
                            Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC SILVER FIR
Abies amabilis (Dougl. ex 
Loud.) Dougl.  
Plant Symbol = ABAM  
 
Contributed by: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden and 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
 Susan McDougal, The Flora of Mt. Adams 
 
Uses 
Pacific silver fir is used in urban landscaping and 
grown commercially for Christmas trees.  When used 
for landscaping, sufficient  space should be allocated 
for the relatively large size of mature trees.  The soft, 
light-weight wood is weak and has low durability.  It 
has been used for light construction frames, 
construction plywood, container veneer, and 
pulpwood. 
 
The dense growth of Pacific  silver fir provides cover 
and protection during the wi nter for wildlife.  Old-
growth stands provide habitat for mountain goat, 
northern spotted owl, Vaux’s swift, western red-
backed vole, and the Olym pic salamander.  Seeds 
provide food for birds, rodents, and squirrels, while 
the leaves of growing shoots are browsed by elk. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Pacific silver fir is 
a U.S. native conifer that ranges from 100 to 230 feet 
tall and up to 45 inches in diameter at the base.  Like 
all true firs, it has erect, cylindrical cones that are 
borne near the tips of the uppermost branches.  
Secondary branches and twigs are typically in pairs, 
with leaves twisted or curved so that they tend to lie 
in one plane.  Mature cones are 3.5 to 6 inches long 
and purple.  Mature trees are erect, conical in outline, 
with spreading, spray-like branches and a scaly, gray 
to whitish bark.  Young shoots have a dense, short, 
pinkish brown pubescence.  Most of the needle-like 
leaves range from 0.5 to 1.3 inches long, are bright 
green, somewhat flattened, and have notched tips. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Native to the Pacific Northwest, Pacific silver fir 
ranges from southern Alaska to northern California.  
Well developed stands are primarily found at 
elevations from 1,000 to  7,000 feet on the coastal 
slopes of the Cascades.  However, in the northern 
part of its range, stands occur well below 1,000 feet.  
Pacific silver fir usually occurs in uniform stands or 
associated with western hemlock ( Tsuga 
heterophylla ).  The geographic range is characterized 
by a maritime to submaritime  climate, with an annual 
precipitation between 40 to 260 inches per year, and 
average summer temperatures between 57 to 59 
degrees F.  Plants have a mild frost tolerance and a 
low tolerance for frozen soil conditions.  Soils are 
usually very moist, somewhat acidic (pH 5), and rich 
in magnesium and calcium.  A thin bark and highly 
flammable foliage contribute to low levels of 
resistance to fire. 
 
Establishment 
Pacific silver firs reproduce only from seed.  Both 
pollination and seed dispersal are effected by wind.  
Plants are capable of self-fertilization and produce 
mature cones and seeds two years after pollination.  
Cones disintegrate while on the tree and seeds are  
 
either dispersed by wind or small mammals.  Cool 
moist sites are optimal for germination, but full 
sunlight produces maximum growth.  Germination 
can occur on a variety of substrates, including litter, 
rotten wood, moss, and organic and mineral soils.   
 
Management 
Management for most fungal diseases involves 
thinning at least 25 f eet from dead trees and 
minimizing wounding during logging or trimming.  
Treating remaining stumps with fungicide or stump 
removal after logging is useful in preventing further 
contamination.  In some cases, removal of infected 
trees and trunks should be practiced as soon as 
disease is diagnosed.  Air drying large stumps often 
reduces chances of further infection. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Pacific silver firs are susceptible to several fungal 
diseased, including Annosus root disease 
( Heterobasidion annosum ).  Infected trees may show 
retarded leader growth, sparse and chlorotic foliage, 
stem decay, and abortive cones.  The most reliable 
way to detect this disease is by the presence of 
fruiting bodies in the duff layer at the root collar on 
the outer bark.  Trees become infected by rood 
contact or by airborne spores falling onto woonds.  
Other fungal diseases include Indian paint fungus 
( Echinodontium tinctorium ) and laminated root rot 
( Phellinus weirii ).  Both can infect stands of trees and 
result in patches of damaged or dead trees.  
 
Trees weakened by disease or poor growing 
conditions may become infested with fir-engraver 
beetle ( Scolylus ventralis ), silver fir beetle 
( Pseudohylesinus sericeus ), or fir root bark beetle 
( Pseudohylesinus granulatus ).  In large numbers, 
these beetles may kill entire trees before any 
symptoms are observed.  Paci fic silver firs are also 
susceptible to Western spruce budworm 
( Choristeneura occidentalis ), Douglas fir tussock 
moth ( Orygia pseudotsugata ) infestation.  Applying 
fertilized and varying the age and density of stands 
reduces the infestation.  Balsam wooly aphids 
( Adelges piceae ) are an extremely devastating pest to 
this species.  Infected trees appear swollen with little 
growth and usually die from the top down within 2 to 
3 years.  To prevent further infestation, most trees 
need to be removed and the site rplanted with such 
species as western hemlock. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Cone production may begin at an age of 20 to 30 
years.  Each cone can produce up to 400 seeds, but 
the percentage of viable seed ranges from 6.3 to 35 
percent.  Preferred methods of cone collecting  include extension poles with appropriate pruners.  
Cones should be collected between mid and late 
August or just prior to disintegration.  They should be 
stored in well-ventilated bags or sacks at 
temperatures between 70 and 80 degrees until the 
cones have disintegrated.  Seeds can be extracted 
mechanically by using screens and then cold-
stratified under dry conditions at temperatures 
between 10 and 30 degrees F for 4 to 6 months.  
Germination is best accomplished by placing them in 
a moist, well-aerated soil mix at temperatures 
between 35 and 40 degrees F.  Light enhances 
germination and development of seedlings.   Plant 
can be grown either individually in containers or in 
flats prior to transplantation.  Under field conditions, 
seed should be sown in the spring at a density of 62.5 
to 125 per acre and approximately 0.25 inches deep.  
During the first few years, growth ranges from 4 to 
16 inches annually.  Fertilizer combined with 
thinning enhances growth. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
Cultivars include a slow-growing, broadly ovoid 
form, ‘Compacta’ and a low-growing, spreading form 
with horizontal branches,  ‘Spreading Star.’  Retail 
nurseries in the Pacific Northwest that stock native 
shrubs and trees may carry the cultivars.   
 
References 
Arno, S. & R. Hammerly. 1977.  Northwest trees. The 
Mountaineers, Seattle, Washington. 222 p. 
 
Dickman, A. & S. Cook. 1989.  Fire and fungus in a 
mountain hemlock forest . Canadian Journal of Botany 
67:2005-2016. 
 
Filip, G. & C. Schmitt. 1990.  Rx for Abies: 
Silvicultural options for diseased firs in Oregon and 
Washington . USDA Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, Gen. Tech. Report 252. 
34 p. 
 
Klinka, K., V. Krajina, A. Ceska, & A. Scagel. 1989. 
Indicator plants of coastal British Columbia . 
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver. 
288 p. 
 
  
 
Krajina, V., K. Klinka, & J. Worrall. 1982. 
Distribution and ecological  characteristis of trees and 
shrubs of British Columbia.  University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver. 131 p. 
 
Oliver, C. & R. Kenady (eds.). 1982. Proceedings of 
the biology and management of true fir in the Pacific 
Northwest. University of Washington, College of 
Forest Resources, Contribution No. 45, Seattle. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007.  The PLANTS website. 
http://plants.usda.gov. Accessed 070117. National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Dieter Wilken, Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa 
Barbara, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken, Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa 
Barbara, California 
 Edited: 070117 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 
  