Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SUBALPINE FIR 
Abies lasiocarpa (Hook.) Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = ABLA  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center & Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Alpine fir, balsam fir, white balsam, white fir, 
western balsam fir, cork bark fir 
 
Uses  
The wood is white, soft, br ittle, and quick to decay, 
used for rough construction and boxes, doors, frames, 
poles, and fuel.  Small trees  are extensively used for 
Christmas trees.  Subalpine fir is a forest pioneer on 
severe and disturbed sites.  By providing cover, it 
assists in rehabilitating the landscape and protecting 
watersheds.  Subalpine fir grows in forests that 
occupy the highest water yield areas in much of the 
western United States and ar e thus highly significant 
in water management and conservation.       
 
Native Americans used pitch and bark preparations 
for wounds and the wood, bark, and boughs for roof 
shingles, baskets and bedding.  The pitch was also 
used to coat canoe seams and rubbed on bowstrings 
as a sealant and protectant.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State  
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native, evergreen 
trees growing to 20 meters  tall with a sharp, spire-
like crown, the upper several feet often less than 30 
cm in diameter, the plants often reduced to a prostrate 
shrub on exposed sites near timberline.  Bark is 
smooth, grayish-white, with resin blisters, becoming 
furrowed only when the tr ee approaches a foot in 
diameter (or var.  arizonica, see below, with a softer, 
corky trunk); branches with bark splitting to reveal a 
reddish-brown layer; leaf scars with periderm red (or 
tan in var.  arizonica).  Needles are 1.8-3 cm long, 
flattened, grooved and bluish-green waxy on the 
upper surface, 1-ranked and tending to turn upward 
so that the foliage of a  particular branch appears 
flattened and as though no leaves were attached to the 
lower sides of the twigs; resin canals median, located 
between the upper and lower epidermis.  Seed cones 
are 6-12 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, dark purple, erect and 
only on the uppermost branches.  The common name 
refers to the distribution of the species in the 
subalpine zone.  
 From Earle, C.J. 2000 @ Gymnosperm Database 
 
Variation within the species:  Taxonomy of the 
species is not settled.   Abies bifolia A. Murr. may be 
treated within  A. lasiocarpa or as a separate species 
(evidence summarized by Hunt 1993).  A southern 
population system (Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado) 
is sometimes recognized as  A. lasiocarpa var. 
arizonica  (Merriam) Lemmon (corkbark fir), or it 
may be identified as part of  A. bifolia.   
 
Abies lasiocarpa in the broad sense is distinguished 
from  A. balsamea  by 4-5 stomatal rows on the upper 
surface at midleaf (vs. mostly 7 rows in  A. 
balsamea ).   
 
Distribution 
Subalpine fir is widespread in western North 
America, from southeastern Alaska, Yukon, and 
Mackenzie south to California, in the Rocky 
Mountains to northeastern Arizona and New Mexico.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.

Adaptation  
Subalpine fir grows in subalpine coniferous forests, 
600-3600 meters, up to timberline, often associated 
with Douglas fir, Engelmann spruce, and blue spruce.  
It is restricted to cold, humid habitats because of low 
tolerance to high temperatures.  Cool summers, cold 
winters, and deep winter snowpacks are more 
important than total precipitation in differentiating 
where subalpine fir grows in relation to other species.   
 
Establishment  
Trees of subalpine fir may begin to produce cones 
when 20 years old, but under closed-forest 
conditions, seed production is not significant until 
trees are older.  Corkbark fir does not begin to bear 
cones until about 50 years old.  Maximum seed 
production occurs in dominant trees 150-200 years 
old.   
 
Germination and early survival are generally best on 
exposed mineral soil and moist humus, but a wide 
variety of other seedbed types also provide adequate 
conditions.  Spring planting is most successful.  
Subalpine fir invades and establishes on open, severe 
or disturbed sites near timberline because of its 
ability to establish a root system under conditions too 
severe for its less hardy associates and its ability to 
reproduce by layering.   
 
Subalpine fir is relatively slow growing.  Seedlings 
average less than 38 cm in height after 15 years in the 
open.  Heart rot is a severe problem, and many trees 
die or are complete culls at an early age.  Of those 
reaching maturity, trees 25-51 cm in diameter are 
often 150-200 years old, and trees older than 250 
years are not uncommon.   Some trees in Olympic 
National Park, Washington, have been determined to 
be over 400 years old (by ring count).   
 
Management  
Periodic thinning increases the yield and size of 
individual trees, but the fir component of subalpine 
spruce-fir stands is likely to be greatly reduced by 
repeated thinning, so that the stand at the time of final 
harvest will be almost pure Spruce.    
 
In the Cascades, the European balsam woolly adelgid 
has caused significant mortality to subalpine fir, 
virtually eliminating it from some stands in Oregon 
and southern Washington.  Windthrow is a common 
problem in subalpine fir,  presumably because of its 
relatively shallow root system.  Pruning should be 
kept to a minimum, for when older branches are 
removed, new growth seldom develops and, 
consequently, the trees become ragged and unkempt.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available through most nurseries.  Horticultural and 
ornamental cultures have been recognized, including 
the following:  
 
A. lasiocarpa  cv. beissneri  – a dwarf tree bearing 
distorted branches and twisted needles.  
 
A. lasiocarpa  cv. caerulescens – a normal-sized tree 
with especially intensive bluish needles.  
 
A. lasiocarpa  cv. compacta  – a dwarf tree of compact 
habit.     
 
References 
Earle, C.J. 2000.   Gymnosperm database-Abies 
lasiocarpa .  29nov2000.   
<http://www.geocities.com/~earlecj/pi/ab/lasiocarpa.
htm> 
 
Foiles, M.W., R.T. Graham, & D.F. Olson, Jr. 1990.  
Abies lasiocarpa .  Pp. 52-59, IN: R.M. Burns and 
B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North America. Volume 1.  
Conifers.  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Hunt, R.S. 1993.   Abies.  Pp. 354-362, in  Flora of 
North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Leadem, C.L. 1988.   Dormancy and vigour of Abies 
lasiocarpa seeds .  Can. Soc. Plant Physiologist, 
University of Victoria, British Colombia, Canada. 
 
Van Pelt, R. 1996.   Champion trees of Washington 
state .  University of Washington Press, Seattle, 
Washington. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp;07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.