Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
THURBER’S 
NEEDLEGRASS 
Achnatherum thurberianum 
(Piper) Barkworth
Plant Symbol = ACTH7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Range Plant Leaflet 69. Oregon State University. Cooperative Extension 
Service. Prepared by: J. Powell.
 
Alternate Names 
Stipa thurberiana; Stipa occidentalis  
 
Uses 
Grazing/Livestock- Thurber’s needlegrass begins 
growth early in the spring, goes dormant in early 
summer and may green-up in fall if soil moisture is 
adequate. It is considered preferred forage in spring 
prior to seed-awn development for cattle and horses. 
It is considered acceptable forage for all classes of 
livestock throughout the rest of the year following 
seed drop. 
Wildlife- It is preferred forage for elk in spring and 
considered desirable forage for elk the rest of the 
year. It is desirable forage for deer and antelope in 
spring. 
 
Erosion Control/Reclamation- It is an effective grass 
in preventing wind and water erosion on sandy to 
loamy soils. It can be used in seeding mixtures for 
revegetation of sites disturbed by mining activities.   
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threaten ed or endangered species). 
 
Description 
General: Thurber’s needlegrass is a native, cool-
season grass common to the semiarid regions of the 
Intermountain West. It is a  perennial bunchgrass, 1- 2 
feet tall with fine, narrow in rolled leaves about 6-10 
inches long. The infloresce nce is 3- 4 inches long, 
narrow and somewhat purplish in color. The seed is 
about ¼- inch long, sharp pointed with a twice bent, 
2- inch long awn. Tiny hairs cover the seed and lower 
segments of the awn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Intermountain Flora - drawn  by Jeanne R. Janish. University of Washington Press.

Distribution: This grass is found in the semiarid 
Intermountain West from southern Idaho to 
Washington Columbia Basin and south to eastern 
California and northern Nevada and Utah.  
Habitat: Thurber’s needlegrass is an important plant 
in semiarid locations in the northern Intermountain 
West. In the semiarid regions of Idaho, Nevada, 
Oregon, Washington, Wyoming and Utah it is found 
in association with sagebrush, saltbush, horsebrush, 
bitterbrush, winterfat, Sandberg bluegrass, Indian 
ricegrass, bluebunch wheatgrass and thickspike 
wheatgrass plant communities.  
  
Adaptation 
Thurber’s needlegrass is very drought and cold 
tolerant and prefers well drained fine sandy loams to 
coarse gravelly loam to silt loam soils. It is not 
tolerant of shade and saline or sodic soil conditions. 
It is less resistant to fire than many other 
bunchgrasses.   
 
It is most commonly found in 7- 16 inch precipitation 
zones and is often the dominant grass in areas 
receiving 10- inches or  less mean annual 
precipitation. 
 
Its elevation range is most common from 3500 to 
6500 feet, but it has been found at lower elevations. 
 
Establishment 
This species has been found to have low levels of 
seed dormancy as compared to close relatives such as 
needle-and-thread and Indian  ricegrass. This species 
has low seedling vigor and competes poorly against 
annual and more vigorous perennial grass species. 
Seed should be planted into firm weed-free seedbeds 
in late fall as a dormant planting or in very early 
spring. Seed should be planted about ¼- ½- inch 
deep.  
 
Native seed mixtures should specify "Source 
Identified" seed from locations within 500 miles of 
the planting site.  
 
There is an average of 3 seeds per foot squared at a 1 
pound seeding rate.  The recommend full seeding rate 
is 7 pounds per acre. Seed mixtures should specify a 
percentage of this rate. 
 
Management  
Thurber’s needlegrass begins growth in early spring, 
flowers in late May to early June and matures seed in 
July. Plants go dormant in early to mid-summer and 
may green-up in fall if soil moisture is adequate.  
 
It is considered preferred forage in spring prior to 
seed-awn development and acceptable forage the rest 
of the year following seed drop. Animals avoid 
grazing Thurber’s needlegrass as seed matures. The 
sharp pointed callus and awns can be injurious to 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue and throat. Otherwise, it 
cures well and provides fair to good winter forage. 
 
It generally decreases under grazing pressure. It 
needs to set seed in order to establish new plants and 
deferred rotation grazing systems are recommended.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
It is not known to be vulnerable to insects or other 
pests. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Thurber’s needlegrass spreads via seed.  It is not 
considered to be "weedy" or an invasive species, but 
it can spread into adjoining vegetative communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  
Its rate of spread is slow.  
 
It may hybridize with closely related species, Indian 
ricegrass creating the hybrid  Stipa bloomeri.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of Thurber’s needlegrass has been 
difficult under cultivated conditions.   
 
Row spacing of 24- 36 inches under irrigation or high 
precipitation (>16 inches annual precipitation) to 36 
inches under dryland cond itions are recommended.  
Seeding rates for seed production range from 2.9- 4.3 
(48- 36 inch rows) pound PLS per acre on dryland to 
4.3 (36 inch rows) pound PLS per acre under 
irrigated conditions.  
 
It should be seeded in locations where weeds are well 
controlled. Thurber’s needlegrass seedlings are slow 
to establish and are therefore vulnerable to 
mechanical (wheel  and foot traffic) and chemical 
damage. Wait until the 3- 5 leaf stage before applying 
herbicides at a low rate (bromoxynil according to 
label) or clipping for weed control. Cultivation 
between rows will be needed for weed control and to 
maintain row culture.  
 
Seed fields are productive fo r about 3- 5 years. Field 
moisture during the fall, soil fertility, and plant re-
growth determine the yield the succeeding year.  
 
Estimated average production of 50- 75 pounds per 
acre can be expected under dryland conditions in 16- 
inch plus rainfall areas .  Estimated average

production of 100- 150 pounds per acre can be 
expected under irrigated conditions.   
 
Harvesting can be accomplished by direct combining 
in the hard-dough stage or by windrowing followed 
by combining.  Windrowing may help ensure a more 
complete threshing.  Windrowing also reduces the 
risk of loss of seed from wind.   Seed is generally 
harvested from mid July to mid August. Seed must be 
dried immediately after combining (moisture content 
should be 12 percent in bins/15 percent in sacks).  
 
Seed should be stored in plastic woven sacks – not 
cotton or burlap sacks. Sharp seeds will become 
caught in cotton and burlap fabric.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
No releases are presently available.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
The USDA Forest Service is  currently working on a 
selection of this species. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and W. C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 
the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977.  Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West , U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. (rev. A. Chase). 1950. Manual of the 
grasses of the United States
. USDA Misc. Publ. No. 
200. Washington, DC. 1950. 
 
Monsen, S.B., R. Stevens and N.L. Shaw. 2004. 
Restoring western ranges and wildlands.  USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136. 884p.
 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2006. Technical Note 24:  Grass, grass-
like, forb, legume, and woody species for the 
intermountain west . USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. 42p. 
 
Oregon State University. Cooperative Extension 
Service. Range Plant Leaf let 69. Prepared by: J. 
Powell. 2p. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 061010. 
(http://plants.usda.gov). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA.  
 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John  
USDA-NRCS,  Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Derek Tilley 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dr. Thomas A. Jones 
USDA-ARS, Forage & Range Research Laboratory, 
Logan, UT 
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 Edited:  05oct06dgo; 09may06djt; 10may06ls; 10may06taj; 10oct06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.