Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SASKATOON 
Amelanchier alnifolia  (Nutt.) 
Nutt. ex Roemer  
Plant Symbol = AMAL2  
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate common names 
Saskatoon service-berry, service-berry, juneberry, 
shadbush 
 
Uses 
Saskatoon is planted as an ornamental and to produce 
commercial fruit crops.  Many cultivars are 
commercially available, selected for desirable plant 
and/or fruit characteristics.  Much research and 
literature details the development of cultivars and 
cultivation techniques.   
 
The fruits are used in pies, jams, and fruit rolls and 
for making jelly and syrup.  Saskatoon wine is a 
regional specialty.  Native  Americans ate the berries 
fresh and dried, often mixed with other foods for 
sweetening and flavor.  Drie d and rehydrated berries 
were added to dried vegetables and cooked into soups 
and puddings.  
 
Native Americans boiled branches to make a tea for 
treating colds.  A drink was made from the bark for  stomach problems.  Bark and twigs provided a 
medicine for recovery after childbirth.  In  
 
combination with other plants, it was used to make a 
contraceptive.  The strong 
and straight-grained wood 
was used to make arrows, digging sticks, spear shafts, 
tool handles, and seed beaters.  Young branches were 
twisted into a type of rope.  
  
Saskatoon is attractive as an ornamental shrub or may 
be trimmed as a hedge.  It is an important species for 
reclamation, wildlife, watershed, and shelterbelt 
plantings.  It can be started from seed or vegetative 
cuttings.     
 William R. Hewlitt ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Native shrubs or 
small trees growing to 7 meters high, variable in 
growth form, forming thickets, mats, or clumps, the 
underground portions including a massive root 
crown, horizontal and vertical rhizomes, and an 
extensive root system; bark: thin, light brown and 
tinged with red, smooth or shallowly fissured.  
Leaves are deciduous, simple, alternate, ovate to 
nearly round, 2.5-3 cm long, with lateral, parallel 
veins in 8-13 pairs, the margins coarsely serrate or 
dentate to below middle or sometimes entire or with 
only a few small teeth at the top.  Flowers are in 
short, dense, 5-15-flowered, upright racemes, the 
petals white, 1-2 cm long and strap-like, sepals more 
or less long-hairy on the inside, reflexing in age, 
stamens about 20, styles 5, ovary persistently 
tomentose at the top.  Fruit are 6-11 mm long, 
smooth, purple-black, slightly gray-blue waxy, the 
pulp fleshy and sweet; seeds 4-10.  The common 
name refers to the city in Saskatchewan, Canada, in 
the heart of the species’ range.   
 
Variation within the species : Considerable variation 
is recognized.  Var.  alnifolia occurs over the whole 
range of the species, exce pt for California, where 
only var.  semiintegrifolia  is found.  Other varieties 
include the following: var.  cusickii (Fern.) C.L. 
Hitchc. and var.  humptulipensis (G.N. Jones) C.L. 
Hitchc.

Distribution  
Saskatoon is distributed along the Pacific coast from 
Alaska to California, eastward to Utah, Colorado, 
Iowa, and Minnesota, and Ontario and Quebec, north 
through the plains and prairies into the Northwest 
Territories (Keewatin and Mackenzie) of Canada.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation  
Saskatoon is common in lower-elevation coniferous 
forests but grows sporadically up to timberline.  It 
also occurs in montane ch aparral, mountain shrub, 
and the upper limits of pinyon-juniper communities.  
In grasslands, it mostly occurs in wooded draws, 
woodland interfaces, and ripari an zones.  It occurs in 
open to lightly shaded disturbed sites such as 
thickets, fencerows, clearings, and edges of woods, 
and it is conspicuous after disturbances such as fire, 
logging, or insect outbreak.  Found at elevations of 
50-3000 meters; flowering  April-June; and fruiting 
(June-)July-August.      
 
Establishment 
Saskatoon reproduces from seed but more commonly 
by sprouting from the root crown and rhizomes and 
by layering.  Seedlings can take up to 5 years before 
they start to produce fruit, but other starts may begin 
at 2-4 years old and with proper management can 
yield 8-10 tons of fruit pe r hectare.  Flowers are 
produced almost every year, but good seed crops may 
be produced only every 3-5 years because of drought, 
spring frost, and/or juniper rust.  Seeds require cold 
stratification to break dormancy and may remain 
viable for 10 or more years.  Natural dispersal is by 
birds and mammals.  One individual of saskatoon is 
known to have reached 85  years but the average age 
apparently may be closer to 20 years.   
 
Management 
Saskatoon in forests is fire-dependent, occurring in 
forests with fire regimes  varying from frequent, low-
severity fire (low-elevation forests) to infrequent, 
severe fire.  It may persist in the understory for 
decades but eventually dies out with fire exclusion 
and canopy closure.  After top-kill by light- to 
moderate-severity fire, saskatoon sprouts usually 
arise from the root crown or from shallowly buried 
rhizomes; sprouts arise from deeply buried rhizomes 
after even the most intense fire.  Sasktoon cover and 
biomass production in western Montana may 
generally increase after fires in Douglas-fir/ninebark 
habitats, but browsing pressure from big game may 
slow the recovery.  Seed production may resume 
soon after fire.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Saskatoon has been artificially crossed with other 
species of serviceberry, and similar hybridization and 
intergradation also occurs in the field, particularly 
between saskatoon and low serviceberry 
( Amelanchier humilis  Wieg.).  Cultivars sold as 
Amelanchier alnifolia  may actually be hybrids 
between  A. alnifolia  and other species of 
Amelanchier.   Amelasorbus jackii  is a hybrid of 
saskatoon and Cascade Mountain-ash ( Sorbus 
scopulina .   
 
References 
Bishop, B.H. & S.H. Nelson 1980.   Propagation and 
transplanting of saskatoon (Amelanchier alnifolia 
Nutt.) softwood cuttings .  Canad. J. Pl. Sci. 60:883-
890.  
 
Davidson, J.G.N. & R.G. St.-Pierre 1994.  
Saskatoons .  HortScience 29(9):959-960.    
 
Howard, J.L. 1997.   Amelanchier alnifolia .  IN: D.G. 
Simmerman (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Database].  USDA, Fo rest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Jones, G.N. 1946.   American species of  Amelanchier .  
Illinois Biol. Monogr. 20(2):1-128. 
 
Laughlin, K.M., R.C. Smith, & .G. Askew 1996.   
Juneberry for commercial and home use on the 
northern Great Plains .  Publ. H-938, North Dakota 
State University Extension Service, Fargo, North 
Dakota.   
<http://www.ext.nodak.edu/e xtpubs/plantsci/hortcrop
/h938w.htm> 
 
Mazza, G. & .G. Davidson 1993.   Saskatoon berry: A 
fruit crop for the prairies .  Pp. 516-519, IN: J. Janick 
and J.E. Simon (eds.),  New crops.  Wiley, New York, 
New York. 
<http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings19
93/V2-516.html>  
 
St-Pierre, R.G. 1992.   The development of native fruit 
species as horticultural crops in Saskatchewan .  
HortScience 27(8):866, 947. 
 
St.-Pierre, R.G. 1997.   Growing Saskatoons - A 
manual for orchardists .  Completely rewritten Fifth 
Edition.  Dept. of Horticulture Science, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

St.-Pierre, R.G. 1997.  Saskatoon.  Pp. 666-668 IN: 
The Brooks and Olmo register of fruit & nut 
varieties.  Third Edition.  ASHS Press, Alexandria, 
Virginia. 
 
The Native Fruit Development Program 2000.  
Registry of the genus Amelanchier: History & 
botany, cultivar overview, publications, plant & seed 
suppliers .  Dept. of Plant Sciences, University of 
Saskatchewan, Canada.  
<http://www.ag.usask.ca/departments/plsc/nfdp/amel
anchier/index.html> 
 
Weir, B.J., R.N. Chibbar, & .G. St.-Pierre 1994.  
RAPD fingerprinting cultivars of a native fruit 
species (Amelanchier alnifolia Nutt., Rosaceae), a 
new Canadian horticultural crop .  IN: P. Adams, J.S. 
Miller, E.M. Golenberg and J.E. Adams (eds.).  
Conservation of plant genes II: Utilization of ancient 
and modern DNA .  Monogr. Syst. Bot. 48:141-148.   
 
Weir, B.J., R.G. St.-Pierre, & R.N. Chibbar. 1997.  
RAPD marker polymorphism among saskatoon 
cultivars, clones, and seedlings .  HortScience 
32(6):1109-1113.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp;07feb03ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.