Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAGEWORT 
WORMWOOD  
Artemisia campestris  L. ssp. 
caudata (Michx.) Hall &  Clements  
Plant Symbol = ARCAC  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Western sagewort 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: Both 
the Lakota and the 
Dakota used  sagewort 
wormwood  ( Artemisia 
campestris ) for 
medicine (Kindscher 
1992).  The Lakota 
made a tea from the 
roots to remedy 
constipation, inability 
to urinate, and 
difficulty in childbirth 
( Ibid .).  Blackfeet 
runners chewed leaves 
for stamina.  The 
Blackfeet also chewed 
the leaves of sagewort 
wormwood for 
stomach troubles and 
applied the chewed leaves to rheumatic joints and 
sore eyes (Kindscher 1992) .  A tea of fresh leaves 
was drunk to abort difficult pregnancies.  The 
Blackfeet stored the dried l eaves for use in a tea that 
was drank to relieve coughs and applied externally to 
relieve eczema.  The Shuswap use a decoction of 
sagewort wormwood for coughs, colds, and 
tuberculosis (Moerman 1986).  They also make a 
poultice of steamed branches  and apply it to bruises 
and sores.   
 
Wildlife : Sagebrush furnishes essential cover for 
many of the smaller desert animals (Martin et al. 
1951).  Its foliage and flower clusters constitute most 
of the diet of the sage grouse, and these parts together  with the twigs are the primary source of food for 
antelope and mule deer.  Other mammals that browse 
the foliage and stems include jackrabbits,  
 
black-tailed rabbits, white-tailed rabbits, cottontails, 
chipmunks, gophers, ground squirrels, various 
species of mice, prairie dogs, kangaroo rats, and 
white-throated wood rats.  Elk and mountain sheep 
browse on the foliage and twigs.  Range cattle also 
make good use of sagebrush as forage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
USDI, GS, NPWRC 
 
Description 
General
: Sagewort wormwood ( Artemisia 
campestris ) is a smooth-stemmed biennial herb 3-10 
dm (1-4 ft) tall with stems arising singly from a 
prominent taproot.  This species is without the typical 
sagebrush odor that is common to most  Artemisia 
species.  The basal leaves are numerous, sometimes 
persistent and sometimes deciduous.  These leaves 
are 2-3x compound, and each leaf is 2-10 dm long 
and 1-4 dm wide.  The cauline leaves are less divided 
and become more reduced as they ascend the stem.  
The inflorescence of nume rous small heads is an 
elongate but narrow panicle.  The fruits are dry, 
smooth, broadly cylindrical achenes.  The mature 
achenes are sub-cylindric and hairless.  Sagewort 
wormwood flowers from August to September.  
 
The lactone glycosides, sant onin and artemisin, are 
probably found in all  Artemisia species and account 
for their anthelmintic properties (Moore 1979).  
Thujone, a terpene-like ketone and essential oil, is 
also found in the plant and may be responsible for 
some of its medicinal effects (Kinscher 1992).  
However, it is poisonous in large doses.  The Food 
and Drug Administration classifies  Artemisia as an 
unsafe herb containing “a volatile oil which is an 
active narcotic poison” (Duke 1985). 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.

Establishment 
Adaptation: Sagewort wormwood grows in open 
places, and is often found growing in sandy soil.  
Sagewort wormwood is circumboreal, and its 
southern range occurs in Oregon, Arizona, Michigan, 
and Vermont. 
 
Most of the wild sages are abundant in their natural 
habitats.  White sage and other  Artemisia species can 
be propagated by seeds or by cuttings taken in the 
early summer (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Sagewort wormwood 
spreads vigorously from a prominent taproot.  Plants 
can easily be divided and replanted. 
•   In greenhouse conditions, it is best to dig up and 
separate plants in late fall or winter.  This is the 
“quiescent” period that follows seed maturation, 
and leaves are senescent (dried up and brown 
colored).  
•  Split the plant clump into pieces by hand, then 
cut the plant into sections, each with one or more 
buds. 
•  For dividing the whole plant, gently loosen the 
soil around the plant, taking care to not damage 
the roots, and then lift the plant gently with a 
pitchfork.  Shake off as much soil from the roots 
as possible. 
•  Divide the plant into smaller pieces by hand, 
retaining only healthy, vigorous sections, each 
with new buds.  
•  Replant the divisions as soon as possible.  It is 
important the plants don’t dry out, so if 
replanting is delayed a couple of hours, dip the 
plants briefly in water and keep them in a sealed 
plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you are 
ready to plant them. 
•  Cut back the old top-growth and replant the 
divided plant sections to the same depth as 
before. 
•  When replanting, ensure that the roots are well 
spread out in the planting hole and the plant 
firmed in.  Water newly planted divisions 
thoroughly; take care not to expose the roots by 
washing away soil when watering. 
•  Plants should be planted in the full sun in a light, 
loose soil.  Plants should be planted on 12-18” 
centers. 
•  As plants are becoming established, the rooting 
zone needs to be kept moist.  
 
Propagation by seed : When the soil has warmed to at 
least 45ºF (7ºC) in the spring, sow hardy  Artemisia 
species where they are to flowers.  
•   Seeds can also be sown in  pots or seed trays and 
either out-planted in their final positions in late 
fall or over-wintered in a cold frame to be out-
planted in spring.  This technique is particularly 
useful in gardens with clay soil that is slow to 
warm up in spring. 
•   The two main methods of sowing outdoors are 
broadcast and drills.  For both, prepare the 
seedbed first by digging over the soil to one 
spade depth, then rake over and firm. 
•  Broadcast Sowing: Sprinkle seeds thinly and 
evenly on the surface of  the prepared seedbed 
and rake them in lightly.  Label the seedbeds, 
then water the area gently, but thoroughly, with a 
fine spray. 
•   Sowing in drills: Use either a trowel tip or the 
corner of a hoe, mark out shallow drill holes 3-6” 
(8-15 cm) apart, depending on the ultimate size 
of the plant.  Sow seeds thinly and evenly by 
sprinkling or placing them along each drill at the 
appropriate depth.  Carefully cover with soil and 
firm.  Label each row and water gently but 
thoroughly with a fine spray. 
•   To prevent overcrowding, the seedlings usually 
need to be thinned.  To minimize disturbance to 
a seedling being retained, press the soil around it 
after thinning the adjacent seedlings. 
•  Water the newly establishing seedlings fairly 
frequently until the roots have developed. 
 
Management 
The following information on the  Traditional 
Resource Management  (TRM) was provided by Lynn 
Youngbuck, who is Cherokee, Chiracahua, and Fox. 
TRM includes the following: 
•   Take only what you need, leaving the best to 
reproduce. 
•  Speak to the plant, leave an offering of tobacco 
or sage before harvesting.  The plant will grow 
back two stems for every one cut. 
•  We humans are another strand in life.  Plants 
sustain us and should be treated as another living 
being. 
•  Plants were taken care of by extended family 
groups of women.  They were taken care of and 
watched each year for generations. 
•  Materials harvested were shared and traded with 
the whole tribe.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ARCAC is available from native plant nurseries 
within its range. 
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883. The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians . American Medical 
Association Journal 1: 116-118. 
 
Beichel, C., E. McDonald, & T. Cole (eds.) 1993. 
Encyclopedia of gardening .  Dorling Kindersley, 
London, New York, Stuttgart.  648 pp. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939.   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25: 517-543. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York. 397 pp. 
 
Duke, J.A. 1985.   CRC handbook of medicinal herbs . 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida. 
 
Grinnell, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 vols.  
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Hart, J. A. 1976.   Montana native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.   
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie .  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie .  University Press of Kansas. 276 pp. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1908.   The ethnology of the Gros 
Ventre . American Museum of Natural History, 
Anthropological Papers 1: 145-281. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts a guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet . Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.).  Flora of the Great Plains .  Great 
Plains Flora Association.  Un iversity Press of Kansas.  
1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2, University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology Technical Reports, Number 19. 534 
pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press, New Mexico. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000316.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
USDI, Geological Survey 2000.   Native wildflowers 
of the North Dakota grasslands .  Version: 000316.  
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.go v/resource/literatr/wildfl
wr/species/artecamp.htm>.  Northern Prairie Wildlife 
Research Center, Jamestown, North Dakota. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised: 04dec00 jsp; 17 mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.