Plant Guide
PRAIRIE ACACIA  
Acacia angustissima   
(Mill.) Kuntze var. hirta  
(Nutt.) B.L. Rob.  
Plant Symbol = ACANH  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Prairie acacia  plant, Shelly D. Maher USDA NRCS  
Alternate Names 
Fern acacia, white- ball acacia, and Texas acacia 
Uses  
Livestoc k: Prairie  acacia produces  high quality forage for  
all types of grazing livestock.  Crude protein of prairie 
acacia leaves have ranged from 16 to 29% with good 
digestibility  (Muir  et al. 2005).   The literature reports 
some toxicity to sheep and other animals when fed at high 
concentrations.   
 
Wildlife :  Prairie acacia provides goo d forage for wildlife.  
It  also provides seed and cover for fawns and upland 
game birds  (Everitt  and Drawe  1993). 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s curren t 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
 
D
 escription
 
General :  Prairie acacia is a native,  perennial,  
rhizomatous  legume  (Correll  and  Johnston  1996; Diggs  et 
al.  1999) .  It ranges from an herbaceous plant with 
delicate fern -like foliage to a semi -woody sub- shrub 
which grows  3-4 feet tall.   Leaves are alternate, bipinnate 
with leaflets 3 -6 mm long.  White to cream flowers occur 
in 1 -2 cm wide heads and those are formed into t erminal 
clusters on long stalks arising from upper leaf axils.  Fruit 
is a brownish flat seedpod 4-7  cm long and 6-8 mm wide.   
  
Distribution :  Prairie acacia’s range extends from Kansas 
and Missouri south into the eastern two -thirds of Texas. 
For current  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile  
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Habitat :   It is located on shallow sandy loam and claypan 
prairie range sites.  It is associated with false 
Rhodesgrass, pink pappusgrass, plains bristlegrass , and 
Arizona cottontop.  
 
Adaptation  
Prairie acacia grows best on sandy loam to calcareous 
clay loam soils.   
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weeds, it can be planted 
in the fall.  Establish a clean, weed -free seedbed by either 
tillage or herbicides.  Prior  to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Prairie acacia is best seeded using a native -grass drill to 
ensure a good planting of the seed on rough, irregular 
rangeland.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not 
easily pl anted with a drill, but some type of additional 
coverage such as culti -packing or light dragging will be 
beneficial to ensure good seed to soil contact.   
 
Seed should be planted 1/4 to 1/2 inch deep.  A brief 
mechanical scarification will improve seed ger mination of 
its hard seed.  For calibration purposes, Rio Grande 
Germplasm prairie acacia contains approximately 31,000 
seeds per bulk pound.  A seeding rate of five pounds of 
pure live seed (PLS) per acre is recommended.  In 
planting mixtures reduce the r ate according to the percent 
of prairie acacia in the mixture.   If one plant per square 
foot has become established than the planting has been 
successful.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of phosphorus and

potassium.  No nitrogen fertilizer is necessary since 
prairie acacia is a legume.  It forms a symbiotic 
relationship with rhizobial bacteria to fix atmospheric 
nitrogen for use by the plant.  However, prior to seeding 
prairie acacia, the seed must be coated with the 
appropriate inoculant in order to establish the symbiotic 
relationship. 
 
Management  
Prairie acacia should not be grazed the first year.  After a 
stand is established, either continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used.  It is recommended that a minimum 
24  inch stubble height be maintained under continuous 
grazing.  For rotational grazing , forage height should be 
utilized between 18  to 24  inches.  P lants should be 
allowed to produce seed annually to insure stand health.  
Prairie acacia  is a long-lived perennial that is extremely 
drought  tolerant once established.   
Pests and Potential Prob lems 
Control of the pests may be necessary in order to produce 
seed crops in dry years under irrigation.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns with prairie 
acacia.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed increase plots have been planted on 36” bedded 
rows .  Prairie acacia can also be established with 
vegetative transplants.  Rapid spread and growth has been 
observed in transplant established stands providing seed 
harvests within the first year.  Furthermore transplants 
stands facilitate  better weed control in the seed production 
fields.    
 
Prairie acacia  produces seed usually twice a year, once  in 
the early summer and again in the late fall.  Seed is 
harvested with a combine.  The use of slow travel and 
RPM speeds while h arvesting results in relatively clean 
seed, needing little cleaning or processing. The use of a 
hammer -mill or flake -breaker is required to get the seed 
out of its pod.  To clean stems and chaff from harvests, a 
C lipper seed cleaner has been used  following the 
hammer -mill treatment.   
 
Well managed seed fields have produced from 300- 500 
bulk pounds of clean seed.  Purity of the seed is usually 
around 80- 90% and germination rates for scarified seed 
ranges from 50 to 80%.  Adequately stored seed in 
h umidity and temperature controlled facilities can be 
expected to stay viable for over 10 years.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Plains Germplasm prairie acacia was released by the 
USDA NRCS Knox City Plant Materials Center in 2008.  
It was developed as a broad- based release consisting of 17 
d
 ifferent accessions from several different ecoregions of 
north and central Texas.  It is adapted to clay, gravelly 
and clay loam soils.  Breeder seed is maintained by 
USDA  NRCS Knox City  Plant Materials Center .  
 
Rio Grande Germplasm prairie acacia was released by the 
USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center  and the South Texas Natives  Project of the Caesar 
Klebe rg Wildlife Research Institute at Texas A&M 
University- Kingsville in 2012.  It was selected for its 
survivability, plant vigor, forage production and seed 
production characteristics.  It is predominantly adapted to 
shallow sandy loam and claypan prairie range sites in 
south Texas.  Breeder seed is maintained by USDA 
N RCS  E. “Kika ” de la Garza Plant Materials Center .  
References  
Correll, D.V., and M.S. Johnston. 1996. Manual of the 
Vascular Plants of Texas. The University of Texas at 
Dallas. Dallas, Texas. Fourth Printing .   
 
Diggs, Jr., G.M., B.L. Lipscomb, and R.J. O’Kennon. 
1 999. Shinners and Mahler’s illustrated flora of North 
Central Texas. Botanical Research Institute of Texas, Fort 
Worth, TX.  
 
Everitt, J.H., and  D.L. Drawe. 1993. Trees, Shrubs & 
Cacti  of  South Texas. Texas Tech University Press, 
Lubbock, TX.  
 
Mu ir, J.P., J. Taylor, and S.M. Interrante. 2005. Herbage 
and seed from Texas native perennial herbaceous 
legumes.  Rangeland Ecol. Manage. 58:643 -651.     
 
Prepared By :   
John Lloyd -Reilley , Manager  
USDA  NRCS E. ‘K ika’ de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  
Citation 
Lloyd -Reilley, J.  2011.  Plant  guide for  prairie acacia 
( Acacia angustissima
 var.  hirta ). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center.   Kingsville, TX 78363.   
 
Published  August 2007 
Edited:  11July2012 jlr  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.
US

DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER