Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK 
CHOKEBERRY  
Aronia melanocarpa  (Michx.) 
Ell. 
Plant Symbol = ARME6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Aronia, Pyrus melanocarpa. Photinia melanocarpa.  
 
Uses 
Landscaping: Black chokeberry is a deciduous, cold-
hardy shrub useful in landscape plantings, showing 
white flowers in the spring and colorful red foliage 
and heavy, dark fruit in the fall. 
 
Wildlife:  Plants are browsed by white-tailed deer and 
rabbits.  The fruit are eaten  by ruffed grouse, sharp-
tailed grouse and prairie chickens. 
 
Economic:  Aronia berries can be canned whole or the 
juice extracted for jelly making, as well as healthful 
fruit drinks.  The juice contains high levels of 
anthocyanins (source of red color) and flavonoids.  
The strong, stable natural color is useful in the food 
industry.  This plant is extensively grown in Europe, 
where yields of up to 38 pounds of fruit per bush 
have been reported. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : A member of the Rose family, black 
chokeberry is a deciduous shrub which can grow to a 
height of 3 to 6 feet tall.  The fine-toothed leaves are 
medium green and hairless, with raised glands along 
the top of the midrib.  In spring, the white bisexual 
flowers form clusters that are 2 to 2 ½ inches across.  
The primary pollinators are small bees.  As the 
seasons progress, the trees turn a deep glossy green.  
In mid to late summer the fruit begins to form.  As 
the pea-sized fruit ripens, it darkens to a purplish-
black color.  The fruit are pomes which will begin to 
drop from the plants shortly after ripening.  The fruits 
are quite juicy, but will begin to shrivel up after 
ripening.  The juice and seeds are deep purple in 
color.  There are 1 to 5 small seeds per pome.  
 
Distribution : Black chokeberry is native to the Great 
Lakes region and the Northeastern U.S., with a 
southerly extension into the higher elevations of the 
Appalachian Mountains.  It is hardy to zone 3.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center  Bismarck, North Dakota 
 
Habitat: Moist woods, but also occurs in drier 
thickets or clearings on bluffs or cliffs. 
 
Adaptation 
The black chokeberry grows well in full sunlight, but 
is moderately tolerant of shade.  The best growth and 
fruit production occurs on low moist but well-drained 
sites, in full sun.  It is not drought-tolerant.  New 
shoots will grow up around  established plants, filling 
in the space between plants  like a hedgerow.  Some 
of these shoots are the result of layering. 
 
Establishment 
Nursery grown seedlings esta blish readily if planted 
free of competing vegetation, in locations having 15 
inches or more of annual  precipitation.  Bareroot 
seedlings should be planted in the spring, once the 
threat of frost is over.  Containerized stock may be 
planted from spring to the middle of summer, if there 
is adequate moisture.  The optimum spacing is 4 to 6 
feet between plants.  If plan ts are to be used for fruit 
production, 10-foot spacing gives more room and 
light to each plant.

Management 
Control of invading weeds and grasses is important.  
Shallow cultivation works best.  Cultivation can also 
be used to stop the spread of shoots and suckers, if 
that is a concern.  Some references report frequent 
suckering.  Very little if any suckering has been 
noticed on chokeberry in windbreaks in the Northern 
Plains.  Thinning of older stems is recommended 
every few years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Black chokeberry appears to have very few disease 
and pest problems.  Mild ew can become a problem 
when plants do not receive adequate sunlight and air 
circulation. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Reproduction is primarily by seed.  The seeds are 
small, being slightly more than 1/16 inch long.  There 
are about 276,000 seeds per pound, and about 100 
pounds of fruit is needed to produce a pound of seed.  
Once the fruit is harvested in the fall, it should be 
cleaned.  For small amounts of fruit, a kitchen 
blender can be used to macerate the fruit.  For larger 
amounts of fruit, a commercial macerator similar to a 
Dybvig® macerator does a good job of crushing the 
fruit.  Quite a bit of pulp can be removed by floating 
it off.  After the seed and remaining pulp have been 
thoroughly dried, hand screens or a fanning mill can 
be used to separate the seed from the remaining dried 
pulp. 
 
Chokeberry seeds have an in ternal dormancy that can 
be overcome by being stratified in moist peat for 
three months between 33°F and 41°F.  For nursery 
scale production of seedlings, it is recommended that 
the seed be sown in September.  The best 
germination occurs from seed that has been cleaned. 
Poor germination results from seed that has not been 
separated from the pulp. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
At the present time there  are no commercial varieties 
available for conservation plantings.  Conservation 
grade stock is available from some conservation 
nurseries in the upper Midwest. 
 
Though black chokeberry is  native to eastern North 
America, it has been planted extensively in Europe 
and Asia.  In Russia, Denmark and eastern Europe 
the fruit is widely used for juice and wine production.  
The Europeans have developed several varieties 
which are now available in the U.S. from commercial 
nurseries.  ‘ Viking’ is a vigorous, productive variety  from Scandinavia, which can grow to a height of six 
feet.  ‘
Nero’ is a shorter growing variety, reaching a 
height of 3 to 4 feet, with dark blue berries.  In the 
U.S., a selection from a native source in Michigan is 
being sold as ‘ Morton’ black chokeberry.  It is 
marketed in the Midwest under the trademark 
Iroquois Beauty™. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Gill, J.D., F.L. Pogge and F.T. Bonner.  Aronia 
Medik . In: Woody Plant Seed Manual 
(
http://ntsl.fs.fed.us/wpsm/) [online: cited 1 March 
2005] 
 
Hardin, J.W. 1973.  The enigmatic chokeberries . Bull. 
Torr Club 100:178-184 
 
Morgenson, G. 2005. Personal communication. 
Lincoln-Oakes Nursery, Bismarck. 
 
Petrides, G.A. 1958. A field guide to trees and 
shrubs .  The Riverside Press, Cambridge. 
 
Smith, D. and C. Ringenberg.  Aronia berries 
(
http://ianrpubs.unl.edu/foods/nf581.htm)  [online: 
cited 4 November 2004]. Nebraska Cooperative 
Extension NF03-581. 
 
Van Dersal, W.R. 1938.  Native woody plants of the 
United States . Miscellaneous publication No. 303. 
United States Department of Agriculture, 
Washington. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Michael Knudson 
USDA NRCS Plant Materi als Center, Bismarck, ND 
 Edited: 04Mar2005 MJK; 06Apr2005 RLN; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.