Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANADIAN 
WILDGINGER  
Asarum canadense  L. 
Plant Symbol = ASCA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Canadian snakeroot 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Abnaki used a decoction of the 
plant in combination with another plant for the 
treatment of colds.  The Ojibwe used the roots of this 
plant as an appetizer by putting it in any food as it 
was being cooked.  It was also used for indigestion.  
The Iroquois used the root s to treat scarlet fever, 
colds, urinary disorders, and headaches.  The 
Cherokee used the plant for a wide variety of 
medicinal purposes.  The roots were used to treat 
coughs, colds, heart trouble, and blood medicine.  
The Meskwaki used the roots for many things.  The 
cooked root was put into th e ear for earache or sore 
ears.  When one could not eat  certain things, this root 
was cooked with these foods and it rendered them 
palatable.  Mud catfish were cooked with Canadian 
wildginger to improve its flavor.  When the root was 
chewed and the fisherman used the spittle on the bait, 
it enabled him to catch catfish.  The Menomini used 
the fresh or dried roots of Canadian wildginger as a 
mild stomachic.  When the patient was weak or had a 
weak stomach and it might be fatal to eat something 
he craved, he was fed a part of this root.  Whatever 
he wanted could then be eaten with impunity.  The 
Micmac also used the root as a stomachic and to treat  cramps.  The Potawatomi used the root to flavor meat 
or fish and render otherwise inedible food, palatable. 
 
Wildlife: 
Canadian wildginger is an alternate food 
source for the pipevine swallowtail butterfly  (Battus 
philenor).  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 © William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General: Birthwort Family (Aristolochiaceae).  This 
herbaceous perennial is hairy, especially the petioles 
and calyx.  The leaves are  cordate-rotund to cordate-
reniform, mostly 8-12 cm wi de at anthesis, and larger 
at maturity.  The solitary,  red-brown flowers are 2-4 
cm.  They are short peduncled, arising between the 
pair of leaves.  The fruit is capsular, opening 
irregularly.  The seeds are  large, ovoid, and wrinkled.  
The rhizome produces annually a pair of petiolate, 
broad, hairy leaves and thes e are deciduous at the end 
of the season. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found in rich woods, usually in 
colonies from New Brunswick and Quebec to Ontario 
and Minnesota, south to North Carolina, northern 
Alabama, and northern Louisiana. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seeds:  This plant is somewhat 
difficult to start from seed and much easier by 
division.  Gather the mealy fruits when they first 
begin to split.  Clean the seeds, washing off all of the 
pulp that might inhibit germination and sow them 
outdoors immediately.  They should be planted in a 
shaded seedbed and well watered throughout the 
summer for good germination the following spring.   
Note that the seeds of Canadian wildginger, if stored 
before planting, should not be kept dry.  They should 
be placed in sealed plastic bags at 40° F and in 
slightly moist vermiculite.  Seeds can also be sown in 
plugs and transferred several times to larger pots.  
They should be place in a greenhouse for three 
months and then moved to a cold frame for three 
months before planting out in the garden.

Propagation by division: Divide mature plants in 
early autumn when they st art to go dormant.  With 
the appropriate garden tool, cut through the rhizome 
at intervals of 6-8 inches.  Another method is to leave 
the parent plant in place and divide sections from the 
edges of the clump.  Replant the new divisions right 
away and water them thoroughly. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
native plant nurseries w ithin the species range. 
 
References 
Cullina, W. 2000.  The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers of the United States and Canada.   
Houghton Mifflin Co., New York, New York. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine and crafts.  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden.  Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s.  Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Phillips, H.R.  1985.  Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.   The University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1923 .  Ethnobotany of the Menomini.  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee  4:1(8-175). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928 .  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4:2(175-326). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1932 .  Ethnobotany of the Ojibwe .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee  4:3(327-525). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1933.   Ethnobotany of the Forest 
Potawatomi Indians .   Bulletin of the Public Museum 
of the City of Milwaukee 7:1-230. 
 
Taylor, LA. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain southeastern tribes .  Botanical Museum of  Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson
 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.