Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOWNY 
SERVICEBERRY  
Amelanchier arborea  (Michx. 
f.) Fern.  
Plant Symbol = AMAR3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Sarvis-berry, shadblow, shadbush, juneberry, 
sugarplum, Indian cherry 
 
Uses 
Trees of downy serviceberry  are generally not large 
enough for sawtimber but they have been used for 
pulpwood.  The wood is  extremely heavy and hard 
and is occasionally made in to tool handles.  Cree 
Indians prized it for making arrows.    
 
At least 40 bird species (for example, mockingbirds, 
cardinals, cedar waxwings, towhees, Baltimore 
orioles) eat the fruit of  Amelanchier species.  
Mammals that either eat the fruit or browse the twigs 
and leaves of downy servic eberry include squirrels, 
rabbits, chipmunks, mice, voles, foxes, black bears, 
deer, and elk.  The fruits taste similar to blueberry – 
they are eaten fresh or cooked in pastries or 
puddings.   
 
The trees are used as ornamentals and many cultivars 
have been selected for variation in growth habit, 
flower size and color, and le af color.  The fall foliage 
blends orange and gold with red and green.  It grows  in partial shade to full sun, preferring moist but well-
drained soil but will also grow in dry sites.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state status and wetland 
indicator values. 
 
Description 
Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Native shrubs or small 
trees to 10 meters tall, with a narrow, rounded crown, 
the twigs often red-brown to purplish, becoming 
gray; bark smooth, grayish, "striped" with vertical 
fissures and very ornament
al.  Leaves: deciduous, 
alternate, simple, oval to oblong, 5-13 cm long, 
glabrous above, pubescent and paler beneath, the 
base rounded or heart-shap ed, acute or acuminate at 
the tip, with finely toothed margins.  Flowers: 3-15 in 
elongate clusters at the branch tips, before the leaves 
appear; petals 5, white, 10-14 mm long and strap-
like.  Fruits 6-12 mm wide, on long stalks, red-purple 
at maturity; seed 5-10 per fruit.  The common name: 
in some regions, the flowers are gathered for church 
services, hence serviceberry or sarvis-berry; or 
“service” from “sarvis,” in  turn a modification of the 
older name “ Sorbus,” a closely related genus.   
 © William S. Justice Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species : Three varieties have 
been recognized: var. alabamensis  (Britt.) G.N. 
Jones; var.  arborea; and var.  austromontana  (Ashe) 
Ahles. 
 
Distribution  
Downy serviceberry is wide spread in the eastern US 
and southeastern Canada (New Brunswick and 
southern Newfoundland to Quebec and Ontario); 
south to the northern tip of the Florida Panhandle and 
west to Alabama, southe rn Mississippi, Louisiana 
and Texas (rare), Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, and 
Minnesota.    
 
Adaptation  
Downy serviceberry grows in a variety of habitats – 
swampy lowlands, dry woods, sandy bluffs, rocky 
ridges, forest edges, and open woodlands and fields.  
It is a late successional to climax species in mixed-
hardwood forests of the cen tral U.S., commonly as an 
understory species.  In the southern Appalachians, 
downy serviceberry grows in red spruce-Fraser fir 
forests at elevations of 1500-2000 meters with yellow 
birch, mountain ash, elderberry, and hobblebush.

Flowering (March-)April-May, among the first of the 
early spring trees and shrubs to bloom; fruiting June-
August.   
 
Establishment 
Downy serviceberry regenerates mainly by seed, but 
it also sprouts from the roots.  Birds and mammals 
disperse seeds; scarification of the seeds after 
ingestion by birds is important for germination.  
Seeds can be sown after 2-6 months of cold 
stratification, but they will not usually germinate 
until after the second spring.    
 
Management 
Fire top-kills downy serviceberry, but it can sprout 
from root crowns and stumps following fire.  A 
significant portion of the post-fir reestablishment is 
from seed dispersed from off-site by birds and 
mammals.  Following wildfire in a spruce-fir forest 
of Appalachia, downy serviceberry was present in 
stands after 30 years but was less than 1% of the total 
basal area.   Gypsy moth larvae ( Lymantria dispar) 
feed selectively on downy serviceberry.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Natural, fertile hybrids occur between downy 
serviceberry and  A. bartramiana, A. canadensis, A. 
humilis , and A. laevis .   Some cultivars are selections 
from  A. X  grandiflora , the hybrid of A. arborea  and 
A. laevis .  Many individuals within  Amelanchier arise 
through hybridization and species boundaries are 
often not clear.    
 
References 
Campbell, C.S., M.F. Wojciechowski, B.G. Baldwin, 
L.A. Alice, & M.J. Donoghue 1997.  Persistent 
nuclear ribosomal DNA sequence polymorphism in 
the Amelanchier agamic complex (Rosaceae) .  
Molecular Biol. Evol. 14:81-90.    
 
Campbell C.S., W.A. Wright, T.F. Vining, & W.A. 
Halteman 1997.   Morphological variation in sexual 
and agamospermous  Amelanchier (Rosaceae).  
Canad. J. Bot. 75:1166-1173.  
 
Campbell, C.S., C.W. Greene, & S.E. Bergquist 
1987.   Apomixis and sexuality in three species of 
Amelanchier, shadbush (Rosaceae, Maloideae) .  
Amer. J. Bot. 74:321-328.  
 
Campbell, C.S. & W.A. Wright 1996.   Apomixis, 
hybridization, and taxonomic complexity in eastern 
North American Amelanchier (Rosaceae) .  Folia 
Geobot. Phytotax. 31:345-354.      
 
Dibble, A.C. 1995.   Conservation biology of 
shadbush, Amelanchier (Rosaceae): Evidence from 
systematics, population structure and reproductive 
ecology (Amelanchier nantucketensis , Amelanchier 
stolonifera , Amelanchier obovalis , Amelanchier 
lucida ).  Ph.D. diss., Univ. of Maine, Orono, Maine. 
 
Harris, R.E. 1970.   The genus Amelanchier .  J. Roy. 
Hort. Soc. 95:116-118.  
 
Iverson, R. 1981.   Amelanchiers.  Amer. Horticult. 
60(10):26-27, 36-37.  
 
Landry, P. 1976.   Taxonomy and distribution of 
Amelanchier arborea (Michx. f.) Fern. in Quebec and 
through the Maritimes .  Naturaliste Canad. 103:377-
385.    
 
McDaniel, J.C. 1974.   Nomenclature: perennial 
problem in Amelanchier arborea .  Amer. 
Nurseryman 139(7):66-68.   
 
Overath, R.D. & J.L. Hamrick 1998.   Allozyme 
diversity in Amelanchier arborea and A. laevis 
(Rosaceae) .  Rhodora 100:276-292.   
 
Snyder, S.A. 1992.   Amelanchier arborea .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Robinson, W.A. 1986.   Effect of fruit ingestion on 
Amelanchier seed germination .  Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club 113:131-134.   
 
Weaver, R.E. 1974.  The shadbushes .  Arnoldia 
(Jamaica Plain) 34:22-31.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp;07feb03ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.