Plant Guide

VINE MAPLE

Acer circinatum Pursh

Plant Symbol = ACCI 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
©J.S. Peterson @ PLANTS 
Alternative Name 
Oregon vine maple 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans used the straight 
long stems for making baskets used for general 
household utility such as carrying wood and fish.  
They also carved the wood into numerous household 
utensils such as spoons, bowls, and platters. The sap 
contains a certain amount of sugar and that used as a 
drink or concentrated into syrup by boiling off the 
water (Facciola 1990).  Vine maple was used 
occasionally for tool handles of axes, and frames.  
This species was used by the Indians of the northwest 
coast for the bows of their fishing nets (Sargent 
1933).  The saplings were used for babies’ cradles. 
Medicinal: The wood was burnt to charcoal and 
mixed with water and brown sugar then used in the 
treatment of dysentery and polio (Moerman 1998). 
Wildlife: The seeds and buds provide food for 
squirrels, chipmunks, and numerous birds. Cattle and 
sheep eat vine maple leaves.  During the summer 
months the leaves and twigs are a preferred food of 
black-tailed deer and elk. 
Agroforestry: Vine maple is used in forested riparian 
buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, protect 
water quality, and enhance aquatic environments. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description 
General: Maple Family (Aceraceae).  Vine maple is a 
native, deciduous shrub or small tree that ranges 
between ten to twenty feet.  The leaves are round to 
cordate, usually seven to nine centimeters long, 
pointed, and double toothed.  The flowers are white 
petals in small loose clusters emerging with the 
leaves.  The bark is thin, smooth, and greenish 
becoming bright reddish brown. 
Distribution: Acer circinatum occurs in the Pacific 
Northwest ranging from the Cascade Mountains to 
southern British Columbia to northern California.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Adaptation 
Vine maple occurs most frequently on moist soils 
along the banks of streams and wet sites.  It 
commonly occurs with Douglas fir, Pacific dogwood, 
big leaf maple, and western hemlock.  This species 
prefers shady areas but can tolerate the sun. It 
sometimes grows in clumps or patches (Farrar 1995). 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed: The seeds should be 
gathered and immediately stratified for 90 days at 41º 
F to break seed dormancy.  Sow the seeds in 
containers or seed trays containing a slow release 
fertilizer. Firm the medium and place the seeds 
thinly and evenly on top and cover with medium 
(Heusser 1997). Seedlings should be placed into 
individual pots when they are large enough to handle. 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Propagation from Softwood Cuttings: Cuttings 
should be done in the spring or early summer in the 
early morning. Take cuttings about five to ten 
centimeters long, just above the node.  Put cuttings in 
a plastic bag to prevent moisture loss (Heuser 1997).  
They must not be allowed to wilt.  Trim the cuttings 
below the lowest node to remove the lower leaves 
leaving three or four at the tip (Ibid.).  A rooting 
hormone may be applied to improve rooting before 
planting. Insert the cuttings in the rooting medium 
up to half their length so the leaves don’t touch each 
other.  The cuttings should root in two to three 
weeks, after which they can be potted (Ibid.). 
Management 
Constant pruning is needed to avoid long internodes. 
Watering may be reduced in the winter but the soil 
should be kept evenly moist. 
Vine maple sends out slender arching branches in the 
wild. These form roots when they touch the ground 
and the plant thereby forms large impenetrable 
thickets often several hectares (Sargent 1965). 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Somewhat available through native plant nurseries. 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908. North American trees. Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.  Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses. 4th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
Facciola, S. 1990.  Cornucopia-a source book of 
edible plants. Kampong Publications. 
McMinn, H.E. 1951.  An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs. University of California Press, 
Berkeley & Los Angeles, California. 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1951.  An illustrated 
manual of pacific coast trees.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
Heuser, C.W. 1997. The complete book of plant 
propagation. The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
Preston, R.J., Jr. 1989. North American trees. 4th ed. 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
Rehder, A. 1940.  Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs hardy in North America. 2nd ed.  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York. 
Sargent, C.S. 1933. Manual of the trees of North 
America. The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Sargent, C.S. 1965. Manual of the trees of North 
America. Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite, formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 24may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.