Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIG BLUESTEM 
Andropogon gerardii Vitman 
Plant Symbol = ANGE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Bluejoint beardgrass, poptillo gigante, turkeyfoot, 
Andropogon chrysocomus, Andropogon furcatus, 
Andropogon gerardii var. chrysocomus, Andropogon 
hallii  var. grandiflorus, Andropogon provincialis, 
Andropogon tennesseensis, Sorghum provinciale . 
 
Uses 
Conservation: Big bluestem is the dominant grass 
species of the Midwestern ta llgrass prairie.  It is 
mixed with other native prairie species for prairie 
restoration and highway revegetation.  While it does 
best in moist soils, it can be used for mine 
reclamation, logging road restoration and other 
restoration areas that have sandy or droughty 
conditions. 
 
Erosion control:  Big bluestem is planted to stabilize 
soil.  Rhizomes are typically 1 to 2 inches below the 
soil surface, while the main roots can extend 
downward to 10 feet.  
 
Big bluestem is also planted to provide aboveground 
protection against wind erosion.  It is used for road  cuts, pipelines, detention basin slopes, and areas that 
need temporary cover during the restoration process. 
 
Ethnobotanic: 
Chippewa Indians used the root of big 
bluestem as a diuretic and to alleviate stomach pains.  
Extracts of the leaf blades were used as a wash for 
fevers or as an analgesic.  The plants were also used 
to fasten the support poles of dwellings.  Moist grass 
was laid on hot stones to prevent steam from 
escaping during cooking.  It was also used to cover 
fruit during ripening and under fruit while drying. 
J. Anderson 2002 USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
Forage:  Big bluestem is a high quality forage species 
for all classes of livestock.   Crude protein content of 
16-18% is maintained from May through August but 
drops below 6% in September and October.  It is 
often cultivated as a pasture grass and for hay-
making. 
 
Landscaping:  Big bluestem is used in wildflower 
meadows and prairie plantings.   It is also effective as 
a rear border or accent in  native plant gardens. 
 
Wildlife: Big bluestem provides shelter for nesting 
birds and insects.  Songbirds and prairie chickens 
consume the seeds while white-tailed deer and bison 
graze vegetative parts. 
 
Legal Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant is invasive in some regions or habitats and 
may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extensio n Service office, or state 
natural resource or agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.    
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Big bluestem is a 
perennial warm-season grass.  It can be distinguished 
from other warm-season grasses by blue coloration at 
the base of the culm and purplish, 3-parted flower 
clusters that resemble a turkey’s foot.  The culms are 
erect, up to 3 m tall, stout, and are usually covered 
with a blue-tinted waxy layer.  Leaf blades are flat,

15-60 cm long, 0.5-1 cm wide, smooth below and 
rough above.  The inflorescence is typically 
composed of three spike-like racemes, but can have 
as many as seven.  The racemes bear paired spikelets 
that are about 1 cm long.  Flowering takes place July 
through October.  The foliage changes color 
seasonally, and culms stay  erect through the winter. 
 
Distribution: Big bluestem is native to the United 
States.  It occurs in southern Canada, from Maine to 
Montana, south to Florida and New Mexico and into 
Mexico.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Big bluestem is found in open woods, 
prairies, meadows, along riverbanks, and roadsides.  
It is especially abundant in  lowland prairies, overflow 
sites, and sandy areas. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones fo r big bluestem are 4 to 
9.  It is best adapted to moist, sandy or clay loams but 
also occurs in dry or shallow soils.  It does well in 
full sun or partial shade.  Prairie conditions, like low 
nutrient and moisture content, have conditioned big 
bluestem for use in well-drained soil with low 
fertility.  It is not tolerant of heavy clays, extremely 
wet bottomlands, deep sands, high salinity, or high 
lime. 
 
Big bluestem is generally shorter in the northern 
portion of its range, and taller in the southern portion 
of its range.  It is a rhizomatous, sod-forming grass in 
the tallgrass prairie and ha s a bunchgrass appearance 
in more arid regions.  
 
Establishment 
Collect big bluestem seeds  when the seed head no 
longer has a creamy center, usually in September and 
October.  Dry seeds in paper bags for 2 to 4 weeks.  
Seeds can be stored up to 7 months at 50
oF and 50% 
humidity.  Cold stratification (40oF, 35% humidity) 
may improve germination uniformity.  Fill 
germination trays or pots with moist soil, compacted 
at bottom.  Sow seeds by hand, covering with a thin 
layer of soil.  Keep soil evenly moist during 
germination and do not use fertilizer.   
 
Greenhouse establishment will occur at alternating 
day/night temperatures (set at 75/65oF) and 12-14 
daylight hours (may be extended artificially).  
Transplant seedlings into plug cells.  Soil does not 
need to be consistently moist at this stage.  In early to 
late spring, move plugs to cold frame.  Seedlings are 
ready for outplanting when the plant and soil can be  completely pulled from the pot as one unit.  
Outplanting can take place from late May to early 
October. 
 
Seeds can be sown directly outside from late winter 
to early spring.  Emergence will occur in 4 weeks 
with several irrigations.  Plants will be ready for 
harvest in mid-summer to late fall. 
 
First-season growth is often slow.  Rhizomatic 
regeneration in following years increases the growth 
rate. 
 
Management
 
Underground rhizomes resprout following fire 
disturbance.  Regeneration is slow if fire occurs 
during the summer (active growth stage).  
Regeneration following springtime fire is much more 
vigorous because the rhizomes have winter-stores of 
carbohydrates. 
 
Big bluestem can withstand substantial grazing.  
However if it is continually grazed closer than 6 to 8 
inches, it will be out competed by other grass species.  
It is highly palatable to livestock during spring and 
summer and becomes coarse and less palatable 
during the fall and winter.  Hay should be mowed in 
early to mid-summer to maintain high nutrition 
quality. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
NRCS Plants Materials Program (PMC) has released 
several cultivars of big bluestem.  The Bismarck, ND 
PMC released 'Bison' for its adaptation to northern 
climates.  It is used for erosion control, upland game 
bird cover and nesting, nature trails, rural beautifica-
tion and other native plantings.  The Knox City, TX 
PMC released ‘Eldorado’ and ‘Earl’ cultivars for 
their forage potential.  Other cultivars include ‘Kaw’ 
(Manhattan, KS), ‘Niagara’ (Big Flats, NY), and 
‘Rountree’ (Elsberry, MO). 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  
 
References  
Anderson, J. 2002.  USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5  (
http://plants.usda.gov, 18 January 2004). 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge.

Bismarck Plants Materials Center. 1989. Notice of 
release: Bison big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii).  
p.2. ID #175. USDA NRCS Bismarck Plants 
Materials Center, Bismarck. 
  
Densmore, F. 1928. U ses of plants by the Chippewa 
Indians . SI-BAE Annual Report #44, Pp. 342.   
 
Casletter, E.F. & M.E. Opler. 1936.  Ethnobotanical 
studies in the American Southwest III. The 
ethnobiology of the Chiricahua and mescalero 
Apache.  University of New Mexico Bulletin 4(5): 1-
63, Pp. 36-40. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1919 . Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region . SI-BAE Annual Report 
#33, Pp. 68-69. 
 
Institute for Systematic Botany. 2002.  Andropogon 
gerardii.  Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants.  
(
http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu/main.asp?plantID=668
, 13 Jan 2004). University of South Florida. Tampa. 
   
Kansas Wildflowers & Grasses. 2004.  Big bluestem. 
(
http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wildflower/bigbluestem.html
, 13 Jan 2004). Kansas State University, Manhattan.   
 
Knapp, A.K. 1985. Effect of fire and drought on the 
ecophysiology of Andropogon gerardii and Panicum 
virgatum in a tallgrass prairie.  Ecology 66(4): 1309-
1320. 
 
Knox City Plants Materials Center. 1985. N otice of 
release: ‘Eldorado’ engelmanndaisy (Engelmannia 
pinnatifida).  pp. 2. ID #1473. Soil Conservation 
Service, Knox City. 
  
Native Plants Network. 2003.  Protocol information: 
Andropogon gerardii.  
(
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org/network, 13 Jan 
2004). College of Natural  Resources, University of 
Idaho, Moscow.   
 
NDSU Extension Service. 1998.  Selected North 
Dakota and Minnesota range plants: big bluestem, 
turkeyfoot. 
(
http://www.ext.nodak.edu/extpubs/ansci/range/eb69-
6.htm, 13 Jan 2004).  North Dakota State University. 
Fargo.    
 
Plant Finder. 2003.  Andropogon gerardii.  
(
http://ridgwaydb.mobot.org/kemperweb/plantfinder/ 
Plant.asp?code=G720, 13 Jan 2004). Missouri 
Botanical Garden. St. Louis. 
 
USDA NRCS. 1996.  Notice of release: Earl big 
bluestem (Andropogon gerardii). Pp. 2. ID #3145. 
USDA NRCS Knox City Plants Materials Center, 
Washington D.C.   
 
Uchytil, R.J. 1988.  Andropogon gerardii var. 
gerardii.  (
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis, 17 Jan 
2004).USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, 
Missoula. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg , USDA NRCS National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 Edited: 29Jan2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.