Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ASPEN ONION 
Allium bisceptrum S. Wats. 
var.  biceptrum 
Plant Symbol = ALBIB  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Twincrest onion and wild onion. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Bulbs and leaves are still gathered by 
the Nevada Northern Paiute, Gosiute, Northern Ute, 
and Washoe.  The greens of this wild onion are used 
as a culinary flavoring by the Washoe.  Reenacting 
an age-old tradition, the young leaves and stems that 
first appear after the snow melts (about April-May) 
have the best flavor and are harvested by the Washoe 
by tearing them with the fingers, one to two inches 
from the ground.  The delectable leaves range in 
flavor from mild to strong.  Sometimes a prayer is 
said before picking.  If the small, spherical umbels of 
diminutive flowers have already appeared, this is too  late to harvest the leaves.  A generation or two ago, it 
was not uncommon for a Washoe family to harvest 
two or three sacks of onio
n leaves.  The odoriferous 
leaves are used similarly  to chives bought from 
contemporary supermarkets.  They can be eaten raw 
as a snack, rolled into balls and sprinkled with salt, or 
used as a delicious herb to accompany acorn mush 
and various kinds of meat.  The leaves are eaten 
fresh, never cooked or stored for long periods.  The 
same areas are revisited year after year, having been 
harvested without depletion generation after 
generation.  Many lower elevation sites where the 
Washoe used to gather wild onions (probably 
different species) in the sagebrush scrub and under 
pinyon and cottonwood trees, are now marked with 
barbed wire fences and no trespassing signs. 
 
 Alfred Brousseau ©Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos
 
Wildlife : Elk, black bears ( Ursus americanus), white-
tailed prairie dogs ( Cynomys leucurus), and mantled 
ground squirrels ( Citellus lateralis) eat the bulbs and 
greens of some kinds of wild onions.  Young 
vegetative growth of many wild onions are also 
highly palatable to cattle and sheep, but their feeding 
and trampling can conflict with indigenous 
harvesting. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This high 
elevation plant is found from 2000 to 2900 meters.  It 
thrives in the damp shade of aspen groves or in open 
meadows in the pinyon-juniper and subalpine zones.  
The plants are from one to four dm. high.  The small, 
round to egg-shaped bulbs are from 3 to 15 mm, and 
the bulb coats are light colored with indistinct 
reticulation.  The dainty, open flower heads occur on 
pedicels that are 10-25 mm. in length and the flowers 
range in color from white to pink to rose.  The flower 
petals are 5-10 mm. long and narrows to pointed tips.  
Each papery fruit contains approximately 7 black 
seeds.  The flat leaves number two to three and give 
off an onion smell when bruised. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The plant is found in the high Sierra Nevada,

southern Oregon, and the Great Basin, including Utah 
and Idaho. 
 
Establishment 
At higher elevations, above the snowline, the black 
seeds should be planted in pots in early fall in the 
outdoors with no protection from the cold.  At lower 
elevations with warm winters, the seeds may need 
cold stratification (4-5 months) before planting to 
ensure good germination.  Seeds are planted in a 
well-drained soil, in a dense pattern, 4-5 seeds per 
square inch, and a thin layer of gravel should be 
placed on top to protect the  plants from disturbance.  
Then wait for the natural rains.  If it is still a dry year, 
into November, supplement with hand watering.  
Start watering in spring, when the plants germinate.  
Make sure that the plants receive 2 inches of water 
(from either hand watering or rainfall) every week.  
With proper watering, these wild onions can grow in 
full sunlight, but they can also be planted in an area 
that receives afternoon shad e.  Unlike mature bulbs 
they do not have reserves to draw upon for nutrients, 
so care should be taken to keep the soil damp, but not 
wet.  Do not let them dry out completely during the 
growing season.  Stop watering as soon as the foliage 
of the plants turns yellow.  Expect the plants to 
require three to five years to reach flowering size.  
When the seedlings are hardy enough, transplant into 
larger containers or plant into a bed prepared with 2 
parts (volume) loam, 1 part leaf mould; and 2 parts 
coarse sand/grit. 
 
The bulbs and bulblets of these wild onions can also 
be planted.  Bulblets can be brought to flowering size 
more quickly than by growing the plant by seed.  
After collecting the bulbs, store them in paper bags 
with dry peat moss.  They can be planted in late fall 
at the time of the first frost.  Plant them in plastic or 
wooden containers (clay dries out too quickly) in an 
acid, potting soil with a fair amount of sand and 
humus that gives excellent drainage.  Break off the 
daughter bulblets and plant them with the mature 
bulbs an inch apart and from six to eight inches deep.  
Do not water them at all.  Watch for them to 
germinate on their own, usually in early spring.  Start 
watering at least once a week.  If it is a dry spring, 
water twice a week.  Watering with a liquid fertilizer 
twice a month or applying a slow-release fertilizer in 
the spring may increase growth and vigor.  When the 
mature bulbs start to flower, stop watering.  These 
pots can sit outside in full sunlight until the daytime 
temperature gets above 75 degrees.  As it warms up, 
move the pots into the partial shade of vegetation or 
apply a 40-50% shade cloth. 
 
Management 
During the harvesting process, the Washoe leave 
some of the plants so they will go to seed.  They also 
do not uproot the bulbs so the plants will come up 
again and again.   
 
References 
Davies, D.  1992.   Alliums: The ornamental onions .  
Timber Press, Inc. , Portland, Oregon. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.   Subsistence.  pp. 64-97 IN: 
Handbook of North American  Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin. Warren L. D'azevedo (ed.). Smithsonian 
Institution.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.). 1993.   Allium.  pp. 1172-1179 
IN: The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Mathew, B. 1997.   Growing bulbs: The complete 
practical guide .  Timber Press, Inc., Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1988.   Range plant handbook.  
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.