Plant Guide
MANCOS 
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus humillimus  A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = ASHU  
 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant 
Materials Program  
 
Figure 1:  Mancos milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus ). Photo ©Al Schneider, Plants Database and www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with permission.  
Alternate Names 
Tragacantha humillima  (A. Gray) O. Kuntze 
  Phaca humillima  (A. Gray) Rydberg  
 
Uses  
Mancos milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus ) was  first 
described by Asa Gray and collected  by Townshend 
Brandegee in 1876 ; “humillimus” means “very 
humble .”  The  attractive  and  sweet -smelling  flowers 
of Mancos milkvetch are frequented by a variety of 
pollinators including  members of the bee family , 
Osmia titusi and  O. sculleni, as well as by  honey 
bees.  B utterflies are also  often seen resting on the 
fragrant  plant when it is in bloom. It has no known 
agricultural, econom ic, or other human uses at this 
time.  
 
Status  
After first being discovered and known only from a 
single collection  in 1875, Mancos milkvetch  was 
rediscovered near Farmington, New Mexico  in 1980 
(Center for Plant Conservation, 2011) .   Mancos 
milkvetch was  listed  as endangered without critical 
habitat throughout its range by the U.S. Fish and  Wildlife Service (USFWS) 
in 1985.  In July 2011, the 
US FWS completed  a 5 -year status review which 
reports  that , from 1985 to 2008, the number of known 
individuals decre ased from ~ 7,600 to less than 400.  
USFWS recommends changing the recovery priority 
status to “high degree of threat and low recovery 
potential with some conflict” (with development), 
based  on genetic research  showing  low fecundity  of 
the species  in conju nction with its limited micro -
habitat,  and the isolated and restricted distribution of 
known populations.   The NatureServe conservation 
status rank, an international effort which ranks  
species on their “global” status , ranks  Mancos 
milkvetch  as G1/S1- critically imperiled  globally and 
statewide, because its extreme rarity  makes it 
especially vulnerable to extinction  (NatureServe,  
2011) .   
Description  
General:    
Pea family (Fabaceae).  Mancos milkvetch  is a 
diminutive,  low -growing,  tufted perennial sub -shrub 
growing in clumps up to  12 inches (in)  (30 
centimeters  [cm ] across ,  with a dense crown of 
persistent spiny  leaf stalks  (Figure 1) .  No other mat -
forming  Astragalus  species has persistent, sub -
spinescent  petioles (Barneby ,  1964).    Stems are up to 
0.4 in ( 1 cm)  long and are crowded with  matted 
leaves up to  1.6 in  (4 cm ) long ,  which are made up of 
several oval or nearly rounded leaflets no more than 
0.1 in  ( 2  millimeters  [mm] ) long.  Flower branches 
support 1 to 3 lavender/purplish flowers with a 
co nspicuous lighter -colored spot in the throat of the 
corolla tube ( USFWS,  1989).   The pods are egg-
shaped and laterally compressed measuring about 0 .2 
in (4.5 mm ) long and 0 .1 in (2 mm ) wide.  Flowering 
occurs in late April and early May.  
Distribution :    
Mancos milkvetch  is a narrow endemic known only 
from the Four Corners region of the southwestern 
United States . Its known global distribution includes 
13 sites, including 3 sites from Colorado in 
Montezuma County and 10 sites from New Mexico, 
in  San Juan C ounty.  The known populations occur 
on lands owned or managed by the Navajo Nation, 
Bureau of Land Management, State of New Mexico, 
and  the Ute  Mountain Ute s.  Please consult the 
USFWS website for a map of the species occurrence 
at www.fws.gov.

For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Habitat :   
Mancos mil kvetch  grows within  piñ on- juniper 
woodland and desert scrub communities ,  with 
populations occu rring  in the Colorado Plateau 
subdivision of the Great Basin Desert of northwestern 
New Mexico and southwestern Colorado (Dick -
Peddie ,  1993).
 Common plant associates include:  
scabrous bricklebush ( Brickellia microphyla var. 
scabra ), single leaf ash  ( Fraxinus anomala ), small 
leaf mohagany ( Cercocarpus intricatus ), and rosy 
ipomosis ( Ipomopisis roseata).   Potential habitat 
corresponds to rimrock outcrops of the Point Lookout 
and Cliffhouse members of the Mesa Verde 
sandstone series with flat or gently sloping surface s 
(Figure 2), ( USFWS, 1989).   
Adaptation   
Mancos milkvetch is adapted to occur within a  10-
mile  wide  section of a narrow band of Mesozoic 
sandstone derived from the Hogback geologic 
formation ( USFWS,  1989).  Occupied habitat is 
c onfined to large sheets of exfoliating  sandstone 
substrate ledges and mesa tops  where plants grow  in 
cracks or  shallow bowl -like depressions (tinajas) that 
accumulate sandy soils and rainfall  at 5,650 feet, 
(1,854 meters) in elevation ( USFWS, 1989  and New 
Mexico State Forestry  Division, 2008).  This species 
occurs within an average annual precipitation range 
of 5 -10 inches (12- 25 cm). 
 
Figure 2:  Mancos milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus ) habitat, 
photo © Steve O'Kane, used with permission.  
Establishment 
Seed germination trials conducted by the  Arboretum 
at Flagstaff  have shown  that this species is difficult to 
establish from seed and difficult to keep in 
cultivation as it  is sensitive to over or under -watering .   
Reduced fitness expressed in low fecundity is 
commonly found in  plants of the genus  Astragalus  
where many species persist in small, highly restricted 
populations which are endemic to particular geologic 
formations (Karron , 1989).  Allphin  et al , ( 2005)  
reported  low fecundity  of Mancos milkvetch  appears  
to be  due to in breeding depression.   
Management  
Mancos milkvetch  is threatened by surface 
disturbance activities associated with energy 
exploration and development  and transmission line 
construction and maintenance , as well as recreational 
off -highway vehicle (OHV) use . The plants ’ habitat 
occur s in  areas  of active oil and gas development. 
Nearly all known and potential habitat may be 
affected by natur al gas or oil exploration and 
development.  Most damage occurs after vehicles and 
heavy equipment drive over and crush individual 
plants as well as break apart sandstone areas that 
contain tinajas, which are a requirement for Mancos 
milkvetch establishment.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Spider mite insect infestations have been noted to 
cause mortality,  especially when the plants are 
already stressed by drought (USFWS , 1989) . Spider 
mites have been documented to entirely cover mature 
plant clumps , causing injured leaves to  be shed and 
contributing to the plants mortality.  Even minor 
spider mite infestations could potentially have a 
significant impact on the plants health.  L arval 
bruchine beetles of the genus  Acanthoscelides may 
also  feed upon Mancos milkvetch  seeds as evid enced 
by pin -sized emergence holes on the seed pods 
(Cane,  2011 personal communication).  
Environmental Concerns  
The decrease in population numbers  of Mancos 
milkvetch  is thought to be due to several notable 
drought periods  of the recent past .  The resulting 
long -term effects on the  population numbers  of 
Mancos milkvetch  may not be entirely evident for 
several years to come.  Some recovery with new 
seedlings has occurred but appears to be triggered by 
both adult mortality and increased moisture event s 
(USFWS,  2011) .
   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Mancos milkvetch is likely to be mycorrhizal 
( Haskins and Murray , 2009) and  is likely a symbiotic 
dinitrogen fixer with Rhizobium bacteria, as nearly 
all  Astragalus  species are (Paschke,  2011  personal 
communica tion). Mancos milkvetch plants produce 
viable fruit by outcrossing and self -pollination

(Tepedino, 2002).  Each fruit of Mancos milkvetch 
produces 4 to 9 seeds in its egg -shaped  pods.  It takes 
two growing seasons for seedlings to mature ,  with 
flowering us ually the third and fourth year compared 
to other species of  Astragalus , which generally take 
one growing season to bloom.  
 
References  
Allphin, L, N. Brian and T. Matheson. 2005. 
Reproductive success and genetic divergence 
among varieties of  the rare and endangered 
Astragalus cremnophylax (Fabaceae) from 
Arizona, USA. Conservation Genetics 6:803-
821.  
Barneby, R.C. 1964. Atlas of North American  Astragalus. Bronx, New York: New York 
Botanical Garden. 1188p.  
Cane, J.H.  2011 Personal Communication. Center  for Plant Conservation.  USDA -ARS Pollinating 
Insect Research Lab , Utah State University, 
Logan, UT ,.   
Center for Plant Conservation  (CPC) .  
http://www.centerforplantconservation.org/.  
http://www.centerforplantconservation.org/Colle
ction/CPC_ViewProfile.asp?CPCNum=414. 
Accessed September 2011.   
Dick -Peddie, W. 1993. New Mexico Vegetation. 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico.  
Haskins, K. and S. Murray. 2009. Ecological study  and comparison of two rare Astragalus  species – 
final report. The Arboretum at Flagstaff, 
Arizona.  
Karron, J.D. 1989. Breeding systems and levels of  inbreeding depression geographically restricted  
and widespread species of Astragalus 
(Fabaceae). American Journal of Botany  
76:331- 340. 
NatureServe. ( 2011).  NatureServe Explorer: An 
online encyclopedia of life [web application]. 
Version 7.1. NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. 
Available http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. 
(Accessed: September 25, 2011 ).  
New Mexico Rare  Plants:  
http://nmrareplants.unm.edu/rarelist_single.php?
SpeciesID=25 .  Accessed September 2011.  
New Mexico State Forestry Division (State of New  Mexico). 2008. Population studies of  Mancos 
milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus : Fabaceae) in 
San Juan County, New Mexico from 1988 to 
2008. R. Sivinski, author. New Mexico Energy, 
Minerals, and Natural Resources Department, 
Santa Fe, New Mexico.  
O'Kane, S. L. 1988. Colorado's Rare Flora. Great  Basin Naturalist. 48(4):434 -484.  
O’Kane, S.L.  Jr. 2011. © Photo Figure 2, u sed with 
permission.  
Paschke, Mark.  2011.  Personal Communications.   Warner College of Natural Resources, Colorado 
State  University , Fort Collins, C O.  Schneider, Al.   2011.
 © Photo Figure 1.  Used with 
permission.   Plants Database and 
www.swcoloradowildflowers.com .  Accessed 
September 2011.  
Tepedino, V.J. 2002. The reproductive biology of  rare rangeland plants and their vulnerability to 
insecticides. In: Cunningham, G.L., Sampson, 
M.W., tech. cords. 1996. Grasshopper  
integrated pest management user handbook. 
Tech. Bull. 1809. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service.   
U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Service.  June 27, 1985 Final 
rule to determine  Astragalus humillimus  to be 
endangered.  Federal Register . 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1989. Mancos 
milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus ) recovery 
plan. P. Knight and D. House, authors. New 
Mexico Ecological Services Field Office, 
Albuquerque,  NM. 
U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. M ancos 
Milkvetch( Astragalushumillimus )5-Year Review 
Summary and Evaluation.  
Watrous, K.M. and Cane, J.H.  2011. Breed ing 
Biology of Threadstalk Milkvetch, Astragalus 
filipes (Fabaceae), with a Review of the Genus.  
The American Midland Naturalist, 165(2):225 -
240.  
 
Acknowledgements:  
 
Thank you for editorial and photo contributions from:  
 
Anderson, David  and the Botany Team.  Colorado 
Natural Heritage Program,  CSU, Fort Collins, 
CO . 
Denver Botanic Garden s Herbarium ,  Denver, CO. 
Cane, Jim.
  USDA -ARS Pollinating Insect Research 
Lab  Utah State University, Logan, UT . 
Lederer, N. University of Colorado Herbari um, 
Boulder,  CO. 
Nelson, E. Rocky Mountain Herbarium.  University  of Wyoming, Laramie, WY . 
O’Kane,  Steve  L. Jr .  Universi ty of Northern Iowa, 
Cedar Falls, IA.  
Paschke, Mark .  Warner College of Natural  Resources, Colorado State Universi ty, Fort 
Collins,  CO . 
Schneider,  Al.    Plants Database and 
www.swcoloradowildflowers.com  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, New Mexico and 
Colorado.

Prepared By:   
Christine Taliga, USDA NRCS Colorado  State 
Office,  Denver, CO . 
 
Citation  
Taliga , Christine E., 2011.  Plant Guide for Mancos 
m ilkvetch  (Astragalus humillimus ). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State 
Office .  Denver , CO  80225- 0426. 
 
Published  September, 2011  
Edited:  18Sep2011  cet,  18Sep2011 s lo; 
19Sep2011jsj; 20Sep2011jab; 23Sep2011cga  
 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site a t 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER