Plant Guide
REDTOP 
Agrostis gigantea Roth  
Plant Symbol = AGGI2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program   
 Figure 1.  Redtop (Agrostis gigantea ).  Photo by Robert Soreng @ 
USDA -NRCS PLANTS database.  
Alternate Names 
Agrostis alba  auct. Non. L. 
Agrostis  depressa  Vassey 
Agrostis  palustris  Huds. 
Agrostis  stolonifera  L. var. major  (Gaudin) Farw.  
Black bent  
Carpet bentgrass  
Redtop bent  
Redtop be ntgrass 
 
Redtop has undergone numerous name changes over time, 
and the actual placement of the multiple species and 
varieties remains confused due to hybridization.  
  Linnaeus apparently based the original description of 
Agrostis alba 
on a specimen of Poa nemoralis  
(Hitchcock, 1971). Historically, several varieties have 
been described, yet other authors have combined  A. 
gigantea  under a broader A. stolonifera  (creeping 
bentgrass) (Cronquist et al., 1977). Currently the 
PLANTS database recognizes  A. gigantea as a separate 
species from A.  stolonifera with  A. gigantea being 
primarily rhizomatous while A. stolonifera  typ ically 
produces stolons. This plant guide addresses A. gigantea 
in the broad sense which includes earlier treatments of A. 
stolonifera  var.  major .  
 
Uses   
Livestock:   
Cattle prefer nearly all other cultivated grasses to redtop.  
It remains green summer long and is useful in western 
states in pasture plantings in mountain meadows. It is 
considered preferred feed for cattle and horses in spring 
and summer and a desirable feed in fall and winter. It is 
considered a preferred feed for sheep in spring and a 
desirable feed in summer (Ogle and Brazee, 2009).     
   
Hay:  One of the primary uses of redtop is for grass hay.   
   
Turf:   
Though creeping bentgrass ( A. stolonifera) is much more 
prevalent in the turf industry than redtop, this species is 
used throughout North America and Europe in lawns and 
golf courses. It is also used for overseeding as a winter 
lawn grass in the South East.   
   
Erosion control :  
Redtop is commonly used for erosion control in plantings 
along riparian zones and wetlands. It germinates very 
rapidly and performs well on acidic low fertility soils. Its 
root system is well suited for holding soils on wetlands, 
waterways, ditchbanks and burned or cutover -timberla nd 
(Wasser, 1982).    
   
Revegetation :  
This species has been used to recapture sites which are 
very acid to land affected with heavy metals and poor soil 
quality such as mine spoils. It has been shown to have a 
higher tolerance of acidic soils than Kentucky bluegrass 
(Balasko et al., 1995).    
 
Wildlife : 
Redtop is a preferred feed for elk in spring, but is used 
sparingly by deer (Ogle and Brazee, 2009). It is  
commonly used as cover by numerous species of birds 
and small mammals. Ducks and geese use redtop for 
nes ting cover, and it is grazed by geese.