Plant Guide
 
HELIOTROPE 
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus limnocharis 
Barneby  var.  montii  (S.L. 
Welsh) Is ely  
Plant Symbol = ASLIM  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
Heliotrope milkvetch  ( Astragalus limnocharis  var. montii ). 
Photo by Duane Atwood  
Uses 
There are no known human uses of heliotrope 
milkvetch. Sheep are known to graze the leaves and 
stems.  
Status  
Heliotrope milkvetch  was listed as a threatened 
species with critical habitat in 1987 (USDI -FWS, 
1987). It is considered a species with a low degree of 
threat and a low recovery potential.  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Legume  family ( Fabaceae).  Heliotrope 
milkvetch is a low growing perennial forb. The 
leaves are pinnately  compound with 5  to 13 leaflets; 
each 2 to 8 mm (0.08 to 0.3 in) long and 1 to 2 mm 
(0.04 to 0.08 in) wide. The stems and leaves have 
basally fixed hairs; the leaves are glabrous above and  hairy on the underside. Two to 8 flowers are born in a 
loose raceme. The flowers ar
e pinkish purple with  
 
white tips on the wing petals. The fruit is an oval 
shaped, inflated pod, 11 to 18 mm (0.4 to 0.7 in) long 
and 8 to 12 mm (0.to 0.5 in) wide, mottled with 
pinkish brown freckles  (Welsh et al., 2003).  
Distribution :    
Heliotrope  milkvetch is known from three 
populations in Sanpete and Sevier Counties, Utah. 
All populations are located within the boundaries of 
the Manti -Lasal National Forest. Two populations 
occur on Heliotrope Mountain and the third is located 
on White Mountain. I n total, the three populations 
cover an estim ated 390 acres and comprise 
approximately  200,000 individuals (USDI -FWS, 
1995).   
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Heliotrope milkvetch grows in the suba lpine zone 
from  3,200 to 3,350 m . ( 10,500 to 11,000 ft) in shale 
barrens  of the Flagstaff Limestone formation . It can 
be found at timberline on plateau s and openings in 
spruce -fir forests  growing with other alpine ,  mat -
forming species . 
Adaptation  
This species is adapted to windswept plateaus at 
timberline in the Flagstaff Limestone formation.  
Average precipitation on the plateaus ranges from 76 
to 90 cm (30 to 35 in).  
Management  
The primary threat to heliotrope milkvetc h comes 
from oil and gas exploration and development. The 
species occurs in an area with potential for oil and 
gas development. Any habitat disturbance from oil 
and gas exploration could have a significant negative 
impact on the survival of the species.  
 
Limited sheep grazing occurs in heliotrope milkvetch 
habitat; however negative impacts to the populations  
from the current grazing levels have not been 
observed (USDI -FWS, 1995).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests or potential problems 
r egarding  heliotrope milkvetch .