Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CICER MILKVETCH 
Astragalus cicer L. 
Plant Symbol = ASCI4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Figure 1. Mature cicer milkvetch.  
Derek J. Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Chickpea milkvetch 
 
Uses 
Hay/pasture 
Cicer milkvetch has many qualities that make it a 
viable choice as a non-bloat legume for hay or 
pasture. Yields of cicer milkvetch are generally 
comparable to those of alfa lfa in areas with longer 
growing seasons (Baldridge and Lohmiller, 1990). 
Moisture content is 4 to 8% higher than that of alfalfa 
or sainfoin, and protein levels of 15 to 30% equal or  exceed other legumes. The high protein content of 
cicer milkvetch is due, in part, to the high leaf to stem 
ratio (approximately 40% greater than alfalfa) an
ability to retain leaves during drying and baling 
(Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990). No bloating
been reported from grazing cicer milkvetch 
(Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990). Cicer milkvetch is 
not as palatable to grazing heifers as alfalfa, birdsfoo
trefoil or sainfoin (Marten et al 1987). It is also less 
acceptable to sheep than alfa
lfa, d its 
 has 
t 
birdsfoot trefoil and 
d clover (Marten et al 1990).  
 
for 
ty as 
increases corresponded with the increase 
 forage. 
eating y 
nd pheasants 
tevens and Monsen, 2004). 
, and 
ritical 
life due to 
s non-bloat nature as compared to alfalfa. 
 for 
rounds 
igure 1) (Stevens and Monsen 2004). 
re
 
Stands of cicer milkvetch  resist overgrazing because 
of its vigorous sod forming rhizomes. Recovery from
grazing is rapid; however recovery after cutting 
hay is relatively slow. Close grazing stimulates 
growth from the base of lower leaves, crowns and 
rhizome buds. This results in increased stand densi
following grazing. Forage yields under grazing 
average approximately 3 to 4 tons/ac. A study in 
Laramie, Wyoming showed more pounds of beef w
produced on Lutana cicer milkvetch compared to 
Eski sainfoin, because the cicer milkvetch pasture 
improved each year over the  four years of the study. 
Beef yield 
in
 
Wildlife 
Deer, elk and antelope have been documented 
cicer milkvetch year round, although it is less 
attractive than alfalfa and sa infoin. Seeds are eaten b
small birds, deer, rabbit, sage grouse a
(S
 
Stabilization of disturbed soils  
Cicer milkvetch has been successfully used in grass 
mixtures on streambanks, road cuts, mine spoils
as a cover crop in orchards and windbreaks. Its 
extensive and prolific root system holds soil, and 
provides quick recovery and rapid growth in c
area plantings. Its nitrogen fixing ability also 
provides nitrogen to other species planted in 
reclamation mixtures. It is considered one of the 
better legumes for use in revegetating strip mines at 
higher elevations. It is better suited for wild
it
 
Beautification 
Its abundant foliage and somewhat showy flowers 
makes cicer milkvetch an ideal vegetative cover
areas around summer homes and campg
(f

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
ate noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
4 
flets  ng 
alfa   
hel. 
 up to 35 yrs. 
n=2x=64 (Welsh et al 2003). 
 
ees tch 
o they 
ccumulate toxic amounts of selenium.  
 
st
 
Description 
General
: Legume family ( Fabaceae). Cicer 
milkvetch is a long-lived, perennial, non-bloat 
legume with vigorous creeping roots or rhizomes. 
Stems are large and hollow, upright when young and 
becoming decumbent and trailing. Stems can reach 
to 10 ft in length in one season. Young plants may 
reach heights of 3 ft, but older plants become more 
trailing in nature. Leaves are 4 to 8 in long with 10 to 
13 pairs of leaflets, plus one terminal leaflet. Lea
are ¾ to 2 ½ in long. Flowers are pale yellow to 
white with 15 to 60 flowers growing in a compact 
raceme. Pods are bladder-sh aped and inflated turni
black with maturity. Seeds detach within the pods 
and rattle. Pods do not shatter easily and may retain 
seeds through winter. Seeds are bright yellow or pale 
green, and are about twice as large as those of alf
(figure 2). The seeds have a very hard seed coat 
which requires chemical or  mechanical scarification
for adequate germination. There are approximately 
130,000 seeds per pound and 65 pounds per bus
Cicer milkvetch plants can live
2
 
Cicer milkvetch is primarily pollinated by bumble 
bees, but may also be visited by other bee species 
including European honey be es and leaf cutter b
(Richards 1986). Plants are readily eaten by all 
classes of livestock as hay  or pasture. The plants are 
also eaten by antelope, deer  and elk. Cicer milkve
plants contain no harmful alkaloids, nor d
a Nutrition
: Nutritional values for cicer milkvetch 
compare to other forage legumes such as alfalfa, 
birdsfoot trefoil and sainfoin. Cicer milkvetch has 
higher leaf:stem ratio and retains leaves longer in 
season than alfalfa, birdsfoot trefoil or sainfoin which 
equates to higher invitro dry matter digestibility 
(Loeppky et al 1996). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat: Cicer milkvetch is native to moist places 
along streams and ditches of Europe from Finland 
and Sweden to Spain and ea st to Russia. The species 
is now established in pinyon-juniper, sagebrush, 
mountain shrub and aspen communities in the 
western United States (Welsh et al 2003). 
 
Adaptation 
Cicer milkvetch is best adapted to the Rocky 
Mountain region, but the species has a very wide 
range of adaptation (Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990). 
Trials including cicer milkvetch have shown that the 
species has good to excellent  performance on coastal 
areas of Alaska south to La s Cruces, NM and also in 
the Central Plains west to the Cascade-Sierra ranges 
(Baldridge and Lohmiller, 1990). 
 
Cicer milkvetch will grow in  soils of all textures from 
clays to sands, but best performance comes from 
plants grown on moderately coarse textured soils. 
Plants are adapted to slightly acidic to slightly 
alkaline soils with pH levels of 6.0 to 8.1. The 
species is moderately salt tolerant. Production begins 
to be affected with EC >5ds/m and its upper limit is 
10ds/m (Ogle et al 2004). These plants also do well 
on poor, disturbed soils making it useful for critical 
area plantings.  
 
Production fields of cicer milkvetch produce best on 
18 to 35 inches of moisture annually, but the species 
also exhibits good drought tolerance and has been 
established on dryland sites in Idaho, Montana and 
Wyoming in areas receiving as little as 14 inches 
mean annual precipitation (Baldridge and Lohmiller 
1990). It is recommended for use in regions receiving 
greater than 15 inches annual  precipitation (Ogle et al 
2008). Cicer milkvetch also does well on wet sites or 
on sub-irrigated sites where ground water is within 3 
feet of the soil surface. 
Figure 2. Cicer milkvetch seed. Photo by Steve Hurst, 
 
Hardy underground root crowns and prolific 
rhizomes prevent plants from being severely 
damaged by frost. The plants require only 30 days of 
frost free growth per season. This is fewer than that 
USDA NRCS PLANTS Database

required by alfalfa. Cicer milkvetch has been grown 
in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming at elevations up to 
7000 ft. 
 
Establishment 
Cicer milkvetch seed has an extremely hard seed coat 
which results in low germination of untreated seed. 
Seed coats respond well to mechanical or chemical 
scarification which facilitates air and water 
imbibition and allows germination. Moderate 
mechanical scarification works best. Too much 
mechanical scarring damages the embryos. 
Scarification is recommended immediately (within 1 
week) prior to planting, because viability declines 
steadily after scarification. (Townsend and 
McGinnies 1972). 
 
Establish cicer milkvetch in the same manner as 
alfalfa in a firm weed-free seed bed. If the soil is low 
in phosphorus, adding 200+ lb per acre incorporated 
into the soil during land prep aration increases rate of 
growth and survival. Nitrogen should not be applied 
at time of establishment as it stimulates weed growth 
and competition. 
 
Plant seed ½ to ¾ inches deep in April or May. 
However, if irrigation water is available, good stands 
can be achieved throughou t the summer. Irrigate to 
prevent crusting and drying. Seed should be 
inoculated with  Astragalus inoculum prior to 
planting. Do not plant with a nurse crop. Grasses 
planted with cicer milkvetch will out compete and 
shade out seedlings. When planted in a seed mix, 
plant cicer milkvetch and grasses in alternate rows. 
 
Commercial seed should be at least 85 percent purity 
and 75 percent germination. Rates: 7 lb/ac for pure 
stands, 5 lb/ac for a mixture. For seed production 
fields use 24 inch rows with  4.2 lb/ac or 36 inch rows 
with 3.0 lb/ac. 
 
Cicer milkvetch can be drill or broadcast seeded but 
drilling with a controlled depth followed by packer 
wheels provides best establishment. 
 
Emergence occurs 10 to14 days after planting as 
compared to 7 to 10 days fo r alfalfa. Seedling vigor is 
good, and the growth rate of cicer milkvetch exceeds 
that of alfalfa as temper atures increase in summer. 
  
Management  
Cicer milkvetch is a long lived perennial, and stands 
normally improve with age due to the proliferation of 
plants via rhizomes. Leaves and stems stay green and 
succulent later into fall than alfalfa, but spring growth  starts 14 to 28 days later than alfalfa. Growth rates 
increase with rising temperatures. 
  
To control weeds during establishment mow weeds to 
an 8 inch height to keep weeds from overtopping 
cicer milkvetch seedlings and to reduce weed seed. 
Recovery after cutting for hay is typically slower 
than alfalfa. 
 
In soils with low Phosphorus, application rates of 70+ 
lbs per acre Phosphorus annually are recommended. 
Stands with good Nitrogen fixing nodules should not 
require fertilization with Nitrogen unless there is a 
grass in the planting. 
 
When harvested as hay in mountain areas, it is best if 
harvested in a two cutting 
regime because of slow 
spring growth and slow post cutting recovery. More 
frequent cutting decreases yield of cicer milkvetch 
hay.  Yields and forage qu ality are also reduced if 
only cut once per season. First cutting should occur at 
1/10
th bloom stage (about 2 weeks later than 1/10th 
bloom of alfalfa). The sec ond cutting should occur at 
the end of the growing season. Drying time is 
approximately 3 days longer than other legumes. 
Crimping the hay as it is cut or turning windrows 
reduces drying time by 30 to 50%. 
 
 Figure 3. Cicer milkvetch grass- legume seeding mix.  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Custer Co. Idaho. 
 
Grass/cicer milkvetch mixes 
Cicer milkvetch and grass mixtures can be successful 
when done correctly. Smooth brome and reed 
canarygrass suppress cicer milkvetch and should not 
be planted with it. Cicer milkvetch suppresses 
pubescent wheatgrass, western wheatgrass, Russian 
wildrye, switchgrass, timothy and Kentucky 
bluegrass and are also poor mixture choices. The 
most compatible grasses to plant with cicer milkvetch 
are creeping foxtail, meadow brome and orchardgrass 
in alternate row plantings.  The use of alternate row 
plantings allows the establishment of cicer milkvetch.

When planted in mixed rows with grasses, the grasses 
out-compete and over-shade the cicer milkvetch 
seedlings. Double seed rates for critical area 
reclamation plantings because of harsh site 
conditions (if broadcasting plant at least 2 times the 
drill seeding rate). Only use cicer milkvetch in 
critical area plantings in areas with greater than 15 
inches mean annu al precipitation. 
 
Cicer milkvetch competes poorly with weeds during 
the establishment year and requires chemical or 
cultural weed control during stand establishment. 
Mature stands compete very well with weeds. Use 
trifluralin (pre-sowing); 2,4-DB (post emergence); 
trifluralin or 2,4-DB + bromoxynil on established 
stands (Moyer 1989). Read and follow all pesticide 
labels. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Root, crown and stem rot ( Sclerotinia trifoliorum) is 
a common problem for cicer m ilkvetch. It is indicated 
by wilting and death of aerial portions of the plant 
and by black sclerotial bodies on or inside stems.  
 
Recovery of plants from this disease is commonly 
due to prolific rhizome activity. Recovered plants 
may not be affected in subsequent years. Infestations 
occur in hot humid weather and usually affect <10 
percent of the field.  
 
Aphids, thrips, seed chalced and grasshoppers have 
all been identified on cice r milkvetch. Grasshoppers 
eat the flowers as well as seed pods. Approximately 
30 grasshoppers/yard² reduces  seed yields by 80%. 
Chemical control of insect pests can be detrimental to 
bumblebee pollinators. If grasshoppers approach 
30/yd
2, cicer should be cut for hay or the field used 
for grazing. Hewitt et al ( 1982) however showed that 
grasshoppers preferred sainfoin, sweetclover, hairy 
vetch and crown vetch over cicer milkvetch, alfalfa 
and birdsfoot trefoil and recommended using cicer 
milkvetch for range plantings for this reason. 
 
In trials conducted in north-central U.S. heifers and 
sheep grazed on pure stands of cicer milkvetch 
developed a photosensitization response. This affect 
has not been documented in other locations. The 
photosensitization is presumed to be related to high 
levels of phyllocrythrin in the blood, a normal by-
product of chlorophyll breakdown (Marten et al 
1987; Marten et al 1990). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
This species is native to Europe and was introduced 
into the US in the 1920s for testing by agricultural 
scientists for use as a forage legume. It has since been  widely used throughout the west and has become 
naturalized in many localities. It is not considered 
weedy or invasive, but may spread under ideal 
conditions via seed or rhizomes. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Average seed yields range from 400-600 lb/ac in 
Montana and Wyoming. Yields as high as 1000 lb/ac 
have been recorded. Dryland yields average between 
100 and 200 lb/ac. 
 
Cicer milkvetch requires 30 to 50 frost-free days. 
Plant at 20 to 36 inch row spacing to allow between-
row cultivation and hand rouging. Wide rows also 
provide better moisture use in dryland settings.  
Establish seed production fields as described in 
establishment section. Bumble bees are the primary 
pollinator and are nece
ssary for good seed 
production. Locate fields within ¼ mile of native 
bumblebee habitat for pollination.  
 
Water should be controlled to 16 to 20 inches. Apply 
sparingly during bloom, but do not allow plants to 
wilt.  
 
Harvest seed about the first week in September for 
low elevations (later at  higher elevations). Seed 
shatter is typically not a concern. Windrow and allow 
seed to dry at least one w eek before combining. Light 
due or high humidity can cau se the pods to become 
leathery and difficult to thrash. Delay combining 
until pods are brittle. Combine with cylinder speeds 
of 6000 to 6500 feet per minute (160 rpm for 15 inch 
cylinder). Rethreshing tailings can increase seed yield 
by 20%. 
 
Seed fields can be kept in production up to 5 years. 
Declines in production over  time occur due to weed 
invasion and reduced vigor and stand under seed 
production management. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘HiPal’ is a 16-clone synthetic released by the 
Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station in 2001. 
It is known for being extremely winter hardy as well 
as being bloat-safe and high grazing tolerance. It may 
however have poor palatability when compared to 
alfalfa or birdsfoo t trefoil. This release has not been 
tested in the western U.S. 
 
‘Lutana’ was developed from 127 plants selected for 
early spring growth, rapid recovery after cutting, 
rapid rhizome spread, and uniformity of seed 
maturation. The cultivar was released in 1970 
cooperatively by the Bridger, Montana Plant

Materials Center, the Montana Agricultural 
Experiment Station and the Wyoming Agricultural 
Experiment Station. Forage production of Lutana is 
slightly less than adapted varieties of alfalfa, except 
in areas where alfalfa would be affected by frost or 
excessive moisture (Stroh et al, 1972). Foundation 
seed is maintained by the Bridger, MT PMC. 
 
‘Monarch’ was developed as a 40-clone synthetic 
cultivar with improved seedling emergence over 
Lutana. Polycross progenies had 125 to 200% better 
seedling emergence than Lutana and forage yields 
were similar to those of Lu tana. Parental clones and 
breeder seed are maintain ed by the Crops Research 
Laboratory, AR-SEA-USDA, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO.  
 
‘Windsor’ is a 15 clone-synthetic released by the 
USDA-ARS, the Colorado Agricultural Experiment 
Station and the Wyoming Agricultural Experiment 
Station in 1993. The plants involved in development 
were selected for excellent regrowth following an 
early August harvest.  Cl ones and breeder seed are 
maintained by the USDA-ARS, Fort Collins, CO. 
Windsor was exclusively released to Peterson Seed 
Co., Inc, Savage, MN. 
 
‘AC Oxley II’ is a synthetic cultivar developed by the 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada Research Centre 
released in 2001. Oxley II was developed for 
improved seedling vigor and forage yield. Oxley II 
also yields approximately 10% more seed than Oxley 
under irrigation. Breeder seed is maintained by 
Agriculture and Agri-food Canada Research Centre, 
Lethbridge, AB. Seed distribution rights are granted 
to Prairie Seeds Inc and Newfield Seeds Co. Ltd. 
 
References 
Baldridge, D.E. and R.G.  Lohmiller, eds. 1990. 
Montana interagency plant materials handbook. 
Montana State University, Bozeman, MT. 337p. 
 
Hewitt, G.B., Wilton, A.C.  and R.J. Lorenz. 1982. 
The suitability of legumes for rangeland interseeding 
and as grasshopper food plants. Journal of Range 
Management. 35: 653-656. 
 
Loeppky, H.A., Bittman, S.,  Hiltz, M.R. and B. Frick. 
1996. Seasonal changes in yield and nutritional 
quality of cicer milkvetch and alfalfa in northeastern 
Saskatchewan. Canadian Journal of Plant Science. 
76: 441-446. 
 
 
  Marten, G.C., Ehle, F.R. and E.A. Ristau. 1987. 
Performance and photosensitization of cattle related 
to forage quality of four legumes. Crop Science. 27: 
138-145. 
 
Marten, G.C., Jordan, R.M. and E.A. Ristau. 1990. 
Performance and adverse response of sheep during 
grazing of four legumes. Crop Science. 30: 860-866. 
 
Moyer, J.R. 1989. Weed control during cicer 
milkvetch establishment and yields in subsequent 
years. Canadian Journal of Plant Science. 69: 213-
222. 
 
Ogle, D., Majerus, M., and L. St. John. 2004. Plants 
for saline to sodic soil conditions. Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Boise,
 Idaho. Idaho Technical 
Note No. 9. 12p. 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 
2008. Grass, Grass-Like, Forb, Legume and Woody 
Species for the Intermountain West. Natural 
Resources Conservation Servi ce. Boise, Idaho. Idaho 
Technical Note No. 24. 43p. 
 
Richards, K.W. 1986. Pollination requirements for 
cicer milkvetch. Journal Range Management 39: 457-
459. 
 
Stevens, R. and S.B.  Monsen. 2004. Forbs for 
seeding range and wildlife habitats. In: S.B. Monsen, 
R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw [compilers]. Restoring 
western ranges and wildlands. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDA Forest Service, Ro cky Mountain Research 
Station. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136-
vol-2. p. 425-466. 
 
Stroh, J., A. Carleton, and W. Seamands. 1972. 
management of Lutana cicer milkvetch for hay, 
pasture, seed and conservation uses. Research 
Journal, Agricultural Experiment Station, University 
of Wyoming. Laramie, WY. No. 66, 17 pp. 
 
Townsend, C.E., and W.J. McGinnies. 1972. 
Establishment of nine forage legumes in the central 
Great Plains. Agronomy Journal. 64: 699-702. 
 
Townsend, C.E. 1993. Breeding, physiology, culture 
and utilization of cicer milkvetch (Astragalus cicer L) 
Advances in Agronomy. 49: 253-308.

Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press. Provo, Utah. 912 p. 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley , Range Conservationist (Plants), USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John , Manager, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited: 31jan08 djt; 31jan08 dgo; 31jan08 lsj; 081008 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.