Plant Guide
CALIFORNIA 
SAGEBRUSH  
Artemisia californica Less.   
Plant Symbol = ARCA11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California 
 
©  James  L. Reveal,  USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database  
Alternate Names 
Coastal sagebrush, California sagewort, California 
mugwort  
 
Uses  
Landscaping  and  erosion control : Landscape use is 
usually restricted to slope plantings, especially road scars, 
and revegetation of distu rbed areas for erosion control 
(Perry 1981).  
 
Wildlife : Late-successional California sagebrush 
communities provide foraging and nesting habitat for 
many birds, including critical habitat for the federally 
threatened California gnatcatcher and the endemic B ell’s 
sage sparrow, a state- listed species of special concern 
(Hauser 2006).   These communities also support a 
number of amphibians, reptiles and small mammals, such 
as d usky- footed and desert woodrats  who preferentially 
feed on California sagebrush (Meser ve 1974). 
 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans in California used the 
leaves of California sagebrush for a number of medicinal 
treatments, including as a poultice for tooth aches or 
wounds, or applied to the back to treat asthma; as a 
decoction taken for mens trual problems, to ease 
childbirth, to ease menopausal symptoms, and for 
newborns to flush out their systems; and as a decoction 
used as a bath for colds, rheumatism and coughs (Bean 
and Saubel 1972; Bocek 1984; Foster and Hobbs 2002).   The leaves are also
 reported to have been chewed fresh, 
or dried and used for smoking, mixed with tobacco and 
other dried leaves (Bean and Saubel 1972).  The Luiseno 
Indians reportedly burned the bushes with white sage in 
ceremonial fires before hunting (Sparkman 1908). Earl y 
Spanish Californians knew the plant as “Romerillo”, and 
regarded it as a panacea, using it in tea for bronchial 
troubles, or as a wash for wounds and swellings (Dale 
1986).  It was also used by early miners in sprays to drive 
fleas from their beds (Dale 1986).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General :  Aster Famil y (Asteraceae).  California 
sagebrush is an aromatic, native, perennial shrub that can 
reach 5 to 8 ft (1.5- 2.5 m) in height.  It has a generally 
rounded growth habit, with slender, flexible stems 
branching from the base of the plant.  Leaves are more or 
l ess hairy, light green to gray in color, usually 0.8 to 4.0 
inches (2 -10 cm) in length, with 2 to 4 thread -like lobes 
that are less than 0.04 inch  (1 mm) wide, with the margins 
curled under.  California sagebrush blooms in the later 
summer to autumn/winter  (depending on locale), and 
inflorescences are long, narrow, leafy and sparse, 
generally exceeding the leav es, with heads less than 0.2 
inch  (5 mm) in diameter that nod when in fruit (Hickman 
1993).   
 
Distribution : California sagebrush is found  at elevatio ns 
below 2,625 ft (800 m) in central western and 
southwestern California south to northern Baja California, 
Mexico (Hickman 1993).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : This shrub is a dominant component of the 
coastal sage scrub, and an important member of some 
chaparral, coastal dune and dry foothill plant 
communities, especially near the coast (Hickman 1993). It 
grows best on shallow, well -drained soils in hardiness 
zones 7 -9 a nd 14- 24 (Norris Brenzel 2001).   
 
Adaptation  
California sagebrush is adapted to summer heat and 
drought, dropping its leaves only under periods of 
extreme drought stress (Perry 1981).  The root system is 
shallow and fibrous, allowing the plant to take advan tage 
of early season rains for rapid growth (Hauser 2006).  The 
leaves produce soluble and volatile terpene compounds