Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED COLUMBINE 
Aquilegia canadensis  L. 
Plant Symbol = AQCA 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Wild columbine, wild honeysuckle, meeting-houses, 
red-bell, Canada columbine, American columbine, 
rock-lily, jack-in-trousers, cluckies,  Aquilegia 
australis, Aquilegia  canadensis var. australis, 
Aquilegia canadensis  var. coccinea, Aquilegia  
canadensis var. eminens,  Aquilegia canadensis var. 
flaviflora, Aquilegia  canadensis  var. hybrida, 
Aquilegia  canadensis  var. latiuscula, Aquilegia 
canadensis  var.  phippenii, Aquilegia canadensis 
forma flaviflora , Aquilegia canadensis  forma 
ecalcarata , Aquilegia canadensis  forma albiflora , 
Aquilegia canadensis  forma phippenii, Aquilegia  
coccinea, Aquilegia elegans, Aquilegia eminens, 
Aquilegia flaviflora, Aquilegia latiuscula, Aquilegia  
phoenicantha  and Aquilegia variegata. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Seeds from this plant have been used 
to treat ailments such as headaches, sore throats, 
stomatitis, heart problems, skin rash or itch caused by 
poison ivy, kidney and urinary problems, and fever.  
They have also been used for ceremonial medicines, 
perfume, and as additives to tobacco.  Roots of this 
plant can be used to treat gastrointestinal ailments. 
 
Landscaping:  Red columbine, in native or cultivated 
forms, is a popular garden perennial because it is  hardy, lives approximatel
y 3 to 5 years, and can 
readily regenerate by seed.  It is also useful for 
woodland and meadow plantings. 
 
Wildlife:  Red columbine is pollinated by 
hummingbirds, which may depend on the plant as an 
important nectar source.  In addition, at least four bee 
species have been found to  be effective pollinators of 
red columbine in southeastern Wisconsin and 
northwards. 
 Jennifer Anderson 2002. USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database
 
Status 
Red columbine is endangered in Florida.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site (
http://plants.usda. 
gov) and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Buttercup Family  (Ranunculaceae).  Red 
columbine is a perennial herb that has short-lived 
fibrous roots and a vertical underground stem 
(caudex).  It is 30-80 cm (12-30 in) tall, growing 
from the caudex.  Compound  leaves are distinctly 
divided into obovate leaflets.  The flower is 
downward facing, with all petals prolonged backward 
into a tubular spur.  Sepals are petal-like and 
typically red.  Petals are yellow and become redder at 
the tip of the spur.  Plant growth begins in early 
spring.  This plant blooms from March to July and 
sets fruit in mid to late summer (June to August).  
Aboveground portions of Red columbine die back to 
the caudex in mid to late autumn. 
 
Distribution : Red Columbine is native to eastern and 
central North America and is  found from Nova Scotia 
to Saskatchewan, south to  northern Florida, western 
Oklahoma and eastern Texas.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Red columbine is found in dry to mesic or 
even low woods, especially along borders or 
clearings of oak-hickory, oak-maple and maple-
basswood forests, black-oak savannas, cedar glades, 
pine woods, and mixed conifer hardwood forests.  It 
can also be found on wooded to open rocky hillsides, 
bluffs, calcareous cliffs, outcrops, ledges, banks, 
beach ridges, gravelly shorelines, roadsides, quarries, 
and peat bogs.

Adaptation 
The USDA Hardiness Zones for red columbine is 3 to 
8.  It grows in thin soils over granitic bedrock, steep 
hillsides of thin loess over limestone or quartzite 
bedrock, and on gravelly glacial marine soils.  
Because of highly variable genetic plasticity, red 
columbine populations can occur in a wide range of 
habitats from rich woods to rocky cliffs. 
 
Establishment 
This hardy eastern perennial is propagated by seed.  
Seed is mature and ready for collection when it turns 
black in the follicles.  Collected seed should be stored 
in seedbags at temperatures of 5
o to 6oC (~41oF) and 
can be stored up to 4 months.  A 3 to 4 week period 
of moist stratification at 5
oC may speed up germina-
tion time but does not increase germination rate.   
 
Aquilegia canadensis  seeds should be hand-sown into 
germination trays in greenhouse temperatures of 21o 
to 24oC (70o to 75oF).  Germination will take place 
within 3 to 4 weeks, and supplemental lighting is not 
necessary.  Soil in the germination trays must be kept 
evenly moist during germination.  Fertilization may 
damage the foliage, so avoid application while in 
germination trays. 
 
Seedlings can be transplanted into plug cells 
following a 3-4 week period of root development.  
Plugs will need to be cut back to allow for air 
circulation over the media surface.  Approximately 2 
weeks prior to outplanting, plants should be exposed 
to lower greenhouse, or frost-free outdoor, 
temperatures.   
 
Although red columbine pref ers soils that are well 
drained, loose, and slightly acidic, it will grow in 
medium that is loose and has a mixture of organic 
matter.  It will not bloom during the first growing 
season. 
 
Germination procedures can begin in August and as 
late as November.  Outplanting should take place in 
the spring (April).  Red colu mbine can also be direct-
seeded at a planting site in the fall or early spring.  
The general recommendation for wildflower seeding 
is 11 pounds per acre. 
 
Management  
Columbine species are little bothered by powdery 
mildew or broad mites.  The waxy nature of the 
leaves sheds water-based pesticides.  Red columbine 
is unpalatable to livestock but is sometimes browsed 
by deer. 
Red columbine can survive fire disturbance.  
Recolonization begins when the underground caudex 
resprouts following disturbance.  Population growth 
continues by seed.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Examples of cultivars include the ‘Canyon Vista,’ 
‘Corbett,’ and ‘Nana’ columbines.  These cultivars 
were developed for garden use to change the color 
intensity of the red and yellow flowers of the 
canadensis species.   
 
Native plant material is readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed.  The National Plant Materials Center 
(NPMC) in Shenandoah National Park produces 
columbine plugs, quart- size plants, and seed.  
 
References 
Agricultural Research Service 2003.  Dr. Duke’s 
phytochemical and ethnobotanical databases.   
USDA-ARS-NGRL, Beltsville Agricultural Research 
Center, Beltsville.  
 
Anderson, J.. 2002.   USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  Version 3.5 (
http://plants.usda.gov, 21 
October 2004).  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge. 
 
Davis, K.M. & J.L. Knjawski 2001.   Propagation 
protocols for production of container Aquilegia 
canadensis plants (container plugs) .  Native Plant 
Network.  (
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 16 
December 2003). USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1919.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River.  SI-BAE Annual Report #33.  Pp. 
82-83.   
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, F.T. Davies jr., & R.L. 
Geneve 1996.   Plant propagation principles and 
practices, 6
th ed.  pp. 727, 770. Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River.   
 
Herrick, J.W. 1977.   Iroquois medical botany.   pp. 
320.  State University of New York, Albany. 
 
Institute for Systematic Botany. 2002.   Aquilegia 
canadensis.   Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants. 
(
http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu/main.asp?plantID=398
0).  University of South Florida, Tampa.   
 
Kujawski, J., J. Englert, & H. Hayward 1997.  
Wildflowers for the Mid-Atlantic: Columbine

(Aquilegia canadensis).  Technical Note No. 97-08.  
USDA-NRCS National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville. 
 
LaRoche, G. 1980.   The effects of restricting root 
growing space, decreasing nutrient supply and 
increasing water stress on the phenetics of Aquilegia 
canadensis L. (Ranunculaceae).   Bulletin of the 
Torrey Botanical Club 107(2): 220-231. 
 
Macior, L.W. 1966.  Foraging behavior of Bombus 
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) in relation to Aquilegia 
pollination.   American Journal of Botany  53(3): 302-
309. 
 
Nichols, G.E. 1934.  The influence of exposure to 
winter temperatures upon seed germination in various 
native American plants.   Ecology 15(4): 364-373. 
 
Rook, E.S. 2002.   Aquilegia canadensis.  
(
http://www.rook.org/earl/bwca/nature/herbs/ 
index.html, 7 January 2004). Boundary Waters Canoe 
Area.   
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians.   Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4: 175-326.  Pp. 238-239.   
 
Sullivan, J. 1992.   Aquilegia canadensis. 
(
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis, 17 December 
2003). USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, 
Missoula.   
 
USDA. 1990.   USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map.   
The U.S. National Arboretum.  
(
http://www.usna.usda.gov/Hardzone/ushzmap.html, 
7 January 2004). Washington D.C.   
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 9Jan2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.