Mead’s Milkweed  
Asclepias meadii  Torr.
 ex A.  Gray  
Plant Symbol = ASME  
 Mead's milkweed flowering on the Salac Prairie, John M. Row, NRCS, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
Alternate Names  
None   
 
Warning:   Mead’s milkweed is a protected species under 
the Endangered Species Act .  Seed or plants may not be 
harvested from federal lands without a  permit from the 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) . 
Description  
General :  A rare, long -lived , herbaceous  perennial of  the 
ASCLEPIDACEAE ,  Mead's milkweed grows from a 
slender rhizome; the stems (ramets) usually solitary, grow 
to as much as 5 dm  tall (Hartman 1986).  Several ramets 
may arise from a genet (Kettle et al. 2000).  The leaves 
opposite, sessile, glabrous except for the margins, 
lanceolate to broadly ovate, 4  to  8 cm long and 1  to 4.5 
cm wide (Hartman 1986) on mature plants.  Ramets 
pro duce solitary umbels on elongated peduncles.  The 
characteristically hook ed peduncles cause the umbel s to 
nod , a characteristic unique among milkweeds (Betz  1989).  Umbels produce 1 
to 26  (12 on average) greenish-
yellow flowers from  late May to early June (Bare 1979; 
Betz 1989; Bowles et al. 1998).  One, rarely two , erect, 
long,  narrowly  spindle-shaped  pods  8  to  1 2 cm long and 
1.3 cm in diameter are produced on deflexed pedicels 
( Betz 1989; Hartman 1986).  
 
Historical:   With the advent of the plow, A sclepias meadii  
quickly disappeared from much of the landscape as native 
prairie was converted to cultivated land.  Range -wide 
populations of the species occur mostly on privately  
owned, tallgrass prairie remnants, most of which are 
hayed  annually.  P opulations also occur on tallgrass 
prairie preserves, remnant prairies along railroads, and 
land not suitable  for cultivation in the eastern parts of the 
species range.  
 
A physician -botanist  named Dr. Samuel Barnum Mead 
first collected A. meadii  in western Illinois in 1843.  John 
Torrey identified the plant as a new species and named it 
for Dr. Mead  (Betz 1989) . 
 
Distribution :  In pre -settlement times , Mead’s milkweed 
probably  was widely  but sporadically  distributed  through 
the tallgrass prairie region of the central Un ited States 
from  east-central  Kansas and southern Missouri, north to 
central Iowa and southwestern Wisconsin, and east to 
southern Illinois and northwestern  Indiana (Betz 1989).  
Extant populations are  known in eastern Kansas, 
Missouri, south -central Iowa, and southern Illinois 
(USFWS 2003).   For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
Habitat :  Mead’s milkweed  is  found in unplowed  tallgrass 
p rairie on mesic to dry mesic upland sites  (Betz and Lamp 
1992) .  On deep silt- loam soils, it can be found growing 
in association with grasses such as big bluestem  
( Andropogon gerardii ), Indian grass  ( Sorghastrum 
nutans ), and prairie dropseed  ( Sporobolus  he terolepis ), 
and  with  prairie forbs such as purple prairie -clover  ( Dalea 
purpurea) , white prairie -clover  ( D. candida, compass 
plant  ( Silphium  laciniatum ), and prairie gentian  ( Gentiana 
puberulenta ) (Betz 1989).  
 
Conservation  
Mead’s milkweed occurs on some state, federal, and 
private prairies where restoration efforts are underway to 
augment existing populations to improve genetic diversity 
of the species.  Due to scarce resources, p rogress will be 
slow .   
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide

Status  
Mead’s milkweed is f ederally l isted by the USFWS  as a 
threatened species across its range  (USFWS  1988). 
State Listings:   Endangered —Illinois, Iow a, and Missouri; 
Reintroduced —Indiana 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your  state ’s Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species , and wetland indicator 
values).  
Plant Collection  
Ch eck  state and l ocal laws regarding the status of Mead’s 
milkweed before collecting any part of this plant.   For 
example, in Iowa, it is prohibited to take, possess, import , 
export, transport, process, sell, or buy Mead’s milkweed 
or any other s tate or federally listed plant (USFWS 2003).    
If collection is permitted in your state and o nce 
permission  has been  obtained from the landowner, collect 
only a limited number of  pods  from any one area.  
Planting Guidelines  
Mead’s milkweed is self -incompatible (Betz, 1989)  so 
several sources of genetic material should be included in a 
planting.  Seedlings may be set out in the spring.  
However, success in establishment may be limited  (Row 
and Wynia 2001) .  Water in seedlings , and if conditions 
are dry, water a larger s urrounding area to reduce the 
chance of rodent damage.   Protect the seedlings from 
rodents  until established .  Set the young plants out in a 
random fashion i n open areas of the prairie avoiding  areas 
disturbed by rodent activity.   Seedling cohort survivorship 
was low for Bowles et al. (1998), at about 10% ,  while 
survivorship of planted rhizomes  was 50% for two or 
three growing seasons.  
Management  
Mead’s milkweed responds well to an annual spring burn 
that removes the previous year’s growth of dead vegetatio n.   
Exclude areas containing Mead’s milkweed from mowing 
until after the seeds have disbursed in the fall.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Sucking insects , such as thrips , are a problem in 
greenhouse culture.  They cause spotting of the leaves by 
destroying  chlorophyll -bearing cells.  Aphids are a 
common pest of milkweeds causing distortion of terminal 
buds and leaves.   The milkweed bug and lesser milkweed 
bu g are known to feed on pods but appear to cause little 
harm.  Monarch butterfly caterpillars have also  been 
known to feed on leaves.  Cerambycid milkweed beetles 
cause damage to flowers, and their larvae bore into stems 
and roots (Betz 1989).  
Pollinators  
The uncommon  to rare mining  bee  (Anthophora abrupta)  
was  thought to be the principle pollinator of Mead ’s 
milkweed flowers .  Honeybees, bumblebees, and prairie  bumblebees
 have also been suggested as pollinators (Betz 
et al . 1994) . 
 
Environmental Concerns  
None   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Flowers polli nated by the first week of June develop ripe 
follicles by the second week of September (Betz 1989).  
S eeds per pod  range from 30  to  120  (average  is 67) .  
There are approximately 5973  seeds per ounce of seed.  
The majority of the seeds placed in a  growth chamber  set 
at  20° /24°C  alternating temperature , germinated within 3 
days  following  a period of cold, moist stratification  at 3° C 
to 4° C (Row 2016) .  Betz (1989) reported germination 
results from seeds planted in soil in a greenhouse to be 
47.6%, which he co nsidered low.  Row (2016) found 
similar germination test results at 46.3%, not excluding 
abnormal seedlings.  Stratified seed may be planted in a 
soil -less mix  or in a well- drained soil consisting of 1/3 
sand and 2/3 loam .  The long petiole s of the cotyledons 
usually emerge within 2 weeks in a  greenhouse culture 
(Betz 1989) .  Seed may also be direct seeded in  the fall.  
 
Literature Cited  
Bare, J. E. 1979.  ASCLEPIADACEAE. Wildflowers and 
Weeds of Kansas.  The Regents Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence.  p. 279-289. 
Betz, R. F. 1989.  Ecology of Mead’s Milkweed  (Asclepias meadii  Torrey), p. 187 -191  in T. B. Bragg 
and J. Stubbendieck (eds.) Proc. Eleventh North 
American Prairie Conference. Univ. of Nebraska, 
Lincoln.  
Betz, R. F. and H. F. Lamp. 1992. Flower, pod, and seed  production in eighteen species of milkweeds 
(Asclepias ) In : D. D. Smith and C. A. Jacobs (eds.)
 
Pro c. of the Twelfth North American Prairie 
Conference, edited by, 25 –30. University of Northern 
Iowa, Cedar Falls.  
Betz, R. F., R. D. Struven, J. E. Wall, and F. B. Heitler.  1994.  Insect pollinators of 12 milkweed ( Asclepias) 
species. P. 45 -60  in  T. B. Bragg and J. Stubbendieck 
(eds.) Proc.  of the Thirteenth North American Prairie 
Conference. Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln.  
Bowles, M. L., J . L. McBride, and R. F. Betz. 1998.  
Management and Restoration Ecology of the Federal 
Threatened Mead’s Milkweed, Asclepias meadii 
(ASCLEPIADACEAE). Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 
85: 110- 125 
Hartman, R. L. 1986. ASCLEPIADACEAE. p. 614- 635 
in  T. M. Barkley (ed.) Flora of the Great Plains. 
Great Plains Flora Association, Univ. Press of 
Kansas. Lawrence.  
Kettle, W. D., H. M. Alexander, and G. L. Pittman. 2000.  An 11 -year Ecological Study of a Rare Prairie 
Perennial ( Asclepias meadii ):  Implications for 
Monitoring and Management. Am. Midl. Nat. 144: 
66- 77.

Row, J. M. and R. L. Wynia. 2001.  Mead’s milkweed – 
Easy to germinate, more difficult to establish. 
Ecological Restoration 19:1  49-50. 
Row, J. M. 201 6.  Propagation and establishment of 
Mead’s  Milkweed  final study report . 40 p. 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_PLANTMA
TERIALS/publications/kspmcsr12823.pdf  
U.S. Fish and  Wildlife Service . 1988.  Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants; determination of 
threatened status for Asclepias  meadii (Mead’s 
milkweed).  Federal Register , 53: 33992-33995. 
U.S. Fish and  Wildlife Service. 2003.  Mead’s milkweed 
( Asclepias meadii  Torr.) Recovery Plan. U.S. Fish & 
Wildlife Service, Fort Snelling, MN. 120 pp.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Citation
 
Row , J.  M.  2015. Plant Guide for Mead’s milkweed  
( Asclepias meadii ). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service.  Manhattan, Kansas  66502.  
 
Published : September 2015    
 
Edited:  19Aug15 ccf ; 13Apr16 jmr  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plan t- materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER