Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC MADRONE 
Arbutus menziesii Pursh 
Plant Symbol = ARME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Madrone madroño, madroña, bearberry, strawberry 
tree 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: In his diary of the Portolá expedition 
of 1769, Pedro Fages (1937:59) lists madrone as one 
of the foods of the Salinan.  The Salinan, Miwok, 
Pomo, and other California tribes have long used the 
berries of Pacific madrone for food and to make 
cider.  Berries within reach were hand picked and 
placed into baskets.  The higher branches were 
shaken or hit with a long stick to knock off the 
berries into a basket held  below or onto a cleared area 
of ground beneath the tree.  The gathered berries 
were eaten fresh, made into cider, or cooked and 
dried for later use.  Fresh berries were eaten in small 
quantities (Bocek 1984) probably because the high 
tannin content makes them astringent.  The Miwok 
chewed the fresh or dried berries for flavor but did 
not swallow them (Barrett & Gifford 1933; Moerman 
1998).  Most often, the berries were used to make 
unfermented cider.  The berries were first pounded 
into a course meal.  The meal was placed into a 
straining basket, which was placed over another 
basket that was so tightly woven it could hold water.   Water was poured into another watertight basket in 
which rocks, heated in the co
als of a fire, were added.  
The rocks were constantly stirred to keep the basket 
from burning.  The heated water was then poured 
over the meal until the entire flavor was extracted 
from the berries.   
 
Berries were strung to make necklaces, and leaves 
and berries were used as decorations (Moerman 
1998).  The berries were also used as bait to catch 
steelhead.   
  © William R. Hewlett California Academy of Sciences @ Calflora
 
The Miwok and the Cahuilla chewed the leaves to 
treat cramps and stomach aches (Barrett & Gifford 
1933; Bean & Saubel 1972).  Many tribes used an 
infusion of madrone bark to treat sores on the skin.  
The Pomo made a tannic tea from the bark that was 
used to wash sores, but not poison oak (Goodrich et 
al. 1980).  However, it is probable that the Salinan 
taught the Padres at Mission San Antonio de Padua 
how to use the berries and leaves of Pacific madrone 
and the related manzanita to make a wash used for 
treating poison oak (Heinsen 1972).  Bark tea was 
drunk to treat colds and so re throats.  Pomo women 
used an infusion of the bark as an astringent beauty 
wash to close the pores and soften the skin on their 
faces.   
 
Wildlife : Pacific madrone trees provide edible berries 
and habitat for many bird species including robins, 
cedar waxwings and bandtailed pigeons, varied 
thrush, and quail.  The trees provide perches and 
nesting places for many bird  species.  Cavity nesting 
birds that utilize Pacific madrone are red-breasted 
sapsuckers, woodpeckers, downy woodpeckers, 
mountain chickadees, house wrens, and western 
bluebirds (McMurray 1989).  Mule deer, raccoons, 
ringtails, and bears eat the berries.  Mule deer do not 
generally browse on mature leaves except during 
times of scarcity of other foliage.  However, after fire 
the plants will sprout up with new shoots that are 
eaten by mule deer as well as domestic sheep, goats, 
and cattle.  The flowers attract bees.   
 
Erosion control : Pacific madrone can prevent erosion 
in sites that experience frequent disturbance.  The 
plants have a widely spreading root system and they 
quickly reestablish after disturbance by re-sprouting 
from the stump or underground burl (McMurray 
1989).

Other: The dense, fine-grained, wood is heavy and 
brittle.  It has been used for flooring and cabinets but 
is generally unsuitable for use in construction 
because it does not dry uniformly and can crack and 
split.  Pacific madrone does make a beautiful veneer 
and is used for pulp and firewood.  Charcoal made 
from madrone wood has been used in the past as a 
component in gunpowder (Parsons 1966).  The bark 
was sometimes used for tanning leather.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Heath family (Ericaceae).  Pacific madrone 
is an evergreen tree that is  native to the northwestern 
Coast Ranges of North America.  The trees have 
single or multiple trunks with rounded, spreading 
crowns.  Mature trees reach heights of 6m to 30m or 
more depending on environmental conditions.  The 
alternately arranged leaves are oval, (7 to 15 cm 
long), thick, and have finely serrated margins.  The 
leaf surfaces are glossy dark  green above with lighter 
grayish green beneath.  Leaves remain on the plant 
for two years before they are shed.  The striking 
cinnamon red bark is thin and smooth.  The bark on 
young branches peels in larg e papery flakes to reveal 
an attractive, satiny gr een surface beneath that 
darkens with time to deep red.  In midsummer, the 
exfoliated bark, along with sh ed leaves in shades of 
red to orange, form a lovely colorful carpet beneath 
the tree canopy (Saunders 1923).  Fragrant bell-
shaped flowers appear in large, showy clusters at the 
ends of the branches during the spring, from March 
through May, but sometimes as  early as January.  The 
flowers (8mm) are yellowish-white to pink and 
consist of 5 fused petals.  Th e fruits are loose clusters 
of bumpy, scarlet red berries (8 to 12mm) that 
contain a mealy pulp and about 20 hard seeds.  The 
genus was named from the Celtic word “arboise,” 
which means rough fruit (Young & Young 1992).  
The early Spanish Californians named the tree 
“madroño” after the strawberry tree ( Arbutus unido), 
which grows in Spain and other nearby 
Mediterranean countries (Parsons 1966).  The edible 
fruits ripen from the early fall until December or 
January.   
 
Distribution : Pacific madrone is native to the West 
Coast of North America  and occurs from the 
Southern Coast Ranges of California to British 
Columbia in the north from 100 to 1500 m.  
Occasional populations are found in the Sierra  Nevada Range at middle elevations.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Pacific madrone is found on wooded slopes 
and canyons in oak, redwood, and mixed evergreen 
forests as well as in chaparral communities.  The 
trees are commonly associated with other species and 
rarely occur in pure stands.   
 
Adaptation 
These trees are adapted to humid coastal sites as well 
as dry foothill slopes and canyons in areas with dry 
summers and mild winters.  They grow on soils with 
low nitrogen and low moisture content.   
 
Establishment 
The Pacific madrone is a sp
ectacular tree.  Its showy 
bark, flowers and berries along with the gracefully 
crooked branches inspired Bret Harte to compose a 
poem about its loveliness (see Parsons 1966).  But, 
alas, they can be difficult to grow.  These trees 
should only be planted in very well drained soils in 
areas with non-alkaline wa ter.  Although generally 
started from seed, Pacific madrone may also be 
propagated from cuttings, grafting, or layers.   
 
To start from seed, gather the fruits from the trees 
when they are ripe—gener ally from October to 
December.  Soften the berries by soaking them in 
water and then separate the seeds from the pulp.  
Completely dry the seeds before storing.  Dried seeds 
may be stored for up to 2 years at room temperature.  
For best germination, use seeds that have been 
stratified by pre-chilling for one to two months at 2 to 
5 degrees C.  Plant the seeds, in either spring or fall, 
in containers that have been filled with a mix of peat, 
sand, and gravel.  Allow the seedlings to reach at 
least two feet in height before transplanting.  
Established trees can live up to 200 years or more 
and do not transplant well, so select a site where the 
tree can remain permanently.  Choose a place with 
full sun to partial shade well away from lawns and 
other plants that require  summer watering.  Deeply 
irrigate the seedlings once a month during the 
summer months until established.  Do not splash 
water upon the trunk or leaves while watering, as the 
trees are susceptible to fungus that resides in the soil.  
Once established, the trees will require only 
infrequent, deep irrigation during unusually dry 
summers.  The trees develop an underground, woody 
organ called a ‘burl’ that re-sprouts if the stem is 
destroyed.

Management 
In areas managed for conifer timber production, 
Pacific madrone has been considered a “weedy” tree 
species.  This is because it can out-compete 
replanting of timber species because of its ability to 
resprout from its stump or burl after disturbance.  
Interestingly, there is some evidence that Pacific 
madrone can facilitate growth of Douglas fir at some 
sites (McMurray 1989).   
 
In natural areas, the situation is reversed from that of 
timber production areas.  Pacific madrone depends on 
periodic fire to reduce the shading resulting from the 
closing conifer overstay.  Fire suppression causes 
Pacific madrone to be out-competed by species that 
can better tolerate shade.   Currently Pacific madrone 
is declining in many of these areas due to infrequent 
fires and other factors including drought, insects, and 
pathogens.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insect pests include aphids, caterpillars, woodborers, 
and Madrone psyllid.  The trees are susceptible to 
several fungal infections, which cause leaf diseases, 
root rot, and crown rot (Labadie 1978).  Pacific 
madrone is also affected by “sudden oak death” 
caused by the introduced fungus,  Phytophthora.   
To keep trees healthy, apply a thick layer of mulch to 
the root zone area beneath the crown and do not 
garden or compact this area in any way, avoid 
frequent irrigation, prune only from June to 
September (when the fungus and insects are less 
active), and fertilize if the tree shows signs of 
deficiency (Švihra et al. 2001).   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Pacific madrone has been declining within its range 
in the Pacific Northwest in both urban and managed 
areas over the last 20 years (Bergendorf & Chalker-
Scott 2001).  The exact ca uses of the decline are 
unknown, but probably do to a combination of factors 
including soil compactions, fire suppression, drought, 
and introduced diseases.   
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Pacific madrone is a prolific seed producer, which 
produces seed every year from  the age of three to five 
years.  One pound of seeds will produce 
approximately 1,000 plants (McMurray 1989).  
However, seedlings grow slowly and are highly 
susceptible to mortality.   
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.   Yosemite Association, Yosemite National Park, CA.  
388 pp. 
 
Bean, L.J. & K. S. Saubel 1972.  
Temalpakh (from 
the earth): Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of 
plants.   Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian 
Reservation.  225 pp. 
 
Bergendor, D. & L. Chalker-Scott 2001.   Soil bulk 
density and health of Pacific madrone.   HortScience 
Vol. 36, No. 3, Pp. 529.   
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.   Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.   
 
Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.   Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, California.  
768 pp. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   Mission San Antonio de Padua 
Herbs: Medicinal herbs of early days .  Third edition. 
Lockwood, California.  142 pp. 
 
Hewlett, W.R. 1999.   Arbutus menziesii.  California 
Academy of Sciences.  Digital Library Project, 
University of California, Berkeley. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.calfl ora.org.  Accessed [15 
December 2001]. 
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
California.  248 pp.    
 
McMurrray, N.E. 1989.   Arbutus menziesii. In: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory 
2001, May.   Fire Effects Information System , 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [20 October 
2001]. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  425 
pp.

Saunders, C.F. 1923.  With the flowers and trees in 
California.   Robert M. McBride & Company, New 
York, New York.  286 pp.   
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California  native 
plants.   University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  366 pp.   
 
Wallace, G.D. 1993.   Ericaceae, Heath family.   In: 
Hickman, J.D., Editor.   The Jepson manual: Higher 
plants of California.   University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California.   Pp.544-545.   
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.   Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  Pp.248-266.   
 
Prepared By:   
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California  
 
Edited: 05apr02 ahv; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.