PURPLE THREEAWN 
Aristida purpurea Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = ARPU9  
 
Purple threeawn. Robert Soreng @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.   
Alternate Names 
Common  Names:  wiregrass, red threeawn, dogtown 
grass, prairie threeawn  
 
Scientific  Names:  A. longiseta 
Uses  
Forage value of purple threeawn depends largely on the 
other species growing in association in the region. In the 
Southwest, where forage is limited, purple threeawn  is 
considered good spring forage while the plants remain 
green. In Arizona and New Mexico its abundance and fair 
palatability make purple threeawn a highly important 
source of forage. In northern areas where more palatable 
forage grasses are available, thr eeawn is considered 
weedy with little value (Stubendieck et al. 1994; USDA, 
1937).    Purple threeawn is popular
 among horticulturalists for use 
in low water landscaping , especially in the Southwestern 
United States . Its reddish purple coloring and compact 
bunchgrass habit  make it desirable . It spreads by seed 
readily however and can overwhelm landscape elements 
and become a nuisance. Seed also sticks to animal fur and 
human socks. Seed heads should be removed before 
maturity to prevent spread (Xeriscape Tod ay 2010). 
Purple threeawn provides some cover to small mammals 
and reptiles in sparsely vegetated desert areas. Native 
bees will make nests in the root structure.   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for  this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
This species has been separated in the past into several 
distinct species. However, the characteristics used to 
separate  these taxa such as culm height, beak length and 
awn length are highly variable within populations and 
even on the same plant (Cronquist et al. 1977). The 
PLANTS Database currently recognizes a single species 
with five varieties: purple threeawn ( A. purpurea var . 
purpurea), Fendler’s threeawn ( A. p. var. fendleriana), 
blue threeawn ( A. p. var. nealleyi ), Parish’s threeawn ( A. 
p.  var . parishii ), and Wright’s threeawn ( A. p. var. 
wrightii).  
 
Purple threeawn is a short -lived native perennial warm 
season bunchgr ass with densely tufted culms averaging 6 
to 30 inches tall. The leaves are mostly basal with blades 
1 to 10 inches long. The leaves are very narrow; less than 
2 mm wide, and involute or rolled. The ligule is a 
membranous based ring of hairs 0.5 mm long. T he 
inflorescence is a narrow panicle, 2 to 8 inches long with 
the lower branches ascending or spreading. The spikelets 
are reddish to purple colored. The floret bears a twisted 
awn column which divides into three awns 3/4 to 4 inches 
in length (Welsh et al . 2003).  
 
Members of the genus have Kranz anatomy and C4 
photosynthesis. (Voznesenskaya,et al. 2005).  
 
Distribution:  Purple threeawn  occurs in western North 
America from the west coast eastward to Minnesota, 
Illinois and Louisiana. There are also disjunct 
documented occurrences in Vermont, North Carolina and 
South Carolina. For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile pag e for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Habitat:  Purple threeawn inhabits dry coarse or sandy 
soils in desert valleys and foothills. It grows in a variety 
of plant communities including: creosote bush, 
blackbrush, shadscale, greasewood, pinyon- juniper and 
ponderosa pine (Welsh et al. 2003). It is often found 
growing in association with sand dropseed, 
needleandthread, and bluebunch wheatgrass (Monsen et 
al. 2004).  
Purple threeawn quickly invades roadsides, animal 
burrows and other areas where the soil is disturbed.  
 
Adaptation  
Purple threeawn is very drought tolerant and is generally 
adapted to sites receiving 6 inches or more annual 
precipitation. Plants are hardy to - 10° F and suggested for 
use in USDA zone 6 (Mountain Stat es Wholesale Nursery 
2001).   
Establishment  
Warm to hot temperatures improve germination of purple 
threeawn. Evans and Tisdale (1972) recorded little 
germination before seeds w ere subjected to air 
tempe ratures of 104 ° F.  Other studies show optimum 
germinati on between 50 and 86° F (Eddleman 1978).  
 
Purple threeawn can be seed ed alone or in mix tures with 
other native species ( Monsen et al. 2004). Drill seeding to 
a depth of 1/2 to 1 inch is recommended. The full stand 
seeding rate of 4 lbs/ac Pure Live Seed (P LS) provides an 
average of 25 seeds/sq ft (Ogle et al., 2014).  
 
De -awned seed can be drill seeded; however USDA -
NRCS (2004) suggest that de -awning may reduce seed 
quality.  
Management  
Grazing should be deferred for two or more seasons to 
allow plants to establish (Ogle et al. 2011).  
 
Purple threeawn i ncreases under grazing because other 
more palatable bunchgrasses are favored by livestock.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no pests or potential problems documented for 
this species.  
Environmental Conc erns 
Purple threeawn is native to arid locations in western 
North America and poses no concern to native plant 
communities. However it spreads quickly into disturbed 
areas and can be considered invasive in certain situations.   
Its dominance may be indicati ve of poor grazing 
management, especially in the Northern Great Plains.   
 
Once  matured, the long awns on the seed head can 
become problematic. The awns and sharp seed can 
become lodged in the soft tissues of the mouth and nose 
dev eloping into abscesses whi ch are extremely painful.  Animals will 
typically avoid eating threeawn when other 
more palatable forage is available.   The awns may also 
decrease value of sheep wool.  
 
 Purple threeawn florets. Bruce Leander, Ladybird Johnson Wildflower 
Center
.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
The  USDA- NRCS Tuc son Plant Materials Center (2004) 
recommends planting purple threeawn with 24 to 38 inch 
row spacing for seed production to allow for between row 
cultivation. Narrower row spacing can be used but seed 
yields and stand long evity may be reduced.   
 
Seed is drilled in late summer to early fall into a firm, 
weed free seed bed. Fields are irrigated to prevent 
crusting and to aid stand establishment. After 
establishment fields are irrigated to field capacity in late 
fall. Establis hed fields are irrigated if necessary in spring 
through the boot stage. Overhead irrigation should be 
avoided during flowering.  
 
Seed is harvested in Tucson from May to July when seed 
is in the hard dough to mature stage. Some lodging may 
occur. Seed can b e stripped for maximum yields. Direct 
combining or swathing and windrowing provide 
satisfactory results.  
 
Awns are removed with a hammermill at moderate speed, 
and the seed is cleaned with air -screening. Weed seed can 
be removed using an indent or disc cle aner. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Common seed of purple threeawn is available 
commercially.   
References  
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, 
J.L. and P.K. Holmgren.  1977. Intermountain Flora. 
Volume 6: the Monocotyledons. Columbia 
University Press. New York, NY. 584p.

Eddleman, L.E. 1978. Survey of viability of indigenous grasses, forbs and shrubs. Annual Progress Report. 
RLO -2232- T2-3. Prepared for US Energy Research 
and Development Administration.  
Evans, G.R and E.W. Tisdale. 1972. Ecological  characteristics of Aristida  longiseta  and  Agropyron 
spicatum  in west -central Idaho. Ecology. 53: 137-
142.  
Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. Grasses.  In: S.B. Monsen,  R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS -GTR -136- vol-2. p. 295- 424. 
Mountain States Wholesale Nursery.  http://www.m swn.com/ Visited January 20, 2014.  
Ogle, D., St. John, l. Stannard, M., Cornwell, J,  Holzworth, L. 2011. Technical Note 10: Pasture and 
Range Seedings –  Planning, Installation, Evaluation, 
Management.  USDA -NRCS Boise, ID -Salt Lake 
City, UT -Spokane, WA. 35p.  
Ogle, D., St. John, l. Stannard, M., Holzworth, L., Tilley, 
D. 2014. Technical Note 24: Conservation Plant 
Species for the Intermountain West.  USDA -NRCS 
Boise, ID -Salt Lake City, UT -Spokane, WA. 73 p.  
Stubbendieck, J., G.Y. Friisoe, & M.R. Bolick. 1994 . 
Weeds of Nebraska and the Great Plains . Nebraska 
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry. 
Lincoln, Nebraska. USDA, Forest Service. 1937. 
Range Plant Handbook. 532 p.  
USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2004.  Native Seed Production. U SDA-NRCS in 
cooperation with Coronado Resource Conservation 
and Development Area, Inc.  
Voznesenskaya, E.V., Koteyeva, N.K.; Chuong, S.D.X.; 
Edwards, G.E.; and Franceschi, V.R. 2005. 
Functional compartmentation of C4 photosynthesis in 
the triple-layered  chlorenchyma of Aristida. 
Functional plant biology. 32 (1): 67- 77. 
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
Xeriscape Today. www.xeriscape- today.com Visited 
January 21, 2014.  
 
  Citation
 
D. Tilley and L. St. John, L. 2013.  Plant guide for purple 
needlegrass ( Aristida purpure a). USDA- Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Published February 2014 
Edited: 
21Jan2014ls; 27Jan2014jab 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.  
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web  sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER