Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
BEACHGRASS  
Ammophila breviligulata  Fern.
Plant Symbol = AMBR 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS New Jersey State 
Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
coastal beachgrass, beach grass, marram grass 
 
Uses 
Dune Stabilization: Major use is to stabilize moving 
sand along the Atlantic  seacoast and Great Lakes 
region.  It is the best species for the initial 
stabilization of frontal dunes. 
 
Revegetation : Useful as an erosion control plant on 
non-dune areas wh ere soils are very sandy or 
inherently droughty and the site conditions make 
establishment of seeded species very difficult.  In this 
application, the beachgrass may only survive a few 
years, but it plays a valuable role in jump-starting  plant succession.  Also used on soils high in salinity, 
such as industrial waste needing vegetative cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state status and wetland 
indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Grass Family (Poaceae).  American 
beachgrass, is a leafy, spre ading, rhizomatous, native, 
bunch grass with many stems per clump.  It may 
reach a height of two to thre e feet.  The seed head is a 
spike-like panicle, about ten inches long, and appears 
in late July or August.  Leaves are long and narrow, 
and may become rolled or folded as it matures. 
Hitchcock (1951) 
 
One outstanding growth characteristic is the strong 
underground stems (rhizomes) that spread beneath 
the sand and give rise to many new plants.  Its 
vigorous growth enables the plant to withstand heavy 
deposits of sand and grow up through it. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It is native to the mid-Atlantic coastal 
region from Maine to Nort h Carolina, and the Great 
Lakes region.  It will grow on inland sites, high in 
sand and/or saline content, provided applications of 
fertilizers containing nitrogen are made.  Requires a 
sunny position in a light, well-drained soil and is very 
tolerant of severe maritime exposure.  The plant has a 
deep, strong and extensively creeping rhizome, and 
can become invasive when growing in suitable 
conditions.  This ability to colonize makes this grass 
very valuable for dune stabilization. 
 
Planting : The best time to plant beach grass is from 
October 1 to March 30 in the Mid-Atlantic region, 
but may be extended to April 30 in New England in 
most seasons.  If properly  planted, good survival can 
be expected at any time  during this period, except 
when soil is frozen.  Summer plantings are not 
satisfactory. 
 
American beachgrass can be planted either by hand 
or by mechanical equipment  designed for this work.

The stems of plants (culms) are used for planting 
stock.  Two to three culms are planted per hole.  
Space plants 18" by 18" unless wind erosion is 
severe, then spacing is reduced to 12” by 12”.  
Stagger the plantings in alternate rows to provide 
maximum erosion control.  On very stable areas 
where wind is not a factor, a spacing of 24" by 24" is 
suitable.  An 18” by 18" spacing requires 58,500 
culms per acre, or 1,350 culms per 1,000 square feet. 
 
Beachgrass culms must be planted at least 8" deep.  
This prevents plants from drying out, as well as being 
blown out by the wind.  A tiling or ditching spade is 
an excellent tool for opening the planting hole. The 
culms and roots must be kept moist before and during 
planting.  Success of planting will increase if the 
stock is dormant or has made very little growth. 
 
Fertilizer properly applied is the key to good 
vigorous growth, as coastal sands are rather infertile.   
Apply fertilizer 30 days after planting, but no earlier 
than April 1 in the Mid-Atlantic and May 1 in New 
England.  Inorganic, granular fertilizers high in 
nitrogen are best, if availa ble (N-P-K analysis of 30-
10-0, 16-8-8 or 10-10-10).  Split the fertilizer 
applications: One in spring, another early summer, 
and a third in late summer, only in the establishment 
year.  Apply no more than 1 lb. of N/1000 sq. ft .in a 
single application. 
 
Management 
Once the stand is well established, the rate of 
fertilizer applied can be reduced by half, or applied 
only when the stand appears to be weakening, based 
on local soil test results.  Pedestrian and vehicular 
traffic that bends or breaks the culms will seriously 
damage the plants and may kill them if traffic is 
intensive.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials  
 [Vegetative culms] of ‘C ape’ and ‘Hatteras’ are 
commercially available, though seed is not available. 
 
‘Cape’ is the most recent variety and was developed 
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service [ in 
1970 ] at the Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape 
May Court House, New Jersey.  Material for this 
release was collected in Barnstable County, 
Massachusetts.  It is very vigorous, a heavy culm 
producer with leaves exceptionally broad, and 
spreads rapidly by rhizomes. 
 
‘Hatteras’ was developed by the North Carolina 
Agricultural Experiment Station and is better adapted 
to southern climates.  Hatteras was developed from a  collection of 18 clones scre
ened for vigor and rate of 
spread.  This cultivar is characterized by early vigor. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.  
296 pp. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York.  910 pp. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1951.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  Miscellaneous Publication No. 200.  
USDA, Washington, D.C.  1051 pp. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
university of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1183 
 
Selisker, D.M. 1995.   Coastal dune restoration: A 
strategy for alleviating dieout of Ammophila 
breviligulata .  Restoration Ecology 3(1):54-60. 
 
Seymour, F.C. 1993.   The flora of New England .  
Privately printed.  611 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Chris Miller 
USDA, NRCS, New Jersey State Office 
J. Scott Peterson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Chris Miller 
USDA, NRCS, New Jersey State Office, Somerset, 
New Jersey 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp;07feb03ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.