Plant Guide
LOW SAGEBRUSH  
Artemisia arbuscula Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = ARAR8  
Including:  
Low sagebrush,  A. arbuscula Nutt. ssp . arbuscula 
( ARARA ) 
Lahontan sagebrush,  A. arbuscula  Nutt. ssp. longicaulis  
Winward & McArthur (ARARL3)  
Alkali sagebrush , A. arbuscula  Nutt. ssp. longiloba 
(Osterh.) L.M. Shultz (ARARL)  
Hotsprings sagebrush , A.  arbuscula  Nutt. ssp. thermopola 
Beetle (ARART)  
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
Low sagebrush.  Photo by Matt Lavin., Montana State University. 
 
Alternate Names  
Dwarf sagebrush  
Early sagebrush  
Gray sagebrush  
Little sagebrush  
Uses  
Wildlife/livestock : Low  sagebrush is browsed by deer , 
pronghorn, elk  and sheep. It is preferred by mule deer in 
winter and spring (Blaisdell et al. , 1982). It is rated as 
preferred by pronghorn year round (Ogle and Brazee, 
2009 ), but is especially utilized during summer in low 
desert scrub communities . Palatability and usage of low 
sagebrush varies by ecotype  (Francis, 2004). 
 
Low sagebrush provides cover to small mammals, reptiles 
and birds.  Due to its low stature , value as cover for large 
mammals is limited.  
  Erosion
: Low sagebrush frequently grows on arid, sterile 
soils that  would otherwise be uninhabited. It provides 
essential cover and root structure for erosion control 
(Francis, 2004).   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Low sagebrush 
is a short statured  mounded evergreen  shrub reaching 
heights of 20 to 40 cm ( 8 to 16 in) with flowering stems 
rising 10 to 30 cm (4 to 12 in) above the canopy.  The 
trunk is poorly defined with the branches diverging from 
the caudex below the soil surface. The leaves are fan 
shaped,  grayish green,  0.5 to 1.5 cm (0.2 to 0.6 in) long 
with 3 lobes at the tip . The flowers are born in heads 
(capitula) in a spicat e inflorescence up to 2 cm ( 0.8 in) 
wide, with 4 to 11  perfect disc flowers  per head. The 
leaves on the inflorescence are deciduous and deeply 3 -
lobed. The fruit is an achene approximately 0.7 mm ( 0.03 
in) long  (Shultz, 2009) . 
 
Low sagebrush can be s eparated from big sagebrush ( A. 
tridentata ) by its narrow spicate  inflorescence.  It differs 
from  black sage  (A. nova)  by having  sessile capitula, 
hairy involucres and lobed leaves on the flowering stems  
(Shultz, 2009) . 
 
Hotsprings sagebrush is a  shorter, dwarf form of low 
sagebrush ranging from 15 to 23 cm ( 6-9 in ) tall.  The 
leaves are more deeply lobed than the other subspecies 
and resemble leaves of three- tip sagebrush (A. tripartita) 
with which it is often confused. Morphology and 
distribution suggest a parentage of three -tip sagebrush and 
low sagebrush (Shultz, 2009).  
 
L ahontan  sagebrush  has longer flower stalks than low 
sagebrush. Mature plants reach 30- 90 cm (12 to 35 in) 
tall.  It is endemic to northwestern Nevada and adjacent 
portions of Oregon and Califor nia. This subspecies is 
believed to be the result of a hybridization of low 
sagebrush and Wyoming big sagebrush ( A. tridentata  ssp. 
wyomingensis ) (Winward and McArthur, 1995) . 
 
Alkali sagebrush dif fers primarily from the other 
subspecies by flowering earlier in the season, from late 
spring to early summer. It can also be distinguished by 
having  a middle lobe of the leaves which overlap the two 
lateral lobes  (Shultz, 2009).