Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
MILKWEED  
Asclepias syriaca  L. 
Plant Symbol = ASSY  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Virginia-silk, algodoncillo, silky swallowwort, herbe 
à la ouate, Seidenpflanze 
 
Uses 
Warning: Milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally, without sufficient preparation. 
 
Ethnobotanic : People have used milkweed for fiber, 
food, and medicine all over the United States and 
southern Canada.  Milkweeds supply tough fibers for 
making cords and ropes, and for weaving a coarse 
cloth.  Milkweed stems are  collected after the stalks 
senesce in late fall-early winter.  The dried stalks are 
split open to release the fibers; milkweed fibers are 
sometimes mixed with fibers of Indian hemp 
( Apocynum cannabinum ).  The bark is removed and 
the fibers released by first rubbing between the hands 
and then drawing the fibers  over a hard surface.   Twisting the fiber opposite each other and twining 
them together forms the cord.  Often this is 
accomplished by rolling the fibers on the thigh while 
twisting them together. 
 
The young shoots, stems, flower buds, immature 
fruits, and roots of butterfly milkweed were boiled 
and eaten as a vegetable by various indigenous 
groups of eastern and mi
d-western America.  The 
Meskwaki steam the flower  buds as a food source; 
they are nutritious but not c onsidered very flavorful.  
 © Jim Stasz @ PLANTS  
 
The Cherokee drank an infusion of common 
milkweed root and virgin’s bower ( Clematis species) 
for backaches (Moerman 1986).  The Cherokee, 
Iroquois, and Rappahannock used the sap to remove 
warts, for ringworm, and for bee stings.  The 
Cherokee used the plant as  a laxative, an antidote for 
gravel and dropsy, and an infusion was given for 
mastitis.  The Cherokee took an infusion of the root 
for venereal diseases.  The Chippewa made a cold 
decoction of common milkweed root and added it to 
food to produce postpartum milk flow.  The Iroquois 
took an infusion of milk weed leaves for stomach 
medicine.  A compound decoction of plants was 
taken to prevent hemorrhage after childbirth by the 
Iroquois.  The Menominee ate the buds or a 
decoction of the root for chest discomfort.  The 
Ojibwa used the root as a female remedy.  The 
Potawatomi used the root for unspecified ailments.  
 
Common milkweed was used by the Meskwaki as a 
contraceptive (Kindscher  1992, Erichsen-Brown 
1979, De Laszlo and Henshaw 1954).  A Mohawk 
anti-fertility concoction was prepared by boiling a 
fistful of dried, pulverized milkweed and three jack-
in-the-pulpit rhizomes in a pint of water for 20 
minutes.  The infusion was drunk at the rate of one 
cup an hour to induce temporary sterility (Kindscher 
1992). 
 
Milkweed species as a gr oup are known to contain 
cardiac glycosides that are poisonous to humans and 
livestock, as well as other substances that may 
account for their medicinal effect.  Resinoids, 
glycosides, and a small amount of alkaloids are 
present in all parts of the plant.  Symptoms of 
poisoning by the cardiac gl ycosides include dullness, 
weakness, bloating, inability to stand or walk, high 
body temperature, rapid and weak pulse, difficulty 
breathing, dilated pupils, spasms, and coma.

Wildlife: The cardiac glycoside in milkweed has also 
been useful as a chemical defense for monarch 
butterflies ( Danaus plexippus ).  Chemicals from the 
milkweed plant make the monarch caterpillar's flesh 
distasteful to most predators.  Monarch butterflies are 
specific to milkweed plants; this is the only type of 
plant on which the eggs are laid and the larvae will 
feed and matures into a chrysalis.  Eggs are laid on 
the underside of young, healthy leaves.  Monarch, 
Queen, and Viceroy butterflies are Müllerian mimics; 
all are toxic, and have co-evolved similar warning 
patterns to avoid predation.  Milkweed species are 
attractive to many insect species, including the large 
milkweed bug, common milkweed bug, red 
milkweed beetle, blue milk weed beetle, and bees.  
Accordingly, this is a wonderful horticultural plant 
for landscaping to attract butterflies (particularly 
monarchs), whose numbers are declining and 
migratory routes changing du e to lack of appropriate 
habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Milkweed Family (Asclepiadaceae).  
Common milkweed (Asclepias syriaca ) is a perennial 
herb growing from a deep rhizome. The hairy stems 
are usually solitary from a simple to branched and 
thickened base, and are 6-20 dm (1.9-6.5 ft) tall.  The 
opposite leaves have broadly ovate to elliptic blades 
that are 10-20 cm (3.9-7.9 in) long and 5-11 cm (1.9-
4.3 in) wide.  The leaves are sparsely hairy above and 
densely hairy below, and the petiole is 0.2-1.4 cm 
(0.08-0.77 in) long.  The in florescence occurs in the 
upper leaf axils, and there are 20-130 flowers per 
inflorescence.  The flower s are small, 11-17 mm (0.4-
0.7 in), and bloom from May to August.  The five 
petals are green to purple-tinged, and are topped by a 
crown of five erect lobes  that are rose to purple, 
rarely white.  The fruits are spindle-shaped follicles 
covered with soft hairs.  The small, round, hairy 
seeds are 6-8 mm (0.2-0 .3 in) in diameter. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  This plant grows throughout the 
Great Plains ecoregion from southern Canada south 
to NE Oklahoma, NW Georgia, and Texas, and east 
from North Carolina to Maine. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Common milkweed grows in sandy, 
clayey, or rocky calcareous soils.  It occurs along the  banks or flood plains of lakes, ponds, and waterways, 
in prairies, forest margins, roadsides, and waste 
places. This species hybridiz
es with showy milkweed 
( Asclepias speciosa ). 
 
Common milkweed is easily propagated by both seed 
and rhizome cuttings.  Both seedlings and cuttings 
will usually bloom in their second year, although 
cuttings will occasionally bloom during their first 
year.  Seeds and plants are available from many 
nurseries.  Common milkweed increases by 
underground shoots and can be invasive.  It is ideal in 
semi-dry places where it can spread without 
presenting problems for other ornamental species. 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Propagation by cuttings 
of the tuberous rhizome is easy and reliable.  The 
cuttings should be made when the plant is dormant.  
Each piece of the rhizome sh ould have at least one 
bud (they are about two inches apart).  Timing of 
propagation is important.  Harvest or divide plants 
and get the plants in the ground by late fall so they 
can develop enough root growth to survive the 
winter.  Irrigation the first year will improve survival, 
and by the second year the root system should be 
well enough established so plants will survive on 
their own.  
 
Both seedlings and cuttings will usually bloom in 
their second year, although cuttings will occasionally 
bloom during their first year (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Propagation from Seed : Common milkweed is easily 
propagated from seed.  Process as follows: 
1) Collect seeds after the pods have ripened, but 
before they have split open.  The seeds are wind 
dispersed, so be careful when gathering to place in a 
paper or burlap bag to avoid losing them.  
2) Eliminate weeds before  planting.  Strip off any 
sod. Cultivate the soil to a fine tilth, firm the soil by 
treading or rolling, and rake lightly. 
3) Seeds can be directly sewn into the ground in the 
fall.  Sow the seed mixture (with fine sand for even 
distribution) at a rate of 1/8 oz per sq. yd (4 g per sq. 
meter) or as advised. 
4) If planting in flats or in a greenhouse, common 
milkweed seeds should be  cold-treated for three 
months.  
5) The seed is very viable.  It is not certain how long 
you can store the seeds and maintain their viability.  
6) During the first summer, weed invasive plants and 
water as needed.  
 
Management 
Milkweed is burned in the fall to eliminate dead 
stalks and stimulate new growth.  Burning causes

new growth to have taller, straighter stems (with 
longer fibers).  It also stimulates flower and seed 
production.    
 
When used for fiber, milkweed is collected in the 
autumn after the leaves ha ve begun to fall off, the 
stalks turn gray or tan, and the plant dries up.  If the 
milkweed stems will break off at the ground it's time 
to harvest.  Breaking off as many stalks as possible 
encourages resprouting in  the spring.  The dried 
stalks are then split open and the fibers are twisted 
into string.  Vast quantities of fiber plants are 
required for nets, regalia, and cordage. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ASSY is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.   
 
References 
Bouton, D.W. 1995.   The monarch butterfly.   A 
fragile tissue in the wind .  Continuum Publishers, 
Harpersville, New York.  
 
DeLaszlo, H. & P.S. Henshaw 1954 .   Plant materials 
used by primitive peoples to affect fertility .  Science 
119: 626-631. 
 
Erichsen-Brown, C. 1979.   Use of plants for the past 
500 Years .  Breezy Creeks Press, Aurora, Ontario, 
Canada. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River Region.   University of Nebraska 
Press.  125 pp. 
 
Grace, E.S. 1997.   The world of the monarch 
butterfly .  Sierra Club Books, San Francisco, 
California. 114 pp. 
 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant's edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  686 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston and London.  pp. 113-
117. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson Horticultural 
Library's source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson 
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries, Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp.  
 
Kinscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.   An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  Pp. 84-94. 
 
Martin, A.C., H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plants.   A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2.  Technical Reports, Number 19.  
University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.  Pp. 156-158. 
 
Munson, P.J. 1981.  Contributions to Osage and 
Lakota ethnobotany .  Plains Anthropology 26: 229-
240. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000228.  <http://plants.usda.gov>  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 25jul00 jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.