Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUTTERFLY MILKWEED  
Asclepias tuberosa L. 
Plant Symbol = ASTU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
orange milkweed, chigger weed 
 
Use 
Warning: Milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally, without sufficient preparation.  
 
Ethnobotanic: Milkweed has been used for fiber, 
food, and medicine by people all over the United 
States and southern Canada.  Fibers from the stems of 
milkweed have been identif ied in prehistoric textiles 
in the Pueblo region.  Tewa-speaking people of the 
Rio Grande still make string and rope from these 
fibers.  At the Zuni Pueblo, the silky seed fibers are 
spun on a hand-held wooden spindle and made into 
yarn and woven into fabric, especially for dancers.  
Pueblo people ate green milkweed pods and 
uncooked roots from one of the species that forms 
fleshy tubers underground. 
 
Milkweeds supply tough fibers for making cords and 
ropes, and for weaving a co arse cloth.  Milkweed 
stems are collected after the stalks senesce in late fall 
to early winter.  The dried stalks are split open to 
release the fibers.  Milkweed fibers are sometimes 
mixed with fibers of Indian-hemp ( Apocynum 
cannabinum ).  The bark is removed and the fibers  released by first rubbing between the hands and then 
drawing the fibers over a hard surface.  The cord is  
 
formed by twisting the fiber opposite each other and 
twining them together.  Often this is accomplished by 
rolling the fibers on the thigh, while twisting them 
together. 
 
The young shoots, stems, flower buds, immature 
fruits, and roots of butterfly milkweed were boiled 
and eaten as a vegetable by various indigenous 
groups of eastern and mi
d-western America.   
 © Kenneth Robertson Illinois Dept. of Natural Resources 1999   
 
Butterfly milkweed has many medicinal uses.  The 
Omahas and Poncas ate the  raw root of the butterfly 
milkweed for bronchial and pulmonary troubles.  
Butterfly milkweed root was also chewed and placed 
on wounds, or dried, pulverized, and blown into 
wounds.  The Omaha tribe used butterfly milkweed 
medicine for rites belonging to the Shell Society.  
The Dakotas used the butte rfly milkweed as an 
emetic.  The Menominis considered the butterfly 
milkweed, which they called the "deceiver," one of 
their most important medicines.   
 
Generalized medicinal uses for milkweed species 
include 1) its use in a salve for scrofulous swelling, 
2) as a diarrhea medicine, 3) drunk by mothers 
unable to produce milk, 4) medicine for snow 
blindness and other forms of blindness, 5) relief of 
sore throat, 6) applied chewed root for swelling and 
rashes, 7) to expel tapeworm, 8) to treat colic, 9) to 
act as contraceptives, and 10) to cure snakebite.   
 
European Americans used  Asclepias tuberosa, called 
"pleurisy root", to relieve inflammation of the lining 
of the lungs and thorax, and to relieve bronchial and 
pulmonary trouble.  Pleurisy root is a stimulant to the 
vagus nerve, producing perspiration, expectoration, 
and bronchial dilation.  As its name signifies, it is 
useful for pleurisy and mild pulmonary edema, 
increasing fluid circulation, cilia function, and 
lymphatic drainage.  The root of the butterfly 
milkweed, was officially listed in the U.S. 
Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1905 and in the 
National Formulary from 1916 to 1936. 
 
Milkweed species, as a gr oup, are known to contain 
cardiac glycosides that are  poisonous both to humans 
and to livestock, as well as other substances that may 
account for their medicinal effect.  Resinoids, 
glycosides, and a small amount of alkaloids are

present in all parts of the plant.  Symptoms of 
poisoning by the cardiac glycosides include dullness, 
weakness, bloating, inability to stand or walk, high 
body temperature, rapid and weak pulse, difficulty 
breathing, dilated pupils, spasms, and coma. 
 
The cardiac glycoside in milkweed has also been 
useful as a chemical defense for monarch butterflies 
( Danaus plexippus ).  Chemicals from the milkweed 
plant make the monarch caterpillar's flesh distasteful 
to most predators.  Monarch butterflies are specific to 
milkweed plants.  This is the only type of plant on 
which the eggs are laid and the larvae will feed and 
mature into a chrysalis.  Eggs are laid on the 
underside of young healthy  leaves.  Monarch, Queen, 
and Viceroy butterflies are  Müllerian mimics, all are 
toxic, and have co-evolved similar warning patterns 
to avoid predation. 
 
Wildlife : Milkweed species are attractive to many 
insect species, including  the large milkweed bug, 
common milkweed bug, red  milkweed beetle, blue 
milkweed beetle, and bees.   Accordingly, this is a 
wonderful horticultural plant for landscaping to 
attract butterflies (particularly monarchs), whose 
numbers are declining and migratory routes changing 
due to lack of appropriate habitat.  Butterfly 
milkweed also has striki ngly beautiful flowers. 
 
Caution: At one time, milkweed was classified as a 
noxious weed due to reported toxic effects on 
livestock, and efforts were made to eradicate it.  
Milkweeds are thought to be poisonous to cows and 
sheep.  Milkweed also can have invasive 
characteristics in disturbed areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Milkweed Family (Asclepiadaceae).  
Asclepias tuberosa  is a perennial herb 3-9 dm tall 
with woody rootstocks.  According to Kelly 
Kindscher (1992), "Asclepias comes from the name 
of the Greek god of medicine, Asklepios.  The 
species name,  tuberosa,  means full of swellings or 
knobs, referring to the enlarged root system."  
Butterfly milkweed stems ar e hairy, erect, and grow 
in numerous clumps.  There is a watery sap within 
the stems and leaves.  The leaves are alternate, 
simple, crowded, lance-shaped, 5-10 cm long, shiny 
green, smooth above and velvety beneath.  The 
flowers are in showy, rounded to flat-topped groups  near the ends of branches.  Each flower has 5 petals, 
bent downward, orange to red or sometimes yellow, 
topped by a crown of 5 erect hoods, each one 
containing a short horn.  Fruits are hairy, spindle-
shaped pods 8-15 cm long.  The numerous seeds each 
have a tuft of long white hairs at the tip. 
 
Distribution 
Milkweeds grow in clumps beside roadways, on 
abandoned farmlands, and in other open areas 
throughout the United States.  Butterfly milkweed 
grows on sandy, loamy, or rocky limestone soils of 
prairies, open woodlands, roadsides, and disturbed 
areas similar to other milk
weed species.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Butterfly milkweed is easily propagated by both seed 
and rhizome cuttings.  Both seedlings and cuttings 
will usually bloom in their second year, although 
cuttings will occasionally bloom during their first 
year.  Seeds and plants of selected cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  When the roots of the 
butterfly milkweed were more commonly harvested 
for their medicinal use, the plants were dug when 
dormant in the late fall.  Butterfly milkweed increases 
by underground shoots and can be invasive.  It is 
ideal in semi-dry places wh ere it can spread without 
presenting problems for other ornamental species. 
 
Seed Collections 
Asclepias tuberosa  is easily propagated from seed.  
Collect seeds after the pods have ripened, but before 
they have split open.  The seeds are wind dispersed, 
so be careful when gather ing to place in a paper or 
burlap bag to avoid losing them.  Butterfly milkweed 
seeds should be cold-treated for three months.  Seeds 
can be directly sewn into the ground in the fall.  The 
seed is very viable.  It is not certain how long you can 
store the seeds.   
 
Whole Plant Collections 
Propagation by cuttings of the tuberous rhizome is 
also easy and reliable.  The cuttings should be made 
when the plant is dormant.   Each piece of the rhizome 
should have at least one bud (they are about two 
inches apart).  Timing of propagation is important.  
Harvest or divide plants and get the plants in the 
ground by late fall so they can develop enough root 
growth to survive the winter.  Irrigation the first year 
will improve survival, and by the second year the 
root system should be well enough established so 
plants will survive on their own.

Both seedlings and cuttings will usually bloom in 
their second year, although cuttings will occasionally 
bloom during their first year (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Management 
Both milkweed and dogbane are burned in the fall to 
eliminate dead stalks and stimulate new growth.  
Burning causes new growth to have taller, straighter 
stems (with longer fibers).   It also stimulates flower 
and seed production.    
 
When used for fiber, milkweed is collected in the 
autumn after the leaves ha ve begun to fall off, the 
stalks turn gray or tan, and the plant dries up.  If the 
milkweed stems will break off at the ground it's time 
to harvest.  Breaking off as many stalks as possible 
encourages resprouting in  the spring.  The dried 
stalks are then split open and the fibers are twisted 
into string. 
 
Vast quantities of fiber plants are required for nets, 
regalia, and cordage.  Blackburn and Anderson 
(1993) quote Craig Bates of the Yosemite Museum 
that it takes approximately five stalks of milkweed or 
Indian hemp to manufacture one foot of cordage.  A 
Sierra Miwok feather skirt or cape contained about 
100 feet of cordage made from approximately 500 
plant stalks, while a deer net 40 feet in length (Barrett 
and Gifford 1933:178) contained some 7,000 feet of 
cordage, which would have required the harvesting of 
a staggering 35,000 plant stalks. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ASTU is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Seeds and plants of 
selected  Asclepias cultivars are available from many 
nurseries.  It is best to plant species from your local 
area, adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown. 
 
References 
Blackburn, T.C. & M.K. Anderson 1993.   Before the 
wilderness.  Environmental management by Native 
Californians .  A Ballena Press Publication.  476 pp. 
 
Bouton, D.W. 1995.   The monarch butterfly.  A 
fragile tissue in the wind .  Continuum Publishers, 
Harpersville, New York. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo province.  Exploring ancient and 
enduring uses .  Museum of Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 
New Mexico.  289 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.   Wild plants 
and Native Peoples of the Four Corners .  Museum of 
New Mexico Press.  312 pp. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region .  University of Nebraska 
Press.  125 pp. 
 
Grace, E.S. 1997.   The world of the monarch 
butterfly .  Sierra Club Books, San Francisco, 
California.  114 pp. 
 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant's edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  686 pp. 
 
Illinois Department of Natural Resources 1999.   The 
tallgrass prairie of Illinois .  Version: 000328.  
<http://www.inhs.uiuc.edu/~kenr/prairieplants.html>.  
Illinois Natural History Survey, Center for 
Biodiversity, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Martin, Alexander C., Herbert S. Zim, & Arnold L. 
Nelson 1951.   American wildlife and plants.  A guide 
to wildlife food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Powell, J.A. & C.L. Hogue 1979.   California insects.  
University of California Press.  388 pp.  
 
Stewart, B. 1997.  Common butterflies of California .  
West Coast Lady Press.  255 pp. 
 
University of Kentucky 2000.   Wildlflowers of 
western Kentucky .  Version: 000328.  
<http://sac.uky.edu/~mthom0/ormilkwd.htm>.  
Lexington, Kentucky. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000328.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California

Edited 17jan01 jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.