SHOWY 
MILKWEED
 
A sclepais speciosa  Torr. 
Plant Symbol  = ASSP    
      
Description  
General :  Milkweed Family 
(Asclepiadaceae).  Showy milkweed is a 
native herbaceous perennial from 
widespread rhizomes, which produce stems 
that grow to 1½ to 5 ft tall in summer.  The 
gray- green leaves are opposite, 4 to 7 inches 
long, oval, and covered in velvety hairs.  
Stems and foliage exude milk y latex sap 
when cut.  Flowers are in loose clusters at the top of the stems and are rose- purple, aging to yellow.  Individual Asclepias 
flowers look like crowns, with the corolla (petals) reflexed, and hoods above the corolla.  Plants flower from May to 
S eptember.  Thick seed pods 3 to 5 inches long split down one side in fall to release reddish -brown, flat seeds.  Each seed has 
a tuft of white, silky hairs that allows them to be dispersed by wind.  Leaves of first year plants are much narrower, about 0.5 
i nches wide, causing the plant to often  be mistaken for other narrow-leaved species of milkweed .  
 
Distribution :   
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  The plant occurs in 
California to British Colombia and Central Canada south to Texas.  
   
Habitat :  Showy milkweed is adapted to a broad range of moisture 
conditions. It is very commonly found along canal banks and 
riparian sites and in sub -irrigated or occasionally flooded wetlands 
with sedges and rushes. Populations can also be found however in 
very dry sites receiving less than 9 inches annual precipitation, 
though these populations are likely to be located  in depressions 
where water accumulates.  
 
Adaptation  
This species typically  grows in sites receiving 16 to 30 inches 
annual precipitation, but can be found in drier sites. It is adapted to 
a range of soil types, but prefers  well-drained soils  with a pH range 
of 5.0 to 7.0 (USDA NRC S 2016). 
 
Uses  
Insectary : Milkweed species are attractive to butterflies, bees, and other insects.  Accordingly, this is a good  horticultural 
plant for floral landscaping to  attract butterflies (particularly Monarchs) and other insects.  Monarch butterflies are specific to 
milkweed plants.  This is the only type of plant on which the eggs are laid and the larvae will feed and mature into a 
chrysalis.  It is important to have large clumps of milkweeds for the young caterpillars; their response to predation is to drop 
to the ground and "play possum."  They cannot find their way back to the milkweed stems, which they need to survive, unless 
they are fairly densely spaced.   
 
Monarch, Queen and Viceroy butterflies are Müllerian mimics; all are toxic, and have co -evo lved similar warning patterns to 
avoid predation.  Other insects, which utilize milkweed, include the large milkweed bug, common milkweed bug, red 
milkweed beetle, blue milkweed beetle, and bees.  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Whole Plant Collections: For milkweed species 
with rhizomes, propagation by cuttings of the 
tuberous rhizome is also easy and reliable.  The 
cuttings should be made when the plant is 
dormant.  Each piece of the rhizome should 
have at least one bud (they are about two inches 
apart).  Timing of propagation is important.  
Harvest or divide plants and move them in 
October at the beginning of the rainy season.  
Place the plants in the groun d by late fall so they 
can develop enough root growth to survive the 
winter.  Irrigation the first year will improve 
survival, and by the second year the root system 
should be well enough established so plants will 
survive on their own.  Both seedlings and  
cuttings will usually bloom in their second year, 
although cuttings will occasionally bloom 
during their first year (Kindscher 1992).  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)   
There are currently no released selections or cultivars  of showy milkweed; however, seed from wildland collected material is 
readily available commercially. Plant materials  should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and 
intended use. Consult with your local land grant university,  local extension or local USDA NRCS office for 
recommendations for use in your area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Balls, E.K. 1962.  Early uses of California plants .  University of California Press.  102 pp. 
Blackburn, T.C. & K. Anderson 1993.  Before the wilderness.   Environmental management by native Californians.  A 
Ballena Press Publication.  476 pp.  
Bouton, D.W. 1995.  The Monarch butterfly.  A fragile tissue in the wind .  Continuum Publishers, Harpersville, New York, 
New York.  
Bunting, P. Pers comm 2 -8 -1999.  Fo rester and member of the Sierra Native American Tribal Council.  
Burrows, G.E. and R.J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic Plants of North America. Iowa State Press.  Ames IA. 1342p.  
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common wetland plants of Western Washington and Nor thwestern Oregon.  Seattle 
Audubon Society and Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp.  
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.  Wild plants of the Pueblo Province.  Exploring Ancient and Enduring Uses .  Museum 
of Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico.  289 pp.  
D unmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.  Wild plants and native peoples of the Four Corners .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  
312 pp.  
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.  Uses of plants by the Indians of the Missouri River region. University of Nebraska Press.  125 pp.  
Grace, E.S.  1997.  The world of the Monarch butterfly . Sierra Club Books.  San Francisco, California.  114 pp.  
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973. Ethnobotany of western Washington.  University of Washington Publications in Anthropology,  10(1).  University of Washington Pres s, Seattle, Washington. 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.  Sturtevant's edible plants of the world.  Dover Publications, Inc.,  New York, New York.  686 pp.  
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual. Higher plants of California.  University of California Press.  1399 pp.  
K indscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide . University Press of Kansas.  340 pp. 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  Nutrition, botany and use .  
Gordon and Bre ach Science Publishers.  633 pp.  
Landis T .D . and R.K. Dumroese . 2015. Propagating native milkweeds for restoring monarch butterfly habitat. The 
International Plant Propagators’ Society, Combined Proceedings, Vol. 64 (2014): 299- 307. 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim,  & A.L. Nelson 1951.  American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food habits .  Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  500 pp.  
Mason, H.L. 1957.  A flora of the marshes of California.  University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.   878 pp. 
Moser, C.L. 1993.  Native American basketry of southern California.  Riverside Museum Press.  155 pp.  
Panter, K.E., Ralphs, M.H., Pfister, J.A., Gardner, D.R., Stegelmeier, B.L., Lee, S.T., Welch, K.D., Green, B.T., Davis, T.Z.  and D. Cook. 2014.  Plants Poisonous to Livestock in the Western States. USDA -ARS. Agriculture Information Bulletin 
Number 415.  
Powell, J.A. & C.L. Hogue 1979.  California insects .  University of California Press. 388 pp.  
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.  Growing California native plants .  University of California Press.  366 pp.