Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPECKLED ALDER 
Alnus incana (L.) Moench ssp. 
rugosa  (Du Roi) Clausen  
Plant Symbol = ALINR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Tag alder, gray alder, hoary alder, hazel alder, swamp 
alder; Alnus rugosa  (Du Rois) Spreng.;  Alnus 
americana  (Regel) Czerp. 
 
Uses 
Speckled alder is used locally for fuel but the wood 
has no commercial value.  Because root nodules of 
alders support nitrogen-fixing bacteria, yields of 
timber-producing trees can be enhanced when grown 
in association with alder, in the same way that 
leguminous crops increase production in agricultural 
crops.  The nitrogen-enhanc ing effect is local and 
restricted to trees in the immediate vicinity of the 
alder.  Rapid growth in open habitats, wide tolerance 
to soil types, and potential for soil conditioning make  it useful in rehabilitation of disturbed sites, including 
old mines. 
 
Alders are beautiful and functional plants and deserve 
to be more widely grown in gardens and nurseries.  
They are fast growing and can easily be trained to a 
tree-like form by removing lower branches. 
 
Wildlife
: Speckled alder thickets provide cover for 
moose, white-tailed deer, rabbits, and others.  Moose, 
muskrats, beavers, and rabbits browse the twigs and 
foliage.  Songbirds, including redpolls, goldfinches, 
woodcock, and grouse eat the seeds, buds, and 
catkins.  Beavers build dams and lodges with 
speckled alder. 
 USDI, GS, BRD, Northern Prairie  Wildlife Research Center 
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used speckled alder 
to treat anemia, as an emetic, a compress or wash for 
sore eyes, and a diaphoretic, for internal bleeding, 
urinary problems, sprains, bruises or backaches, 
itches, flux, and piles, to cure saddle gall in horses.  
When mixed with powdered bumblebees, it was used 
as an aid for difficult labo r.  Tea was made from 
alder to cure diarrhea and toothaches.  Other bark 
mixtures were applied to rashes, eyes, and swelling.  
Chippewa Indians mixed alder root scraping with 
grounded up bumblebee and fed the mixture to 
women whom were having difficulty during 
childbirth. 
 
Erosion Control : Speckled alder’s acceptance of a 
wide variety of soil types makes it a good choice for 
disturbed site rehabilitation.  This is a valuable 
species to plant along stream banks for erosion 
control. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Birch Family (Betulaceae).  Native shrubs 
and (less commonly) small trees growing to 10 m 
tall, thicket-forming, with  open crowns.  The bark is 
gray, reddish, or brown, thin and smooth, becoming 
broken into irregular plates, often with conspicuous 
whitish lenticels (spongy openings for gas exchange).  
Leaves are elliptic to ovate, 4-11 cm long, 3-8 cm 
wide, broadest near or below middle, doubly and 
irregularly toothed, with 9-12 nearly straight, parallel

veins on each side, with a ladder-like network of 
depressed veins, dull dark green above.  Male 
(pollen, staminate) and female (seed, pistillate) 
flowers are in catkins, borne separately, but on the 
same tree (the species monoecious).  The seed catkins 
are cone-like, cylindric to ovoid, 1-2 cm long, erect, 
sessile or on a short, stout stalk, generally remaining 
intact after release of fruits in spring.  The pollen 
catkins are elongate, 2-7 cm long, in hanging clusters 
from near the shoot tip.  The common name 
(speckled) is in reference to the numerous lenticels 
covering the bark.   
 
Variation within the species:  Speckled alder is 
similar in growth form and habitat to mountain alder 
( Alnus tenuifolia ), which ranges from Alaska, Yukon, 
and Mackenzie southward to New Mexico.  In 
mountain alder, the leaf blades are thin and papery, 
with rounded or blunt teeth, compared to the thick 
leaf blades with sharp t eeth in speckled alder; 
mountain alder also is more treelike than speckled 
alder.  They intergrade  where their distributions 
overlap in Saskatchewan  westward.  Eurasian or 
European alder ( Alnus incana) also is similar to these 
North American natives.   When these three are 
‘lumped’ (considered to represent only a single 
species, using the oldest name), the nomenclature is 
summarized as below.  Many still consider them to 
represent three separate species.    
 
•   Alnus incana  (L.) Moench ssp.  incana – 
European alder   
  
•   Alnus incana  ssp. rugosa (Du Roi) Clausen  – 
speckled alder  
synonym:  Alnus rugosa  (Du Roi) Spreng.  
synonym: Alnus incana  var. americana  Regel  
synonym: Alnus rugosa  var. americana  (Regel) Fern.  
 
•  Alnus incana  ssp. tenuifolia  (Nutt.) Breitung  – 
mountain alder 
synonym:  Alnus tenuifolia  Nutt.  
synonym: Alnus incana  var. occidentalis  (Dippel) 
C.L. Hitchc.  
 
Brookside alder ( Alnus serrulata), a species of the 
eastern and southeastern  USA, has sometimes been 
included as a subspecies of  A. incana but is now 
generally regarded as a separate species.  Hybrids 
occur where brookside alder and speckled alder grow 
together.   
 
Distribution 
Speckled alder ranges over much of the eastern two-
thirds of Canada and reaches into Alberta, British 
Columbia, Mackenzie, and  Yukon.  In the USA, it  reaches into the Lake States and Northeast and as far 
south (at higher elevations) as Iowa, West Virginia, 
Maryland, and Virginia.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation
: Speckled alder colonizes stream banks, 
lake shores, and damp meadows and also occurs in 
bogs and nutrient-rich swamp communities, at 0-800 
meters.  It is weedy in damp areas along roadsides 
and other disturbed sites.  It grows abundantly in 
various soil types, from sandy to gravelly, loamy, 
clayey, and mucky, and it can tolerate periods of 
flooding as well as occasio nal droughts.  It often 
dominates the understory in communities of black 
spruce, balsam fir, jack pine, tamarack, northern 
white-cedar, balsam poplar, and birch-aspen, but 
growth and reproduction occur most vigorously in 
full sun.  Overstory removal brings rapid release of 
speckled alder, which may form dense, nearly pure 
thickets.  Gaps created by  fire and logging in these 
wetland forests are quickly invaded by speckled 
alder.   
 
Flowering occurs in early spring (March–May), 
before the leaves appear, th e inflorescences formed in 
late summer the season before flowering.  Fruit 
maturation is in late August–September with the 
seeds dispersed the following spring.  
 
Propagation by Seed : Speckled alder can be 
propagated by seed or by cuttings.  Seeds are shaken 
from dried cones collected in September and October 
and can be stored air-dry  in sealed containers for 
several years.  They are mo st easily sown in a cold 
frame immediately after ripening, in sand or a sand-
humus mixture.  Spring planting of seeds collected 
earlier requires stratification in moist sand or 
vermiculite for 60-90 days at 5 ° C.  Seedbeds should 
be kept moist and shaded until late in the summer.  
Germination rates are often low.  Softwood cuttings 
taken in summer, treated with rooting promoter, and 
rooted under mist provide good starts; cuttings of 
mature wood taken soon after leaves fall also are 
reported to be effective.  Two or three year-old 
seedlings are used for field planting. 
 
General : Flowering and fruit production begin at 
about 5-10 years, with abundant fruit crops produced 
at about 4-year intervals.   An optimal seedbed for 
germination is exposed, constantly moist mineral 
soil.  Mild intensity burning and scarification also 
encourage regeneration.  Individuals of speckled 
alder are fast growing, but short-lived.

Most new stems in alder stands are formed through 
sprouting from rhizomes, which may result in dense, 
clonal thickets.  Such sprouting is independent of 
aboveground stem damage, but root crown sprouts 
may contribute strongly to regeneration following 
top-kill from fires.  Sprouting rhizomes are usually 
within about 5 centimeters of the soil surface.   
 
Management 
Alders have relatively few insect or disease 
problems, although alder psyllid and alder blight 
aphid can damage the leaves.    
 
Mild spring and early summer fires that kill only the 
aerial stems are recommended for regeneration of 
speckled alder.  Severe fires that remove the organic 
layer and expose and char root crowns can 
completely eliminate sprout ing in speckled alder or 
significantly retard regenera tion.  Fire intervals of 
about 9 years are adequate to keep speckled alder 
stands at an early successional stage.  Longer 
intervals may encourage  the expansion of alder 
thickets at the expense of other forest types.   
 
Alder patches of various age classes can be 
maintained by staggered cutting and provide the best 
wildlife cover.  Spring and winter cutting produces 
the most rapid sprout growth.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
A few cultivars have been developed from  Alnus 
incana  (the European populations, see above):  
'Aurea' has new yellow foliage and bright yellow-
orange male catkins;  'Laciniata' is a cut leaf form 
with exceptionally deep lobing; 'Pendula' is a 
weeping form. 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981.   Michigan 
trees .  The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Brown, C.A. 1965.  Louisiana trees and shrubs .  
Claitor’s Bookstore, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Curtis, J.T. 1959.   The vegetation of Wisconsin.  The 
University of Wisconsin Pr ess, Madison, Wisconsin. 
 
Furlow, J.J. 1979.  The systematics of the American 
species of Alnus (Betulaceae) .  Rhodora 81:1–121, 
151–248.   
 
Furlow, J.J. 1993.   Alnus.  Pp. 509-516, IN:  Flora of 
North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York. Accessed September 2000  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>  
 
Green, C.H. 1939.   Trees of the south.  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1970.   Home guide to trees, shrubs, 
and wildflowers .  Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Hamann, A. 1999.   Utilization and management of 
red alder [Alnus rubra] genetic resources in British 
Columbia .  Ph.D. dissertation.  Dept. of Forest 
Science, Univ. of British Columbia.   
<http://genetics.forestry.ubc.ca/hamann/phthesis/phth
esis.html>  Accessed September 2000.    
 
Healy, W.M. & J.D. Gill 1974.   Shrubs and vines of 
northeastern wildlife .  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service. 
 
Hosie, R.C. 1969.   Native trees of Canada .  7th ed.  
Canadian Forest Service, Department of Fisheries 
and Forestry, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
 
Hylander, N. 1957.   On cut-leaved and small-leaved 
forms of Alnus glutinosa and A. incana .  Svensk Bot. 
Tidskr. 51:437–453.  
 
Murai, S. 1964.   Phytotaxonomical and geobotanical 
studies on gen. Alnus in Japan (III). Taxonomy of 
whole world species and distribution of each sect .  
Bull. Gov. Forest Exp. Sta. 171:1–107.  
 
Trappe, J.M., J.F. Franklin, R.F. Tarrant, & G.M. 
Hansen (eds.) 1968.   Biology of alder.  USDA, Forest 
Service, Portland, Oregon. 
 
USDA NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database . 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version 030127. 
 
Van Deelen, T.R. 1991.   Alnus rugosa.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler ).  The fire effects information 
system [database] .  USDA Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/shrub/alnr
ug/>

Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 27jan03 jsp; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.