Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
NEEDLEGRASS 
Achnatherum occidentale  
(Thurb. ex S.Wats.)  Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = ACOC3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Uses 
Prior to maturity, Western needlegrass is considered 
good forage for cattle, horses, sheep and deer. 
Western needlegrass also provides good protection 
from soil erosion. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General : Western needlegrass is an erect, native, 
perennial grass with blue-green foliage. Densely 
tufted; culms 25-45 cm tall; sheath glabrous to 
pubescent, blade commonly narrow, 1-2 mm. wide; 
panicles 10-20 cm. long; glumes 10-15 mm long; 
lemma 6-8 mm. long, uniformly appressed-hairy; 
awn twice bent, densely hairy on all three segments. 
 
Distribution 
Western needlegrass usually is found in the Plains, 
rocky hills and open woods in Wyoming, 
Washington, Arizona and California.  For more 
information on this species current distribution, 
please consult the PLANTS Web site. 
©  2002  Steve Matson @ CalPhotos 
 
Adaptation 
Western Needlegrass has shown a preference for 
loam to clay loam soils.  It can persist on moderately 
deep road cut slopes.  It is best grown for seed on 
well to moderately well-drained, moist, medium 
textured soils.  It does not tolerate poor drainage or 
prolonged flooding.  
 
Establishment 
Western Needlegrass seed germinates with autumn 
rains and early growth is satisfactory as long as soil 
moisture and temperature is suitable.  Minimum 
rainfall requirements vary from 10-12 inches 
depending on soil type, elevation and aspect.  
 
Management  
Needlegrasses should be grazed only moderately 
until the flowers begin to head and should then be 
protected from grazing until their main growing 
season has ended.  If thus managed, under normal 
weather conditions and in the absence of fire, they 
develop enough seed to regain their old-time 
abundance.  Such management also enables the 
needlegrasses to store eno ugh plant food in their 
crowns and roots for vigorous early growth the next 
fall. 
 
Needlegrasses should always be regulated enough to 
leave a stubble averaging at least four inches in 
height.  This allows the plants to continue to make 
healthy root and top growth during the current 
growing season, and to produce new foliage early in 
the next growing season.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Needlegrass populations have been known to be 
damaged by rodents, but less so than most other 
perennial species.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Flowering occurs in the late spring typically April to 
May.  Adequate moisture will promote good seed set, 
but even under adverse conditions of low moisture, 
seed will be produced in most years.  Seed is ripe 6 to 
9 weeks after flowering.  There are 311,000 seeds per 
pound.  The planting rate for most vegetative 
practices is 5 pounds pure live seed per acre drilled 
and 7 pounds pure live seed per acre broadcast.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘LK621e’ Cultivar- LK621e was collected from a 
native stand five miles southwest of Canby, 
California at an elevation of 4600 feet above sea 
level.  Employees of the NRCS originally obtained 
the seed in 1997.  It was evaluated in a common 
garden at Lockeford Plant Materials Center against 
16 other Achnatherum  populations assembled from 
California.  
 
References 
Crampton, B. 1974.  Grasses in California . California 
Natural History Guides. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California 
 
Green, L.R. & J.R. Bentley. September 1957. 
Seeding and Trials of Stipa on foothill ranges . USDA 
Forest Service, Forest Re search Notes, California 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Young, Vernon A. unknown date.  Two important 
needlegrasses in San Diego County .  Department 
Range Management, Texas A & M College, College 
Station, Texas.  
 
Prepared By:  
Dyer, Dave, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 
Edited: 11Jul2005; 06dec05 jsp; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.