Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YERBA MANSA 
Anemopsis californica (Nutt.) 
Hook. & Arn.  
Plant Symbol = ANCA10  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Bear root 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The root of the plant was used as a 
medicine by many tribes in California, Great Basin, 
and the Southwest including the Wukchumni Yokuts, 
Kawaiisu, Paiute, Shoshone, and Pima.  Some Native 
Americans still gather the plant today. The Kawaiisu, 
for example, boiled the root and a decoction was then 
drunk hot to alleviate colds and coughing.  The 
Tubatulabal of southern California for colds also took 
a decoction of the plant.  The Kamia of Imperial 
Valley pulverized the seeds of yerba mansa in the 
mortar and the meal was th en cooked as mush in a 
pot or baked as bread in hot ashes.  The Yokuts 
pounded up the root and soaked it in water.  The 
water was then drunk for a bad stomach.  The 
Costanoan made a decoction from the root, which 
was used, for menstrual cramps and for general pain 
remedy.  A tea was used to  wash sores and the plant, 
dried and powdered, was sprinkled on wounds as a 
disinfectant.  The Cahuilla  peeled, cut up, squeezed, 
and boiled the roots into a decoction that was drank 
as a cure for pleurisy.  An infusion was also used as a 
cure for stomach ulcers, chest congestion, and colds. 
 
The bark was also harvested in autumn and boiled 
into a deep red-wine color and drank to alleviate  
 
ulcers or applied externally to wash open sores.  The 
Moapa Paiute boiled the leaves in a quantity of water 
and used it as a bath for muscular pains and for sore 
feet.  The Shoshone mashed the roots and boiled 
them to make a poultice for swellings, or the 
decoctions used as an antiseptic wash.  A tea from the 
boiled roots can be taken for stomachache or more 
commonly as a tonic for general debility following 
colds.  The Pima in the So uthwest made an infusion 
of dried roots which was taken for colds.  They also 
chewed the roots and swallowed them or made a 
decoction of the roots which was taken for coughs.  
Spanish settlers in California used the plant as a 
liniment for skin troubles an d as a tea for disorders of 
the blood. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lizard’s Tail Family (Saururaceae).  This 
common herbaceous perennial has an aromatic, 
creeping rhizome, which is  thick and woody.  The 
flowers do have not true petals, but rather each 
flower is subtended by an involucre bract 1-3 cm 
long that is white, often tinged reddish.  There are 
about one hundred flowers  to each conical-shaped 
flower head.  The conical spike is stout, 1-3 cm long 
and is subtended by 4-8 unequal white petal-like 
bracts, 1-2 cm long and rounded.  The fruit is a 
capsule.  The leaves have a spicy smell and are 
alternate and simple. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The plants are found in saline or alkaline soil in 
damp or wet places in many different plant 
community types, such as valley grassland, saltgrass 
flats, and desert fan palm oases.  The range of the 
plant is from the Peninsular Ranges, South Coast 
Ranges and Mojave Desert of California on the south, 
and north through the Sacramento, San Joaquin 
Valleys and San Francisco Bay Area.  The plant also 
inhabits the Channel Islands off the southern 
California coast.  Its range  extends into Utah, central 
Kansas, northcentral Oklahoma, Colorado at the foot

of the Front Range, Arizona, northwest New Mexico, 
and west Texas 
 
Establishment 
This plant is not valued horticulturally, yet its white 
bracts are quite attractive.  This plant is hardy and 
spreads rapidly, and can become invasive.  Start the 
plant from a fleshy root.  Dig up the plants from an 
already established area and transplant them in the 
fall or winter.  Directly outplant the plants in the 
ground in full sun, giving them plenty of space.  
Place the plants one-foot apart.  The transplants will 
fill in quickly, sending 2-3 feet of runners radiating 
out from each plant.  Water the transplants and keep 
them moist year round.  If growing the plants for 
their roots for medicinal purposes, plant them in a 
loose soil.   
 
Management 
Weed around the plants peri odically.  Areas of yerba 
mansa were burned periodically by the Wukchumni 
Yokuts to maintain their quality and abundance. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ANCA is available from native plant nurseries within 
its range.   
 
References 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel. 1972.  Temalpakh: Cahuilla 
Indian knowledge and usage of plants . Malki 
Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, CA. 
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.   Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington .  Economic Botany 38(2):240-255. 
 
Chalfant, W.A. 1933.  The story of Inyo.  229 p. 
 
Curtin, L.S.M. 1949.  By the prophet of the earth .  
San Vicente Foundation, Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Franco, H. 1993.   That place needs a good fire .  
News From Native California 7(2):17-19. 
 
Jepson, W.L. 1925.   A manual of the flowering plants 
of California .  University of California Press.  
Berkeley, California. 
 
Kaul, R.B. 1986.   Saururaceae.  p. 79 IN: Flora of 
the Great Plains.  R.L. McGr egor, T.M. Barkley, R.E. 
Brooks, E.K. Schofield (eds).  University Press of 
Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
McClintock, E. 1993.   Saururaceae.  pp. 1000-1002 
IN: The Jepson Manual:  Higher Plants of California.  
J.C. Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.  Tribes of California. University of 
California Press, Berkeley , California.  p. 480. 
 
Train, P., J.R. Henrichs & W.A. Archer 1957.  
Contributions toward a Flora of Nevada No. 45 .   
USDA, ARS, Plant Industry Station Beltsville, 
Maryland. 
 
Train, P., J.R. Henrichs, & W.A. Archer 1941.  
Medicinal uses of plants by Indian tribes of Nevada .  
Contributions Toward a Flora of Nevada No. 33.  
USDA, The Division of Plant Exploration and 
Introduction, Bureau of Plant Industry, Washington 
D.C. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Voegelin, E.W. 1938.   Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records 2(1):1-84. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited 25jul00 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.