Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN YARROW 
Achillea millefolium L. var. 
occidentalis  DC. 
Plant Symbol = ACMIO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bridger (MT)  Plant 
Materials Center 
  
Alternate Names 
Woolly yarrow; Achillea millefolium  L. ssp. 
occidentalis  (DC.) Hyl, Achillea millefolium  L. var. 
lanulosa  (Nutt.) Piper;  Achillea millefolium  L. ssp. 
lanulosa  (Nutt.) Piper 
 
Uses 
Conservation:  Western yarrow is an early 
successional species that readily establishes on 
disturbed sites.  It is recommended for adding species 
diversity in native seed mixtures for rehabilitation of 
disturbed sites such as rangelands, mined lands, 
roadsides, park and restoration areas, prairie 
reconstruction projects, and farm bill program 
conservation plantings.  Secondary use is for 
ornamental application in pollinator friendly, low 
maintenance, or naturalized landscapes. 
Forage:  Western yarrow is a food source for bighorn 
sheep, pronghorn antelope, and deer.  Sage-grouse, 
especially chicks, and other  upland birds rely heavily 
on the foliage of western yarrow as a food source.  
Sage-grouse chicks also benefit from eating the 
insects associated with  yarrow.  In Montana, 
domestic sheep and goats derive approximately 40 
percent of their summer diet from western yarrow,  while it constitutes 20 percent of cattle and horse 
diets (Reitz and Morris, 1939).  The leaves and 
flowers contain volatile oils, alkaloids, and 
glycosides that are considered toxic, but the plant is 
seldom overgrazed and 
eaten in large enough 
quantities to be harmful to foraging animals. 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used western 
yarrow for many purposes, such as a tea to cure 
stomach ailments, a poultice on infected wounds, and 
as a mosquito repellant.   
 
 Susan R. Winslow USDANRCSBridgerPlantMaterialsCenter
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Western yarrow is not to be confused with the 
introduced, invasive plant, common yarrow ( Achillea 
millefolium  var. millefolium ).  Common yarrow has 
origins in central Asia, the European continent, and 
the islands of Scandinavia.  It is considerably 
different from western yarrow in that it has a much 
taller stature, aggressive vigor, and weedy 
characteristics.  Common yarrow also initiates a later 
sequence of flowering and seed ripening (Callan, 
2002). 
 
Western yarrow is a common component of western 
rangelands and only under definite conditions of 
overgrazing and disturbance could it become locally 
abundant (USDA FS, 1937).  Yarrow is seldom 
regarded as a problem weed  (Whitson et al., 1991) 
except on heavily disturbed, arable sites with 
favorable environmental conditions (Kannangara and 
Field, 1985).    
 
Description 
General :  Western yarrow is a member of the 
Asteraceae (Sunflower) family that is commonly 
found in natural and disturbed habitats throughout the 
western U.S. (Hitchcock and Cronquist, 1973).  It is a 
self-incompatible, insect-pollinated species (Clausen 
et al., 1958) occurring as native forms that may differ 
in chromosome number (n=1 8 or n=27); native races 
originating in the western U.S. (except the Pacific 
coast) are mostly tetraploid and introduced races 
mostly hexaploid (Hitchcock et al 1955).   Botanists 
currently acknowledge genetic and ecological 
differentiation among native ecotypes at the local and 
regional level (Lavin, 2002; Lesica, 2001).

Taxonomic:  Western yarrow is a moderately 
rhizomatous, long-lived, native, herbaceous perennial 
forb.  It is 30-100 cm tall with few to many 
unbranched, erect, lanate  stems (Cronquist et al., 
2002).  Leaves are alte rnate, sessile, pinnately 
dissected, semi-evergreen, and aromatic with an 
anthemideous scent (chamomile or dog fennel-like 
odor).  The basal rosette foliage is up to 25 cm long, 
and cauline leaves are typically  up to 10 cm long and 
3 cm broad.  Inflorescences are arranged in a 
compound, flat-topped corymb 6-20 cm wide, 
consisting of numerous, small flower heads 4-6 mm 
in diameter.  Involucre bracts are usually pubescent 
and greenish, with papery, straw-colored margins 
(Robinson and Fernald, 1908).  Outside ray flower 
numbers are 3-12, mostly white to cream-colored, 1-
2.5 mm long and encircle the center disk flowers.  
The disk flowers number 10-75 each, and are yellow, 
tubular, perfect, and seed -producing.  Fruit is a 
flattened, glabrous achene with compressed margins 
in a mostly reverse egg-shape with no pappus (USDA 
FS, 1966). 
 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.  
 
Habitat   
Western yarrow is one of the most abundant and 
widely distributed wildflowers in the western United 
States.  It is circumboreal and grows in a variety of 
plant communities from Alaska across Canada and 
into northern Mexico (Johnson and Larson, 1999).  
Western yarrow prefers full  sun on roadsides, hills, 
canyons, pastures, and disturbed areas.  It is scattered 
in sagebrush areas, open timber, and subalpine zones.   
 
Western yarrow thrives in droughty conditions on 
gravelly loam and on thin or sandy soils.  It is a 
common component of such ecological sites as 
shallow, silty, shallow to gravel, and silty steep 
(USDA SCS, 1976).  
Associated species include 
western wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum smithii), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), prairie 
Junegrass ( Koeleria macrantha ), Sandberg bluegrass 
( Poa secunda), common gaillardia ( Gaillardia 
aristata), big sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata), and 
prairie coneflower ( Ratibida columnifera ).  
       
 
Adaptation 
Western yarrow is highly variable and displays wide 
ecological amplitude to diurnal temperature, altitude, 
latitude, and climatic (
Hiesey and Nobs, 1970)  and 
edaphic conditions (Higgins and Mack, 1987).  It is  considered an “environmental specialist” due to the 
successful evolution of a nu
mber of ecotypic races 
(Taylor, 1992). 
 
Establishment 
Natural:  Western yarrow initiates growth in early 
spring and blooms for an extended period of time 
from late spring through mid summer (Budd and 
Campbell, 1959).  It reproduces by seed and 
vegetatively, but in undisturbed habitats the rhizomes 
remain attached to the parent plant and vegetative 
spread is relatively low (Bostock and Benton, 1979).  
In disturbed areas, rhizome  fragments do not survive 
on the soil surface, and  bud sprouting success in 
buried rhizomes is dependant on fragment length and 
soil depth (Bourdot, 1984).   
 
The growth performance of western yarrow is 
reduced under conditions of increased competition 
and shading (Bourdot et al., 1984 and 1985).  It is 
rated as good in maintaini ng a state of evergreenness 
(Monsen et al., 2004) and is not highly flammable, 
although flames can wick up through the hollow, dry 
flower stalks.  Late-spring burning will reduce 
western yarrow (Anderson et al., 1970), as will heavy 
fires.  In certain environments yarrow populations 
tend to temporarily increase after less intense fires 
(Bartos and Mueggler, 1981).  Studies conducted on 
the use of yarrow as a sodding technique in erosion 
control projects have produced satisfactory results 
(Airhart, 1988).       
 
Direct Seeding:  Viability of fresh western yarrow 
seed is generally high and seeds germinate under 
normal test conditions in 2 to 8 days, with 75 percent 
germination occurring in 5 days (Sorenson and 
Holden, 1974).  Seed should be planted into a firm, 
weed-free seedbed with a drill that will ensure 
uniform seed placement to a depth of  ⅛ to ¼ inch (3 
to 6 mm) or broadcast seeded, then harrowed or 
raked, and firmed with a packer or roller.  Field 
conditions during seedling emergence must be 
monitored for impermeable crusts, especially on sites 
with clayey soils.  If crusting is observed, the soil 
crust can be fractured with a roller or periodic 
sprinkler irrigation.  
 
There are approximately 4.4 million seeds/lb (9.5 
million seeds/kg).  The full seeding rate is ¼ to ½ 
lb/acre (0.3 to 0.6 kg/ha) pure-live-seed (PLS), but 
western yarrow would seldom be seeded in a pure 
stand.  It is recommended that western yarrow be 
included as a component of a native seed mixture, 
where the seeding rate is adjusted to the desired 
potential of the plant community.  Spring seeding is 
preferred over a dormant fall planting date.  Periodic

mowing during the establishment year is one option 
for weed suppression.   
 
Containers: Containers should be sown in fall for 
outside nursery production and in spring for 
production in the greenhouse.  Pots are filled with a 
well-drained soilless medium and wetted prior to 
seeding.  Seeds are placed directly on the surface and 
lightly covered with a thin layer of the medium, 
perlite, or pea gravel, and then thoroughly irrigated.  
Containers are kept moist with light irrigation or 
misting during the establishment phase.  Germination 
occurs in 6 to 14 days at approximately 70° F, 
followed by rapid root and shoot development over 
the next 60 days.  Supplemental nutrition is not 
necessary, but may be applied at the recommended 
rate as a controlled release, encapsulated fertilizer 
(Luna et al., 2004).  
 
Potted material should be acclimated to natural spring 
temperatures for at least 1 month prior to lining out.  
The site should be prepared so that the soil is 
workable, but not so loose as to resist packing.  
Transplants are placed in a hole slightly deeper than 
the length of the root ball, firmly tamped to remove 
unwanted airspace, and watered until the soil is 
settled.  Additional soil may be required to fill cracks 
as they occur around th e plants.  Supplemental 
irrigation is advised for as long as feasible, or on a 
regular basis during the active growing season to 
promote flowering and seed set.  Survival is high in 
increase plantings receiving proper care, but lower on 
sites with existing vegetation (Skinner, 2003).       
 
Management  
There is a high potential for using this species to 
revegetate alpine and subalpine disturbances, and in 
other degraded areas of the western U.S (Wasser, 
1982).  New seedings may need protection from 
trampling and weeds during establishment.  Clipping 
weeds above the seedlings is a preferred method of 
weed suppression as there are no herbicides selective 
for broadleaf plants.  Western yarrow vigor, 
aesthetics, and stand persistence after establishment 
may be sustained with properly timed grazing or 
defoliation of associated species.  Satisfactory control 
of western yarrow is achieved through herbicide 
application mixtures of dicamba and dichlorprop 
(Robocker, 1977).  Always consult product label 
prior to application and properly follow 
recommendations.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Inflorescences that are harv ested for seed production 
often contain small quantities of insect larvae and 
numerous live insects.  Many beneficial and  pollinating insects, such as minute pirate bug (
Orius), 
big-eyed bug (Geocoris ), hoverflies (Syrphidae), and 
several tachnid flies ( Archytas apicifer, Gymnosoma, 
Tricopoda pennipes, Cylindromia ) are known to 
frequent yarrow plants (Long, 2001).  Pest insects 
include common leaf bugs ( Lygus) and flea beetles 
(Chrysomelidae).  Root rot and mildew may occur in 
poorly drained soils (War wick and Black, 1982).  
   
Environmental Concerns 
Western yarrow is a pioneer species and considered 
an increaser where the forage resource has been 
overstocked and excessively utilized.  It should be 
considered noninvasive when used within a diverse 
plant community in its anticipated area of adaptation. 
 
Seed Production  
Production fields should be seeded at a rate of 25 
PLS per linear foot of row (82 per linear meter of 
row).  Between-row spacing is dependent on the type 
of planting and cultivation equipment, and ranges 
from 22 to 36 in. (56 to 90 cm).  Adequate between-
row space should be provided  to perform mechanical 
cultivation.  At 24-in. row spacing, the recommended 
seeding rate is 0.12 PLS lb/acre (0.14 kg/ha), and at 
30- and 36-in. row spacing, the seeding rate is 0.09 
and 0.08 PLS lb/acre (0.1 and 0.09 kg/ha), 
respectively.  There are  presently no herbicides 
specifically labeled to control weeds in seed 
production fields.  Seed harvest can be accomplished 
by swathing and combining from the cured 
windrows, or direct combin ing.  The indeterminate 
ripening may necessitate periodic mechanical 
stripping as seed heads mature.   
 
Seed is processed over a two-to three-screen fanning 
mill (slotted mesh screens), with final cleaning over 
an indent cylinder or gravity table.  An acceptable 
seed quality testing standard is 95 percent purity and 
80 percent viability (Stevens and Meyer, 1990).  Seed 
production of 100 to 150 lb/acre (112 to 170 kg/ha) 
can be expected under irrigated conditions.  Seed 
longevity is at least 5 year s when stored at moderate 
temperatures and low humidity (USDA NRCS, 
2004).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Great Northern Germplasm is a selected class release 
of western yarrow originally collected in 1988 in 
Flathead County, Montana.  This 2004 release was 
selected for top performance in vigor, height, 
seedhead production, and survival from among 29 
accessions of native yarrows from Montana and 
Wyoming.  It is adapted for use in northern Idaho, 
and all of Montana and  Wyoming, except the Red

Desert and Bighorn Basin.   G1 seed (analogous to 
Foundation seed) will be maintained by the USDA 
NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center and is 
available to commercial growers through the 
Foundation Seed Program at Montana State 
University-Bozeman and the University of Wyoming 
Foundation Seed Service at Powell, Wyoming.  
Commercial production is limited to two generations 
beyond G
1.       
 
Yakima Germplasm is a source-identified, composite 
release of western yarrow from 27 collection sites on 
the U.S. Army Yakima Training Center in Yakima, 
Washington.  Yakima Germplasm western yarrow is 
intended for use in the rehabilitation and restoration 
of western rangelands.  The USDA-ARS Forage and 
Range Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah, will 
maintain G
1 seed and it will be made available to 
growers through the Utah Crop Improvement 
Association.  Seed through the G
4 generation will be 
eligible for certification.      
 
References 
Airhart, D.L. 1988.  Experiments with seed-grown sod 
as plant introduction technique described 
(Massachusetts) . Restoration & Management Notes, 
6(1):51.    
 
Anderson, K.L., E.F. Smith, and C.E. Owensby. 
1970.  Burning bluestem range . Journal of Range 
Management 23:81-92. 
 
Bartos, D.L. and W.F. Mueggler. 1981.  Early 
succession in aspen communities following fire in 
western Wyoming . Journal of Range Management 
34(4):315-318.  
 
Bostock, S.J. and R.A. Benton. 1979.  The 
reproductive strategies of five perennial Compositae . 
Journal of Ecology 67:91-107.  
 
Bourdot, G.W. 1984.  Regeneration of yarrow 
(Achillea millefolium L.) rhizome fragments of 
different length for various depths in the soil . Weed 
Research 24: 421-429. 
 
Bourdot, G.W., D.J. Saville, and R.J. Field. 1984. 
The response of Achillea millefolium L. (Yarrow) to 
shading . New Phytologist 97:653-663. 
 
Bourdot, G.W., R.J. Field, and J.G.H. White. 1985. 
Growth analysis of Achillea millefolium L. (Yarrow) 
in the presence and absence of a competitor--
Hordeum vulgare L. (Barley).  New Phytologist 
101:507-519. 
 
Budd A.C. and J.B. Campbell. 1959.  Flowering 
sequence of a local flora .  Journal of Range 
Management 12: 127-132. 
 
Callan, N. (December) 2002.  Personal 
communication . Montana State University. Western 
Agricultural Research Station, Corvallis, MT. 
 
Clausen, J., D.D. Keck, and W.M. Hiesey.  1958.  
Experimental studies on the nature of species: III. 
Environmental responses  of climatic races of 
Achillea .  Carnegie Institution of Washington 
Publication 581, Washington D.C. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, and 
J.L. Reveal. 2002.  Intermountain Flora, vascular 
plants of the intermountain west, Vol. 5: The 
Asterales. The New York Botanical Garden, NY.  
 
Hiesey, W.M. and M.A. Nobs. 1970.  Genetic and 
transplant studies on contrasting species and 
ecological races of the Achillea milllefolium complex . 
Botanical Gazette 131(3):245-259. 
 
Higgins, S.S. and  R.N. Mack. 1987.  Comparative 
responses of Achillea millefolium ecotypes to 
competition and soil type. Oecologia 73:591-597  
 
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W. 
Thompson. 1955. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of Washin gton Press, Seattle 
and London. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest: an illustrated manual . University 
of Washington Press,  Seattle and London. 
 
Kannangara, H.W. and R.J. Field. 1985. 
Environmental and physiological factors affecting the 
fate of seeds of yarrow (Achillea millefolium) in 
arable land in New Zealand . Weed Research. 25:87-
92. 
 
Johnson, J.R. and G.E. Larson. 1999.  Grassland 
Plants of South Dakota and the Northern Great 
Plains .  South Dakota State University. College of 
Agriculture and Biological Sciences. South Dakota 
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin 566 
(revised).    
 
Lavin, M. (November) 2002.  Personal 
communication . Montana State University, Bozeman. 
 
Lesica, P. (June) 2001.  Personal communication . 
Conservation Biology Research. Missoula, MT.

Long R. F. 2001. Quantifying pests and beneficial 
insects in insectary hedgerows-the final report . 
http:www.sarep.ucdavis.edu/grants/Reports/Long/Lo
ng99-22-2/htm 
 
Luna, T., J. Evans, and D. Wick. 2004. Propagation 
protocol for production of container Achillea 
millefolium L. Nutt.  (172 ml conetainers); Glacier 
National Park, West Glacier, MT . In: Native Plant 
Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org/  
Moscow, Idaho: University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery. 
 
Monsen, S.B., R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw, comps. 
2004.  Restoring western ranges and wildlands . Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. Pages 295-698 
plus index. 
 
Reitz, L.P. and H.E. Morris. 1939.  Important grasses 
and other common plants on Montana ranges--
description, distribution, and relative value . Bulletin 
375. Montana State College, Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Bozeman. 
 
Robinson, B.L. and M.L. Fernald. 1908.  Gray's New 
Manual of Botany: A handbook of the flowering 
plants and ferns . Amer. Book Co., New York.  
 
Robocker, W.C. 1977.  Germination of seeds of 
common yarrow (Achillea millefolium) and its 
herbicidal control . Weed Science 25(5):456-459. 
 
Skinner, D.M. 2003. Propagation protocol for 
production of container Achillea millefolium L ; 
Pullman Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington. In:  Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org/  Moscow, Idaho: 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery.  
 
Sorenson, J.T. and D.J. Holden. 1974.  Germination 
of native prairie forb seeds . Journal of Range 
Management 27(2):123-126. 
 
Stevens, R. and S.E. Meyer. 1990 . Seed quality 
testing for range and wildland species . Rangelands 
12(6):341-346.   
 
Taylor, R.J. 1992.  Sagebrush country: A wildflower 
sanctuary.  Mountain Press Publishing Company. 
Missoula, MT. 
 
USDA FS. 1937.  Range plant handbook .  
Washington, DC. 
 
USDA FS. 1966.  Notes on western range forbs--
Cruciferae through Compositae . Agriculture 
Handbook No. 293. Washington, DC.  
 
USDA NRCS. 2004.  Release notice for selected class 
of Great Northern Germplasm western yarrow . 
Bridger, MT.  
 
USDA SCS. 1976.  Climax vegetation of Montana 
based on soils and climate .  Bozeman, MT. 
 
Warwick, S.I. and L. Black. 1982.  The biology of 
Canadian weeds. Achillea millefolium L . 
Canadian Journal of Plant Science. 62:163-182. 
 
Wasser, C.H. 1982. Ecology and culture of selected 
species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
West. USFWS FWS/OBS-82/56. 347 pp.  
 
Whitson, T.D., L.C. Burrill, S.A. Dewey, D.W. 
Cudney, B.E. Nelson, R.D. Lee, and Robert  
Parker. 1991.  Weeds of the West . The Western 
Society of Weed Scien ce and University of  
Wyoming, Laramie. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Bridger, 
Montana 
 Edited: 24Jan2006 jsp; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.