Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC 
SILVERWEED  
Argentina egedii  (Wormsk.) 
Rydb.  
Plant Symbol = AREG  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
G.A. Cooper Courtesy of Smithsonian Institu tion, Department of Botany 
 
Alternate Names 
Argentina egedii ssp. ededii, Argentina egedii ssp. 
groenlandica , Greenland silverweed,  Potentilla 
pacifica , Potentilla anserina  ssp. pacifica . 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotany . Pacific silverweed roots were a staple 
food in the northwest coast region, including Alaska 
and Washington.  Silverweed roots were dug in large 
quantities, cooked, and often dried for winter and 
used as a trade item.  The roots were generally 
harvested in the fall, after the leaves had started to 
dies for the winter.  Clumps of roots were pried up 
with a digging stick, and the edible roots – long and 
sometimes spindle-shaped , with striated, brown 
skins, were broken off.  The roots were always 
cooked through boiling or roasting to remove the 
bitter flavor.  After cooking, they taste like parsnips.  
They were often harvested and cooked together with 
springbank clover rhizomes ( Trifolium wormskioldii).  
Pacific silverweed roots were  also dried, before or 
after cooking, and st ored for the winter. 
 
It is purported to have potent medicinal properties.  
The leaves contain tannin, an astringent, and have 
been used as a tea to relieve diarrhea, lessen fevers, 
as a purgative, to ease eye inflammations, and to 
relieve sore throat.  The roots were used by the 
Blackfeet as an antidiarrheal. 
 
Other Uses.  The stoloniferous growth form aids in 
substrate stabilization  and erosion control.  
Songbirds, such as snow buntings and rosey finches 
east the seeds.  Rabbits, cottontails, chipmunks, and 
ground squirrels eat the foliage and seeds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Pacific 
silverweed is a low-growing perennial native herb 
which spreads by creeping stolons.  It often forms 
dense tangles.  The pinnat ely compound and alternate 
leaves are all basal, glo ssy green, with silver 
undersides.  The leaflets are deeply notched and 
toothes, 3-50 cm long, with 5-10 leaflets per side.  
The leaves dry out and become brown in the winter, 
but remain intact.  The buttercup-like yellow flowers 
have 5 petals, 5 sepals, and have many stamens and 
pistils.  Pacific silverweed flowers form singly at the 
nodes of the stolons.  The petals are 7-20 mm long.  
The 2 mm fruits are oval, flattened, and dark red-
brown.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  It is found in the Pacific 
Northwest and New England into Labrador and 
Newfoundland.  It is found at elevations below 150 m 
throughout coastal North America and Asia. 
 
Habitat: Pacific silverweed typically occurs in high 
tidal marshes, at or above  the mean high water, where 
it is often associated with tufted hairgrass 
( Deschampsia caespitosa ) and Lyngby sedge (Carex. 
lyngbyei ).  It can also be found in nontidal freshwater 
meadows and marshes.  In these situations, it is often 
associated with cr eeping buttercup ( Ranunculus 
repens ), several species of grasses and sedges, and 
the invasive reed canarygrass (Phalaris 
arundinacea ).

Establishment 
Pacific silverweed can be propagated easily from 
container or bare root stock, as it produces many 
stolons and rhizomes.  It can also be propagated from 
seed. Pacific silverweed is found in wetland areas 
with very wet soils.  It will tolerate brackish 
conditions, so it can be used in salt marsh and 
floodplain restoration.  It provides good groundcover, 
however, it can be invasive. 
 
Pacific silverweed spreads vigorously from both 
stolons and rhizomes.  In greenhouse conditions, it is 
best to dig up and separate plants in the late fall or 
winter.  This is the quiescent period that follows seed 
maturation and leaves are senescent.  They should be 
planted in full sun in a light, loose soil.  Plants should 
be planted on 12-18 inch centers.  They will fill into 
solid stands in one year.  Plants need to be kept moist 
with frequent watering.  Lightly fertize the plants 
during the growing season .  Pacific silverweed 
tolerates brackish conditions.  Plants may need to be 
protected from hervivores, such as rabbits or gophers. 
 
Management  
Keep the runners pruned back, because they can be 
invasive.  It is necessary to divide the patch every 3 
to 4 years and start a new patch for increased vigor.  
Younger plants are more vigorous and produce more 
flowers and seeds. 
 
Turner and Deur (1999) include the following for 
traditional resource management: 
-  Ownership of individual patches and their output 
by Chief’s, ensuring  long-term care and 
enhancement of plant production; 
-   Root feasts as a means of redistribution plant 
wealth and meeting ceremonial obligations; 
-  Specialized digging sticks as a harvesting tool to 
cultivate and turn over the soil; 
-  Replanting and leaving behind portions of 
silverweed roots to re-grow the following year; 
-  Weeding root patches; and 
-  Individual patches and landscapes were burned 
regularly. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cooke, S.S. 1997. A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon . Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society. 414p. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973 . Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington . University of Washington Publ. in 
Anthropology 10(1). University of Washington Press, 
Seattle. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, F.T. Davies, Jr. 1990. 
Plant propagation principles and practices . Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 647p. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual: Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 1399p. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist (eds.). 1973.  Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest. An illustrated manual . 
University of Washington Press, Seattle. 730p. 
 
Isaacson, R.T. 1993.  Anderson horticultural library’s 
source list of plants and seeds . Anderson 
Horticultural Library, University of Minnesota 
Libraries, Minnesota Landscape Arboretum. 261p. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner. 1991.  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples. Nutrition, 
botany and use . Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology, Volume 8. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 632p. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publication, Inc., New York. 500p. 
 
Norton, H.H., E.S. Hunn, C.S. Martinsen, & P.B. 
Keely. 1984. Vegetable food products of the foraging 
economies of the Pacific Northwest. Ecology of Food 
and Nutrition 14:219-228. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.  Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians. Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California’s 
indigenous plants . Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany. 156p. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part I. Coastal peoples . B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part II. Interior peoples. B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria.

Turner, N.J. & M.A.M. Bell. 1983. The ethnobotany 
of the Southern Kwakiutl Indians of British 
Columbia . Econ. Bot. 27:257-310. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat. 1982 . Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island . B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2. 
Victoria. 99p. 
 
Turner, & H.V. Kuhnlein. 1983.  Camas (Camassia 
ssp.) and riceroot (Fritillaria ssp.): Two Liliaceous 
“root” foods of the Northwest Coast Indians . 
Ecology of Food and Nutrition 13:199-219. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson, & R.T. 
Ogilvie. 1983.  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island . B.C. Provincial Museum 
Occasional Paper  No. 24. 165p. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007. The PLANTS web site. 
Accessed: 070122. http://plants.usda.gov. National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan, & S 
Hashisaki. 1994. A citizen’s guide to wetland 
restoration . USEPA Region 10. 71p. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens, former ly USDA NRCS National 
Plant Data Center, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Davis, California 
 Edited: 070122 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.