Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVER MAPLE 
Acer saccharinum L. 
Plant Symbol = ACSA2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate Names 
Soft maple, silverleaf maple, white maple, river 
maple, swamp maple, water maple  
 
Uses 
Silver maple has been heavily planted as an 
ornamental in many urban areas because of its ease of 
transplanting and establishment, adaptability to a 
wide range of sites, rapid growth, and good form. 
The species also has been used for vegetative 
rehabilitation of surface mined lands as well as for 
bottomland reforestation.   
 
Silver maple sap can be used to make a good, light 
syrup, although the sugar content of the sap is the 
lowest of the maple species used for syrup  
 
production.  The sap has been used for kidney and 
liver ailments and also as a cough syrup.  
 
The wood of silver maple is fairly hard, even texture, 
rather brittle, and easily worked; it is used for 
furniture, cabinetry, paneling, flooring, woodturning, 
veneer, musical instruments, boxes and crates, tool 
handles, wagons, carts, and rails.  Old heartwood 
develops a swirled pattern that is sold as “bird’s eye 
maple.”  Silver maple on good sites can be managed 
for timber – it is often cut and sold with red maple as 
“soft maple” lumber.   
 © William S. Justice Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
The abundant seeds of silver maples are eaten by 
many birds, including evening grosbeaks, finches, 
wild turkeys, ducks and other game birds, and small 
mammals, especially squirrels and chipmunks.  The 
buds are an important food for squirrels when stored 
food is depleted, particularly  in late winter and early 
spring.  The bark is a food source for beavers and 
deer and rabbits browse the foliage.  Silver maple 
tends to develop cavities that are used by cavity-
nesting birds and mammals and provide shelter and 
breeding habitat for many other species, including 
raccoons, opossums, squirrels, owls, woodpeckers, 
and many other birds.      
 
Because of its abundance and wide distribution of 
silver maple, its early-produced pollen may be 
important to the biology of bees and other pollen-
dependent insects.  Most references describe red 
maple as wind pollinated, but insect pollination may 
be important, as many insects, especially bees, visit 
the flowers.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General:  Maple Family (Aceraceae): A native tree 
reaching to mature heights of  27-36 m, usually with a 
short, thick trunk and spreading, open, irregular 
crown of long, curving branches with pendulous 
branchlets turning up at the ends; twigs with slightly 
unpleasant odour when crushed; bark gray and thin,

becoming furrowed into long, shaggy, scaly ridges on 
older trunks and branches.   The leaves are deciduous, 
opposite, 8-15 cm long and nearly as wide, long-
petioled, deeply 5-lobed and long-pointed (middle 
lobe often 3-lobed) with V-shaped sinuses, doubly 
toothed, with three main veins from the base, dull 
green above, silvery-white beneath, usually turning 
pale yellow or soft gold  in the autumn, occasionally 
scarlet and crimson (perhaps reflecting hybridization 
with red maple).  The flowers are usually greenish or 
yellow from reddish buds, about 6 mm long, the male 
(staminate) flowers fascicled, the female (pistillate) 
flowers in drooping racemes , the flowers functionally 
male or female.  Individual trees commonly have all 
male or all female flowers (the species essentially 
dioecious) or some trees may have more of one type 
than the other, and scattered flowers may be 
functionally bisexual (the species technically 
polygamo-dioecious).  The fruits are winged nutlets 
(samaras) 4-6 cm long, light brown with pink veins, 
in a long-stalked, wide-spreading pair.  The common 
name refers to the silvery appearance of the 
underside of the leaves.  
 
Variation within the species:  Red maple forms 
natural hybrids with silver maple ( A. saccharinum): 
Acer  X freemanii E. Murray.  The hybrids, however, 
are nearly sterile.   
 
Distribution:  Silver maple grows over most of the 
eastern half of the United States and immediately 
adjacent Canada, except al ong major portions of the 
Gulf and Atlantic coastal plains.  The natural range 
extends from Maine, New Brunswick, and southern 
Quebec, west to Minnesota and southeastern South 
Dakota, eastern Nebraska, Kansas, and Oklahoma, 
and south to Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, 
northwestern Florida, and central Georgia.  It is 
relatively uncommon in the southern part of its range 
and absent at higher elevations in the Appalachians.  
Its abundance in natural habitats has decreased due to 
conversion of bottomland forests for agriculture but 
increased in urban areas due  to planting.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Silver maple has been introduced to the western 
United States as an ornamental and to areas of the 
Black Sea coast of the Sovi et Union and various parts 
of Europe.   
 
Adaptation  
Silver maple is found on stream banks, flood plains, 
and lake edges where it grows best on better-drained, 
moist alluvial soils, at elevations of 30-600 meters.  
Silver maple can grow on  sites where soils are  usually saturated most of the growing season.  
Seedlings have survived 60 days of continuously 
saturated soils.  In the upper Mississippi River valley, 
silver maple trees survived 1 year of constant 
inundation (due to reservoir formation) but died after 
the second.  It ranges from moderately shade-tolerant 
(good sites) to intolerant (poor sites).  Silver maple 
dominance is usually in forest types that are pioneer 
to intermediate in succession and maintained only 
with management or disturbance, particularly 
flooding.  It will quickly invade abandoned 
agricultural clearings and other cutover areas.  
Although it does not compete well with other species 
in upland sites, silver maple grows vigorously under 
a wide variety of conditions when planted as an 
ornamental.    
 
Silver maple flowers in (February)March-
April(May), before the leaves, usually before red 
maple.  All flowers on
 one tree are nearly 
synchronous.  Fruiting occurs in April-June, maturing 
about 3 weeks after pollination and all released over a 
short period, usually less than 2 weeks.   
  
Establishment 
Silver maple may begin producing seed as early as 11 
years old.  Viable seed may be produced through 
self-pollination and large seed crops are produced 
annually.  The seeds are pr imarily wind dispersed but 
are sometimes carried by water.  Germination usually 
occurs in the spring shortly after dispersal – the seeds 
require no pretreatment or stratification (although 
seedlings require a considerable length of chilling to 
break dormancy).  Natural regeneration by seed is 
most successful on moist mineral soil or moist litter.  
Seedling establishment requires full sun, but 
subsequent growth is best with partial shade.    
 
Silver maple can be propagated from cuttings and 
bud grafts and by layering.  Seeds are abundant but 
seedlings are highly variable.  Sprouts from the 
stump or root crown are prolific.  The best sprouting 
occurs from younger trees with stumps less than 30 
cm in diameter.  Flood energy breaks off 
aboveground portions of silver maple – the remaining 
stems sprout vigorously and may vary in number 
after such damage.    
 
Silver maples can live to 130 years or longer.  
 
Management 
Despite its usefulness in urban plantings, especially 
on poor sites, silver maple has significant limitations 
and is now not so commonly planted.  It has been 
over-planted.  It often grows to a larger size than 
anticipated and the brittle branches are easily broken

in winter storms and wind storms.  Pruning is often 
required to develop good form and to remove broken 
branches and old, multi-trunk trees often require 
cabling.  Relatively soft wood renders silver maple 
susceptible to a number of wood rotting fungi and it 
is susceptible to various leaf molds and wilts (e.g., 
anthracnose, verticillium wilt, leaf spot, tar spot).  Its 
large, vigorous, shallow-rooted root system can 
damage sidewalks and driveways, clog drain pipes, 
and penetrate septic systems and sewer pipes.   
  
Silver maple is susceptible to fire damage because of 
its thin bark, soft wood, and shallow/surface roots; 
surface fires kill seedlings and saplings and wound 
larger trees, exacerbating the tendency to rot.  
Prescribed fire is not  recommended where silver 
maple is a desirable species.  Silver maple can be 
managed on good sites for saw timber and on poor or 
wet sites for pulp or cordwood.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
At least 58 cultivars have been named, encompassing 
variation in leaf form and color, branching pattern, 
and crown shape.  At least one fruitless (male) strain 
has been selected. 
 
References 
Koelling, M.R. & R.B. Heiligmann (eds.) 1996.  
North American maple syrup producers manual .  
Ohio State Univ. Extension Bull. 856.  AUG00.  
<http://www.ag.ohio-
state.edu/~ohioline/b856/index.html> 
 
Li, H.-L. 1960.   The cultivated maples .  Morris 
Arbor. Bull. 11:41-47.  
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Acer saccharinum.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [data base].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.   
 
Gabriel, W.J. 1990.   Acer saccharinum L.  Silver 
maple.  Pp. 70-77, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala 
(tech. coords.).   Silvics of North America .  Volume 2.  
Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom , BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.