Splitbeard bluestem     
Andropogon ternarius Michx. var. ternarius
    
Plant Symbol = ANTE2       
Common Names:   
Split-beard bluestem 
Split-beard beardgrass 
Splitbeard broomsedge 
Split bluestem 
Feather bluestem 
Silvery beardgrass 
Paintbrush bluestem 
 
       
Scientific Names:   
Andropogon ternarius Michx.  
Andropogon ternarius Michx. var. cabanisii (Hack.) Fernald & Grisc.  
(This species is exclusive to Florida) 
 
Description 
General:  Splitbeard bluestem is a native warm season, perennial bunchgrass. The 
plants usually begin growth in April and reach a mature height of 2 to 4 feet. Basal 
leaves are numerous, flat or rolled, 1/8 to ¼ inch wide and 10 to 16 inches long. The 
leaves can be glaucous, glabrous, or loosely villous. The leaf sheaths are villous and 
often purplish in appearance. The stems are long, slender, and erect branching in the 
upper 2/3 of the plant. The inflorescence is composed of paired racemes about 2 
inches long, containing many sessile spikelets (.19 to .27 inch) covered in silvery 
white hairs (Hitchcock, 1951; Leithead et al. 1971; Tyrl et al. 2008). 
Distribution:  Splitbeard bluestem is distributed from Delaware south to Florida and 
west to Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas. It is especially widespread in the eastern half 
of Texas. (Diggs et al. 2006). For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Splitbeard bluestem is found on upland woodlands and woodland pastures 
and is commonly associated with little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium) on well 
drained sandy sites (Diggs et al. 2006 and Grelen and Hughes 1984). 
Adaptation 
Splitbeard bluestem is adapted to coarse and medium well drained sandy and sandy loam soils with lower fertility and a pH 
of 4.0 to 7.5. This plant is moderately shade tolerant, drought tolerant, and grows in areas with annual rainfall ranging from 
20 to 60 inches (Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center 2016 and USDA, NRCS 2016). 
Uses 
Livestock: Cattle will graze splitbeard bluestem in the spring shortly after growth begins. The forage value is similar to little 
bluestem which varied from 11.6% to 8.1% crude protein from April to June respectively on southern pine range (Leithead et 
al. 1971, Grelen and Hughes 1984, and Pearson et al. 1982). 
 
Wildlife: The seeds are consumed by birds and small mammals. Native bees use splitbeard bluestem for nesting materials or 
utilize the plant itself as a nest structure (Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center 2016). 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Splitbeard bluestem plant.  
Splitbeard bluestem raceme and spikelet 
(Grelen and Duvall 1966).

Native Habitat Restoration: Splitbeard bluestem can be used as a component in longleaf pine habitat restoration. It is found in 
longleaf pine savannas and is identified as an important understory species in old growth longleaf pine stands (Grelen and 
Duvall 1966 and Varner et al. 2003).  It is adapted to fire and is characteristic of the mid stages of plant succession (Tyrl et al. 
2008). 
 
Special Uses: Splitbeard bluestem is used as an ornamental in gardens and landscapes. In the fall, the stems turn to shades of 
blue, purple, and red. The silvery racemes are desirable for fresh and dried floral arrangements (Hoffman Nursery 2016). 
Ethnobotany 
The Houma Indians of Louisiana used Andropogon sp. to make a decoction taken by expectant mothers to strengthen them 
and their child (Speck 1941). 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  No (US Fish and Wildlife Service 2016) 
Wetland Indicator: Splitbeard bluestem is considered a facultative upland (FACU) plant in the continental United States 
(USDA, NRCS 2016) 
Weedy or Invasive:  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
Begin seedbed preparation well in advance of planting.  Establish a weed free seedbed by tillage or herbicides.  Prior to 
planting in the spring, the seedbed must be firmed and have accumulated soil moisture for improved establishment success. 
Splitbeard bluestem seed is fluffy which makes it difficult to plant with a conventional grain drill. Native grass drills 
equipped with picker wheels or a fluffy seed box is the preferred method for planting splitbeard bluestem seed. When using a 
seed drill without picker wheels or a fluffy seed box, seed should be debearded to facilitate seed flow through the planter.  
Seed lubricants such as powdered graphite may also reduce bridging inside the seed box and drop tubes.  Seed should be 
planted approximately 1/8 inch deep.  Planting into a fluffy or loose seedbed may cause soil to sluff off into tracks left by the 
planter press wheels and bury the seed too deeply after the first rain event.  It is better to plant shallow than too deep.   
Splitbeard bluestem seed may also be broadcast planted but is not recommended.  If seed is broadcast planted, a carrier agent 
such as sand or cat litter is required to help seed flow more easily through spreaders and for improved seed distribution.  If 
possible, seed should be incorporated with a drag or cultipacker after broadcast planting.  Seeding rates should be increased 
by 25% or more.  Timing broadcast plantings to rain events will help incorporate seed into the soil and improve 
establishment.  Spraying slurry mixtures through hydromulchers may also be more effective in certain situations such as 
steep slope seedings.   
For calibration purposes, splitbeard bluestem contains approximately 216,000 seeds per bulk lb. A seeding rate of 6.0 PLS 
lb/acre (30 PLS seed/ ft2) is recommended. When planting seed mixes, adjust the seeding rate according to the percent of 
splitbeard bluestem in the mixture.         
Management 
Contact your local NRCS field office for assistance in developing a prescribed grazing plan. Do not graze splitbeard bluestem 
during the year of planting. Cattle readily graze splitbeard bluestem during the spring when foliage is tender but not when it 
is more mature.  Since splitbeard bluestem is not an aggressive plant, it is seldom abundant enough to significantly contribute 
to cattle diet and be a key management species (Grelen and Hughes 1984).  Proper grazing management of pinehill bluestem 
or little bluestem in the stand will also benefit splitbeard bluestem (Leithead et al. 1971). These warm season grasses are not 
tolerant of continuous or close grazing. To maintain stand health and production, only 50% of the current growth by weight 
should be harvested during a growing season. To control weeds, mow the stand at 8-10 inch stubble height or apply

herbicides labelled for grass. Splitbeard bluestem tolerates periodic controlled burning, however annual burning followed by 
grazing tends to eliminate it (Leithead et al. 1971). 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Possible pests of splitbeard bluestem include aphids, leaf spot, spider mites, spittlebugs, and rust. (Hoffman Nursery 2016) 
Environmental Concerns 
Splitbeard bluestem produces light, fluffy seeds that are wind distributed. Splitbeard bluestem is a native grass species and its 
escape from planted areas would not be considered hazardous or detrimental to the natural landscape. 
Control 
Splitbeard bluestem may be controlled by mechanical means such as mowing or by applying a broad spectrum herbicide 
which is labelled for control of grasses. Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to 
learn what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control 
method.  Trade names and control measures appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS 
does not guarantee or warranty the products and control methods named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Take a soil test of the planting site to determine fertility and pH. Amend field(s) based on soil test recommendations for lime, 
N, P, and K after the first growing season. This will minimize warm season weed competition during establishment.  
Splitbeard bluestem will be most productive in fields that receive full sun to 
moderate shade or at least 3 hours of direct sunlight during the day.  Seed 
production fields can be started by transplants or direct seeding. 
Transplanting is the fastest establishment method, reduces the time needed 
to achieve a solid stand, and allows for use of pre-emergent herbicides. Seed 
can usually be harvested in the first year.   Direct seed splitbeard bluestem 
in the spring with a native grass drill. Use a seeding rate of 6 PLS lb/ac and 
plant approximately 1/8 inch deep.     
Splitbeard bluestem is indeterminate and begins to flower in late August.  
Seed matures from October to December and can be harvested using a flail 
harvester or combine.  The flail harvester is a nondestructive harvest 
method allowing multiple harvests of seed production fields.  This machine 
harvests mature seed, leaving the immature seed for a later harvest. When 
harvesting with a combine, use low volume air settings to minimize seed 
loss.   After harvest, the seed should be dried and debearded to partially 
remove awns and other seed appendages before cleaning.  A seed cleaner 
with air adjustments and separation screens is used to remove stems, chaff, 
and unfilled seed. To enhance seed longevity, store seed in a humidity and 
temperature controlled environment. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Currently splitbeard bluestem ecotypes are commercially available. 
Purchase splitbeard bluestem seed based on the local climate, resistance to 
local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local land grant university, 
local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on 
adapted materials for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Diggs, G., B. Lipscomb, M. Reed, and R. O’Kennon. 2006. Illustrated flora of east Texas vol. 1. Center for Environmental 
Studies and Dept. of Biology, Austin College, Sherman, TX and Botanical Research Institute of Texas, Ft. Worth, TX. 
Harvesting fluffy seed of splitbeard bluestem with 
a flail harvester.  
 Splitbeard bluestem seeds.

Grelen, H. and V. Duvall. 1966. Common plants of longleaf pine-bluestem range. Res. Paper SO-23. USDA-USFS Southern 
Forest Experiment Station. New Orleans, LA. 
Grelen, H. and R. Hughes. 1984. Common herbaceous plants of southern forest range. Res. Paper SO-210. USDA-USFS 
Southern Forest Experiment Station. New Orleans, LA. 
Hitchcock, A. 1951. Manual of the grasses of the United States. 2nd ed. Rev. by A. Chase. USDA Misc. Pub. 200. 
Washington, DC. 
Hoffman Nursery. Andropogon ternarius (Splitbeard broomsedge). Accessed online 6/30/16 at 
http://hoffmannursery.com/plants/details/andropogon-ternarius.  
Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center. Andropogon ternarius (Splitbeard bluestem). Accessed online 7/1/16 at 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant=ANTE2. 
Leithead, H., L. Yarlett, and T. Shiflet. 1971. 100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. Agr. Handbook No. 389. 
USDA-SCS. Washington, DC. 
Pearson, H., H. Grelen, E. Epps, M. Johnson and B. Blakewood. 1982. Botanical composition and nutritive value of cattle 
diets on southern pine range. Res. Paper SO-178. USDA-USFS Southern Forest Experiment Station. New Orleans, LA. 
Speck, F. 1941. A list of plant curatives obtained from the Houma Indians of Louisiana. Primitive Man 14:49-75. 
Tyrl, R., T. Bidwell, R. Masters, and R. Elmore. 2008. Field guide to Oklahoma plants commonly encountered prairie, 
shrubland, and forest species. Oklahoma State Univ. Stillwater, OK. 
US Fish and Wildlife Service. 2016. Environmental conservation online system species report. Dept. of the Interior-US Fish 
and Wildlife Service. Washington, DC. 
USDA, NRCS. 2016. The PLANTS Database. National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401-4901 USA. 
Varner, J., J. Kush, and R. Meldahl. 2003. Vegetation of frequently burned old-growth longleaf pine (Pinus palustris Mill.) 
savannas on chocolocco mountain, Alabama, USA. Natural Areas Journal 23:45-52. 
 
Citation 
Brakie, M. 2016. Plant Guide for splitbeard bluestem (Andropogon ternarius Michx. var. ternarius). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center. Nacogdoches, 75964. 
Published: September 2016   
 
Edited:  
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.

If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER