Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANADIAN 
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus canadensis  L. 
Plant Symbol = ASC11  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Canada milk-vetch, Canada milkvetch 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Blackfoot, who  dug them in the 
spring for eating (Kindscher 1987), gathered 
Canadian milkvetch roots.  Canadian milkvetch was 
often used in a broth (Moerman 1998).   
 
Medical : The root is analgesic and antihaemorrhagic 
and can be chewed or used as a tea to treat chest and 
back pains, coughs and spiting up of blood (Moerman 
1998).  A poultice made from the chewed root has 
also been used to treat cuts (Ibid.).   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Bean family (Fabaceae).  Canadian 
milkvetch ( Astragalus canadensis ) is a smooth, stout-
stemmed plant that grows up to five feet tall (Ladd 
1995).  The leaves are smooth; elliptic to oblong, 
with thirteen to thirty-one stalked leaflets that are one 
to two inches long.  The flowers are greenish white to  cream colored, with a re
gular pea flower shape, 
located at the ends of long stalks.  The fruit is a 
smooth, erect, stout, woody pod, twelve to fifteen 
millimeters long and divided into two cells (Vance, 
Jowsey, & McLean 1984).   
 
Distribution : Astragalus canadensis  ranges from 
Quebec and Vermont to Hudson Bay and British 
Columbia, south to Virginia, West Virginia, 
Arkansas, Texas and Colorado (Steyermark 1963).  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
© William S. Justice Botany Department, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation 
Canadian milkvetch is commonly found in dry 
prairies, moist shores, riverbanks, marshy grounds 
and open or partly shaded ground (Voss 1985).  This 
species requires a well-drained soil in a sunny 
position.  It has low tolerance of root disturbance and 
cannot tolerate extremel y cold weather.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed: Canadian milkvetch  seeds 
should be sown in a cold frame as soon as they are 
ripe.  Seeds should be pre-soaked for twenty-four 
hours in hot water before sowing.  Germination can 
be slow but is usually within four to nine weeks if the 
seeds are sown fresh.  When they are large enough to 
handle, place the seedlings into individual pots and 
grow plant them in the greenhouse for their first 
winter.  Plant them into their permanent positions in 
spring or early summer.   
 
Management 
Canadian milkvetch looks similar to some closely 
related poisonous locoweeds, so its use is not 
recommended unless positive identification can be 
made (Kindscher 1987).  Many members of this 
genus contain a poison that affects cattle (Fielder 
1975).  They become affected  with a sort of insanity, 
a slow poisoning that can cause death within a period 
of months or even a year or two (Ibid).   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Materials are somewhat available from native plant 
seed vendors.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government”.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be

listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Braun, L.E. 1967.  The monocotyledoneae from cat-
tails to orchids .  The Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.   An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Bruggen, T. V. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Fielder, M. 1975.   Plant medicine and folklore .  
Winchester Press, New York, New York. 
 
Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   An ethnobotanical guide: edible 
wild plants of the prairie .  University Press of 
Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Straughbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of 
West Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., 
Morgantown, West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Tiner, R.W. Jr. 1987.   A field guide to coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States .  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Voss, E.G. 1972.   Michigan flora.  Cranbrok Institute 
of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, & University 
of Michigan Herbarium. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 05apr02 ahv; 25feb03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.