Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAND FIR 
Abies grandis  (Dougl. ex D. 
Don) Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = ABGR  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center & Biota of North America Program 
Alternate common names  
Lowland white fir, balsam fir, western balsam fir, 
yellow fir, California great fir, Oregon white fir, 
Puget Sound fir, giant fir, grand fir, silver fir, tall 
silver fir, great silver fir, stinking fir  
 
Uses 
The soft wood of grand fir is a valued source of 
pulpwood and is harvested as timber even though it is  weaker and more prone to decay than many other 
species.  It is also used as plywood and has been used 
for various kinds of rough construction, such as 
framing, sheathing, subflooring, planking, beams, 
posts, siding, paneling, millwork, prefabricated 
buildings and structural members, furniture parts, and 
boxes and crates.   
 
The thick-foliage, symmetry, deep green shiny color, 
and strong, orangish fragrance make grand fir one of 
the preferred species of Christmas trees grown in the 
Northwest.  Most seedlings produced for Christmas 
tree growers originate from
 the "Panhandle" area of 
Idaho.  In most areas, it will produce a marketable 
tree in 8-10 years.  Grand fir also is valued in 
plantings in recreation areas  and urban sites.  It grows 
quickly in the moister parts of Britain and is 
cultivated for timber in western and northern Europe.  
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © 1995 Saint Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
The aromatic properties of grand fir were important 
in many of its uses by American Indians.  The 
needles were boiled to make a medicinal tea for 
colds.  Boughs were brought inside as an air 
freshener and burned as incense and to make a 
purifying smoke to ward off illnesses.  Dried, crushed 
needles have been used as baby powder.  The pitch of 
young trees was mixed with oil to be used as a 
deodorant and rubbed on the scalp to prevent balding.   
 
The famous Barlow Road snub-trees on the south 
side of Mount Hood in Oregon were grand firs.  They 
were used by early settlers to control the rate of 
descent of their covered wagons on a particularly 
steep slope in their trek from east to west.  Some of 
the rope-burned trees are still standing after 150 
years. 
 
The majority of pileated  woodpecker roost trees in 
northeastern Oregon were grand fir, both live and 
dead, where a hollow chamber had been created by 
decay from Indian paint fungus.  The majority of 
roosts occurred in old-growth stands of grand fir.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state status and wetland 
indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native evergreen 
trees growing to 75-100 meters tall, the crown conic,

becoming round or straggly with age, branches 
dropping, twigs mostly opposite.  Bark: smooth, gray, 
becoming brown and furrowed with age.  Needles are 
2-6 cm long, flattened, strongly waxy and silvery-
white on the lower surface, green above, mostly 2-
ranked, spreading horizon tally, not concealing the 
upper surface of twigs, the needles 1-ranked and 
spiraled higher on the tr ee; resin canals marginal, 
located near the lower epidermis; stomatal rows 
absent on the upper surface at midleaf, 5-7 stomatal 
rows on each side of midrib of lower surface.  Seed 
cones: 6-12 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, dark purple or 
blue to gray or light green at maturity, erect and on 
the upper branches.  Na tive.  The common name 
refers to the large size of  mature trees, one of the 
tallest of the firs.   
 
Variation within the species : Although Abies grandis  
is fairly uniform throughout its range, a green coastal 
form and gray interior form are often recognized, and 
five fairly distinct climatic forms of grand fir have 
been identified, differing mainly in physiological and 
ecological traits.   Abies grandis var. idahoensis  Silba 
was recently described (Silba 1990) as “an inland 
variety, to 1850 m altitude” from southeast British 
Columbia to central Idaho,  characterized by smaller 
cones, a distinct forward and vertical spread of the 
leaves, and more twisted petioles.  In southern 
Oregon and northern California, grand fir hybridizes 
and introgresses with A. concolor , which generally 
grows in higher, drier habitats.  Natural hybrids also 
are known between grand fir and subalpine fir.   
 
Abies grandis  is distinguished from the closely 
similar  A. amabilis  by bud scales slightly pubescent 
or glabrous (vs densely  pubescent), upper surface of 
twigs easily visible (vs concealed by the needles), 
and variably colored mature seed cones (vs purple).  
Compared to subalpine fir, grand fir occurs at lower 
elevations, has a wider crown, and usually produces 
broad spreading lower limbs with beautifully even 
secondary branchlets.   
 
Distribution:  Coastal British Columbia, south along 
the coast to Sonoma County, California.  A disjunct 
population system in the Northern Rocky Mountains 
occurs from southern British Columbia and Alberta 
to Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and western Montana.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation 
Common in moist forests in stream bottoms, valleys, 
and Lower Mountain slopes,  preferably on N-facing 
slopes, on a variety of soil types, 0-1500 meters.   Grand fir sometimes grows in pure stands but is 
much more common in mixed coniferous and 
hardwood forests.  It is very shade tolerant, especially 
when young, although growth is slower in dense 
shade.  It is a dominant climax species in some 
habitat types and a long-lived seral species in other 
types.   
 
Establishment 
Seed production in grand fir is relatively low.  A 
good cone crop is considered to be more than 40 
cones per tree – the interval
 between good seed crops 
is about 2-3 years.  Seed production begins at about 
20 years of age.  Germination is best on mineral soil 
but in open sites the seeds germinate nearly as well 
on duff as on any other surface.  Primary causes of 
germination failure are insect infestation and the 
perishable nature of the seeds.  Grand fir seedlings 
are relatively resistant to dr ought on areas exposed to 
full sun because deep initial root penetration protects 
them from drying of the su rface soil.  On heavily 
shaded, cool areas, surface  dryness from drought is 
the most important physical cause of seedling 
mortality because initial root penetration is slow.   
 
Initial survival and growth of grand fir are favored by 
moderate shade, where growth may be aggressive 
enough to form a dominant part of the forest.  After 
20-30 years, it makes most rapid growth in the open.  
Trees 250 years old are co mmon and occasional trees 
may be more than 300 years old.    
 
Management 
Susceptibility to heart rot  and decay is one of the 
more important factors in management of grand fir.  
Centers of decay are closely related to logging scars, 
frost cracks, broken tops, and other mechanical 
injuries.  Grand fir is thin-barked and sensitive to fire 
– ground fires in moist  creek bottoms are highly 
damaging but trees on dry hillsides are more 
resistant, largely because of a deeper root system and 
thicker bark.  Control of fires in the drier southern 
parts of the Northwest has allowed an increase in 
range of grand fir over the last 50 years. 
 
Well-stored seed can retain viability for up to 5 years, 
but germination is often poor, usually taking about 6-
8 weeks.  If seed are sown in a cold frame 
immediately after autumn ripening, stratification is 
said to produce a more even germination.  Seedlings 
are usually transplanted in  a nursery for 1-2 years.  
Young trees should be planted into their permanent 
positions when they are well under one meter tall.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Plant Materials 
(and area of origin)

This tree should be available through your local 
nursery. 
 
References 
Bull, E.L., R.S. Holthausen, & M.G. Henjum 1992.  
Roost trees used by pileated woodpeckers in 
northeastern Oregon.  J. Wildlife Management 
56:786-793.   
 
Foiles, M.W., R.T. Graham, & D.F. Olson, Jr. 1990.  
Abies grandis.  Pp. 52-59, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America. Volume 1.  
Conifers.  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Hunt, R.S. 1993.   Abies.  Pp. 354-362, IN: Flora of 
North America, North of Mexico .  Vol. 2,  
Pteridophytes and gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Silba, J. 1990.   A supplement to the international 
census of the Coniferae, II .  Phytologia 68:7-78.   
 
Van Pelt, R. 1996.  Champion trees of Washington 
State .  University of Washington Press, Seattle, 
Washington. 
 
Xie, C.-Y. & C.C. Ying 1993.  Geographic variation 
of grand fir (Abies grandis (Dougl.) Lindl.) in the 
Pacific Coast region - 10 year results from a 
provenance trail .  Canad. J. For. Res. 23:1065-1072.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden,  
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 25feb03 ahvv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all  prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.