Plant Guide
 
WELSH’S MILKWEED 
Asclepias welshii N.H. 
Holmgren & P.K. Holmgren  
Plant Symbol = ASWE3 
 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
 
 Welsh’s  milkweed ( Asclepias welshii ). Photo by J.P. Riser, 
Washington State University  
Uses 
There are no known human uses of Welsh’s 
milkweed . This species, unlike other members of the 
genus, is not toxic to livestock. However larger 
animals tend to avoid the unconsolidated sands that 
make up Welsh’s milkweed habitat, leaving it largely 
unutilized by grazers.  
Status  
Welsh’s milkweed was listed as a threatened species 
in 1987 with designated critical habitat  (USDI -FWS, 
1987) . 
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Milkweed  family ( Asclepiadaceae). 
Welsh’s milkweed is a perennial forb which grows 
from an extensive underground root system  
comprised of a taproot and horizontal runners 
connecting stem clusters . The plants grow with one to 
several erect stems to a height of 25 to 100 cm ( 10 to    
39 in
). The leaves are opposite, and broadly ovate; 6 
to 9 cm ( 2.3 to 3.5 in ) long, and 3 to 6 cm ( 1.2 to 2.3 
in ) wide  (Welsh et al., 2003) . The leaves and stems 
are covered with a white wooly tomentum , or 
pubescence,  early in the season. Windblown sands 
abrade the hairs leaving the vegetation nearly 
glabrous later in the year. The inflor escence is a 
globose cluster of ar ound 30 cream colored flowers 
with a rose -tinged middle. The fruit is a 4 to 8 cm 
( 1.6 to 3. 2 in) long  pod or follicle. The seeds are 
large, 2 cm (1 i n) long with a rudimentary coma , or 
tuft of hairs  (USDI -FWS, 1992).  
 
 
Welsh’s milkweed inflorescence. Photo by S. O’Kane 
Distribution :    
Welsh’s milkweed is currently known to occur in 
three populations in southern Utah and northern 
Arizona. The largest population of an estimated 
10,000 plants lies on the Coral Pink Sand Dunes in 
Kane County, Utah. A second Utah population of 
approximately 500 individuals is found in the Sand 
Hills, also in Kane County. A third population of 
approximately 500 plants is known at Sand Cove on 
the Kane County, Utah and Coconino County, 
Arizona border.  
 
For current distribution, consu lt the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Welsh’s milkweed is found on s hifting sands and 
dunes adjacent to sagebrush, juniper and ponderosa 
pine communities  from  1,700 to 1, 900 m ( 5,600 to 
6, 200  ft) in  elevation . Other  dune-loving plant 
species found in association with Welsh’s milkweed