Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD ONION 
Allium hyalinum Kellogg  
Plant Symbol = ALHY 
 
Contributed by: USDS NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Many species of Allium are known by the common 
name “wild onion.” 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The young foliage of  Allium species is 
delicious and can be used in the place of chives.  This 
onion was a food of the Tabatulabal and probably 
many other tribes as well.  Sometimes the bulb was 
eaten raw.  Today, individuals of many tribes still 
gather different species of wild onions.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliac eae).  This herbaceous 
perennial plant has herbage with the characteristic 
taste and smell of onions.  The scape is 15-45 cm 
high and the leaves are 2-3 and linear.  Reproduction 
is from wrinkled, black se eds contained in a capsule 
or by ovoid to spherical bulbs. The bulb-coats are 
brown or gray, thin, with horizontal undulate 
reticulation in vertical rows.  Five to 25 pale pink to  white flowers are in an umbel subtended by 2 or 3 
thin whitish or scarious bracts. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found from 50 to 1500 m in moist 
areas in grassy slopes and mosses on rocks in the 
Sierra Nevada and San Joaquin Valley. 
Gladys L. Smith ©  California Academy of Sciences  @ CalPhotos
 
Establishment 
Dig up the bulbs of plants that are in bloom or seed 
or purchase the bulbs and plant them in the ground in 
autumn.  The bulbs should be planted 1 to 3 inches 
deep in a well-drained soil in full sun or partial shade.  
Allium  species do especially well in raised beds for 
drainage.  Water them after planting and then let the 
rains come.  Weed around the plants.  Most animals 
don’t eat wild onions.  This species of wild onion can 
be invasive. 
 
If establishing the plant by seed, plant the seeds in the 
fall in pots in partial shade.  Scatter the seeds on top 
of a well-drained soil.  Sprinkle a thin layer of dirt 
over the top and place quarter-inch gravel over the 
soil.  Water the pots and keep them slightly moist.  
Stop watering when the leaves shrivel in the early 
summer.  Plant the plants out in the garden or 
wildlands after two years in the summer or fall. Let 
the rains do the watering. 
 
Management 
Separate the plants every several years and replant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ALHY is available from native plant nurseries within 
its range. 
 
References 
Chesnut, V.K. 1902.  Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII.  Reprinted by 
the Mendocino County Historical Society in 1974. 
 
Davies, D.  1992.   Alliums: The ornamental onions .  
Timber Press, Inc. , Portland, Oregon. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.). 1993.   Allium.  pp. 1172-1179 
IN:  The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California .  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California.

Mathew, B. 1997.  Growing bulbs: The complete 
practical guide . Timber Press, Inc. , Portland, Oregon. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Voegelin, E.W. 1938.   Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records Vol 2:(1):1-84. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09j un03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.