CANADIAN 
SERVICEBERRY   
Amelanchier canadensis (L.) 
Medik.
 
Plant Symbol = AMCA4  
 
 
Photograph of  Canadian serviceberry . Photo by Wikipedia commons @ 
http://en.wikipedia.org ,  hosted by the USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:   serviceberry, shadbush, shadblow, 
sarvice, Juneberry , wild currant 
 
Scientific Names:  Amelanchier canadensis  var. 
subintegra,  Amelanchier lucida  
Description
 
General :  Canadian serviceberry is a  woody, deciduous 
shrub native to the US. Shadbush is the  common name 
because its flowering coincides with the annual migration 
of shad in New England rivers. It has several  smooth, 
gray  trunks that grow up to approximately 26 ft tall (8 m)  
and 15– 20 ft (5–6 m)  wide.  They are ash -gray with dark 
stripes when young, and rough, with long furrows when 
older.  Its branches slope upward so as to be almo st 
parallel with  the main stem. The twigs are hairy when 
young, becoming smooth with age. The y a re reddish -
brown in the winter and produce  reddish -purple leaf buds. 
The 3 –6 cm long and 2– 3 cm wide leaves are oblong, 
finely -toothed,  rounded at base, and rounded at the apex  
wit h a small, sharp projection. There are 10 –15 pairs of 
main veins. The young leaves are covered with a soft, fine 
hair and will become dark green and smooth with age. 
The underside of the leaf is covered with soft white hairs. 
The leaves will only be ha lf grown during mid-bloom. 
The  nodding  inflorescence is indeterminate with many  stemmed 
white flowers branching from a cottony ax is. 
The  five showy, oblong to lance -like petals are 7 –10 mm  
(~ 0.5 in) long . The fruit is purplish -black, juicy, and 
sweet.  It is technically a pome ( similar to an apple or 
pear), which is not typical within the Rosaceae family, but 
it diag nostic of the subtribe Malinae, to which  
Amelanchier  spp. belongs.  Serviceberry has a haploid 
chromosome count of 17, as opposed to other plant s in the 
Rosaceae family which have counts of 7, 8, 9, or 15. 
Natural populations of serviceberry often hybridize and so 
may be difficult to distinguish  (Bir, 1992).  It hybridizes 
with  A. stolonifera , A. intermedia , A. arborea, and A. 
laevis . Additionally,  morphological characteristics in this 
genus are quite variable.  
 
Distribution :  Serviceberry  grows in USDA hardiness 
zone 4 –7.  It  can be found in the eastern United States 
from Maine to Georgia, west to Mississippi and in the 
eastern parts of Tennessee. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Serviceberry  is an understory tree, often found 
growing in clumps in swamps, lowlands, and thickets. It 
is considered a coastal species of l ow elevations (Brown 
and Brown, 1972).  In the Northeast , it may be found 
growing in association w ith tupelo, speckled alder,  poplar, 
hazel shrubs, white oak,  red  cedar, choke cherry, and 
bayberry (Wiggers, 1994).   
 
Adaptation  
Canadian serviceberry is desig nated as a USDA 
facultative plant meaning that can occur both in wetlands 
and non -wetlands.  It is one of the earliest blooming trees 
in spring.  A study by Abu -Asab et al. (2001) found that 
the  first -flowering  of Canadian serviceberry occurred 
approximately  6 days earlier over a 20 -year period in 
Washington D .C . due to a warming climate.  It is 
moderately drought and salt tolerant and is adapted to 
many soil types  including coarse loamy sands and sandy 
loams  (Gilman and Watson, 1993; Peronto and Manley, 
2008; Hightshoe, 1987 ). Serviceberry is an early -
successional plant that will often colonize areas disturbed 
by storm, fire, or mechanical disturbance (Campbell et al., 
1987).  In natural communities, Canadian serviceberry 
forms an association with vesicular ar buscular mycorrhiza 
(VAM) fungus which helps it acquire mineral nutrients 
from the soil (Berliner and Torrey, 1988).  
 
Uses  
Timber/wood:   The wood is hard, heavy, close -grained, 
and is dark brown with a lighter sapwood (Pinchot and 
Ashe, 1897). It can hold a polish and can be used to make 
wooden handles, walking sticks, and fishing rods 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

(Coulber, 2015; Pinchot and Ashe, 1897). Due to the 
tree’s small size, its use for wood production is limited.  
 
Urban forestry/o rnamental/shade: Serviceberry has very 
attract ive yellow and gold foliage  that turns  orange –red  in 
the fall. It is often planted in spring or fall and enjoyed as 
a specimen tree that is the  focal point of the landscape . Its 
shortcoming is that it may be intolerant to urban heat 
islands and pollution ( Peronto and Manley, 2008).  
B ecause of the plants sensitivity to environmental 
pollutants, it is considered a suitable plant to use as a 
bioindicator of airborne fluorides (Weinstein and 
Davison, 2003). Canadian serviceberry may also have 
difficulty accessi ng N in urban conditions as indicated by 
lower foliar N concentrations compared to other popular 
urban landscaping plants for the Northeas t (Falxa-
Raymond et al., 2014).  
 
Wildlife:   Because serviceberry is an early blooming 
plant , it plays an important role as a food source for 
pollinators like bees and butterflies. Birds and wildlife are 
very attracted to serviceberry’s fruit. The fruit may be 
eaten by orioles,  cardinals, thrushes, catbirds, 
woodpeckers, waxwings,  robins,  squirre ls, and chipmunks 
(Coulber, 2015; Peronto and Manley, 2008).  The larvae of 
tiger  swallowtail  butterflies, viceroy, admirals , and striped 
hairstreak  feed on the leaves (Coulber, 2015; Peronto and 
Manley, 2008).  The plant is seldom severely damaged by 
deer ( Drake et al., 2003)   
 
Other Uses:   Panchen et al. (2012) find that the relatively 
short flowering period of Canadian serviceberry and its 
close correlation to temperature makes this plant a good 
indicator of climate change. The authors also note that the 
s hort flowering window allows for mo re consistency in 
bloom -time  documentation  when comparing across 
herbarium specimens, photographs, and observations.   
Ethnobotany  
Juneberry pies were made with serviceberry fruit by 
colonists and Native Americans ( Bir, 1992).  The 
Chippewa, Cherokee, and other Native American tribes 
used the root -bark to cure diarrhea, indigestion, excessive 
menstrual bleeding, and to expel worms (Foster and 
Duke, 2000).  The fruit can be eaten fresh or dried, cooked 
for jams , or made into  wine. 
Status  
Weedy or Invasive:  Canadian serviceberry  is no t 
considered weedy or invasive, and is often promoted as a 
suitable native alternative to non -native, exotic plants. 
There is some suckering that will have to be managed in 
garden plots. Please  consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Ext ension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use . Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g.,  threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).
 
Planting Guidelines
 
Serviceberry can be plant ed in  part ial to full  shade in 
well -drained acidic,  loamy sand (Gilman and Watson, 
1993).  It has a moderate growth rate.  It can be grown 
from early spring hardwood cuttings and the seed planted 
in either fall or spring. Microcuttings can be rooted into 
rockwool  plug and out -planted in 6 weeks and ready to be 
planted into field of garden 8 months later (Chu and 
Mudge, 1996). If planting by seeds in the spring, the seed 
will have to undergo cold- moist stratification for 90–120 
days (NPIN, 2013).  The tree should be watered regularly 
for the first year of growth, but no nitrogen fertilizer is 
needed at planting or during the first year of 
establishment (Peronto and Manley, 2008).  
Management  
Trees should be regularly irrigated during the first 
growing season, and thereafter during droughts (Peronto 
and Manley, 2008) . The base of the trunk should have a 
think bed of mulch 1 inch away from the trunk of the 
plant.  The limbs of  will require pruning if pl anted near 
sidewalks or roadway, but otherwise, pruning and 
fertilizing are rarely required  (Gilman and Watson, 1993).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Serviceberry may be infected by many of the diseases 
common  to plants in the rose family, nevertheless d amage 
to the plant is mostly cosmetic (Bir, 1992).  They may be 
infecte d by foliar diseases like leaf spot, rust, or powdery 
mildew. To help pre vent leaf spot, fallen leaves should be 
raked away and overhe ad irrigation should be avoided. 
Pests may include Japanese beetles, spider mites, aphids, 
and leaf miners (Dickert, 2010) . The thin bark can  be 
easily damaged by machinery.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Canadian serviceberry is similar to other plants in the 
Rosaceae in that it is an apomict (capable asexual seed 
production)  and is also pseudogamous, meaning that both 
its own pollen and foreign pollen can initiate fruit 
production (Campbell et al., 1987).  A study by Burgess et 
al. (2014) found that the diploid Canadian serviceberry 
had a mean 38% fruit set and a mean 18% seed set in 
open -pollinated flowers; and that outcrossing  increased 
fecundity.  Early observations in North Carolina by 
Pinchot and Ashe (1897) found that  within natural 
communities , serviceberry produced a large fruit set every 
three years, with intermediate years only producing 
sparingly.  If seeds are collected  and stored overwinter, 
they should first be properly cleaned by removing the 
seeds ’ fleshy coating. Serviceberry  also produces suckers 
and will spread naturally through suckering.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)

Several cultivars are available from the nursery industry. 
‘Prince William’ produces suckers but is not overly 
aggressive (Bir, 1992). It has relatively large flowers and 
fruit and will typically bloom after two years. Other 
cultivars include ‘Rainbow Pill ar’ which has dense 
branching and is suitable as a hedge. As its name 
suggests, it produces a variety of colors before a bright 
red fall foliage. ‘Spring Glory’  is a heavily flowering 
variety that has orange and yellow fall foliage. Consult 
with your local  land grant university, local extension or 
local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on 
adapted cultivars for use in your area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Abu -Asab, M.S., P.M. Peterson, S.G. Shetler, and S.S. 
Orli.  2001.  Earlier plant flowering in spring as a 
resp onse to global warming in the Washington, DC, 
area.  Biodiv. Conserv. 10:597 –612.  
Berliner, R., and J.G. Torrey.1988. Studies on  mycorrhizal associations in Harvard Forest, 
Massachusetts.  Can. J. Bot. 67(8):2245– 2251. 
Bir , R.E. 1992. Growing and propagating showy native 
woody plants. The University of North Carolina 
Press. Chapel Hill, NC.  
Brown , R.G.,  and M.L. Brown.  1972.  Port City Press. 
Baltimore, MD.  
Burgess, M.B., K.R. Cushman, E.T. Doucette, N. Talent, 
C.T. Frye, a nd C.S. Campbell. 2014. Effects of 
apomixes and polyploidy on diversification and 
geographic distribution in Ame lanchier (Rosaceae). 
Am. J. Bot. 101(8):1375– 1387. doi: 
10.3732/ajb.1400113  
Campbell, C.S., C.W. Greene, and S.E. Bergquist. 1987. 
Apomixis  and sexuality in three species of 
Amerlanchier , shadbush (Rosaceae, Maloideae). 
Amer. J. Bot. 74(3):321– 328. 
Chu, C.C., and K.W. Mudge. 1996. Using a rockwool  plug system in vitro on Amelanchier , Cercis,  Kalmia, 
cherry, and apple.  p. 566. In  93 Annual Con ference 
of the American Society for Horticultura l Science, 
Lexington, KY. 6 –10 Oct. 1996. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 
Alexandria, VA.  
Coulber, S. 2015. Serviceberries. Canadian Wildlife  Foundation (CWF). http://cwf -fcf.org/en/discover -
wildlife/flora -fauna/flora/serv iceberries.html 
(accessed 10 Mar. 2015).  
Dickert, G.M. 2010. Serviceberry. Pub. # HGIC 1026.  Clemson Coop. Ext. Clemson Univ. Clemson, SC. 
http://www.clemson.edu/extension/hgic/plants/landsc
ape/trees/hgic1026.html  (accessed 13 Mar. 2015).  
Drake, D., P. Nit zsche, and P. Perdomo. 2003. Landscape 
plants rated by deer resistance. Pub #E271. Rutgers 
NJAES Coop. Exten. New Brunswick, NJ.  Falxa
-Raymond, N., M.I. Palmer, T. McPhearson, K. L. 
Griffin. 2014. Foliar nitrogen characteristics of four 
tree species planted in New York City forest 
restoration sites. Urban Ecosyst. 17:807 –824. 
doi:10.1007/s11252- 014-0346 -3.  
Foster, S., and J.A. Duke. 2000. Eastern/Central  medicinal plants and herbs. 2
nd ed. Peterson Field 
Guides.  Houghton Mifflin Co. NY, NY.  
Gilman, E.F., an d D.G. Watson. 1993. Amelanchier 
canadensis , shadblow serviceberry. Pub #  ST –74. 
USDA US Forest Service Factsheet. UF IFAS 
Extension. Univ. of FL. Gainesville, FL. 
http://hort.ifas.ufl.edu/database/documents/pdf/tree_f
act_sheets/amecana.pdf  (accessed 10 Mar. 2015).  
Hightshoe,  G.L. 1987. Native tree shrubs, and vines for 
urban and rural America: a planting design manual 
for environmental designers. John Wiley & Sons.   
NPIN (Native Plant Information Network). 2013. Lady  Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. The Uni v. of Texas 
at Austin.   
Peronto, M., and R.C. Manley. 2008. Native trees  and 
shrubs for Maine landscapes: shadblow serviceberry. 
Bull. #2563. UMaine Extension. Bangor, ME.  
Pinchot, G., and W.W. Ashe. 1897. Timber trees and  forests of North Carolina. M.I. & J.C. Stewart. 
Winston, NC.   
Weinstein, L.H., and A.W. Davison. 2003. Native plant 
species suitable as bioindicators and biomonitors for 
airborne fluoride. Environ. Pollut. 125(1):3 –11.  
doi:10.1016/S0269- 7491(03)00090-3 
Wigge rs, R. 1994. The plant explore r’s guide to New 
England. Mountain Press Pub. Co. Missoula, 
Montana.   
 
Citation 
Sheahan, C.M. 2015 . Plant  guide for  Canadian 
serviceberry  (Amelanchier canadensis ). USDA- Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Cape May Plant 
Materials Center , Cape May, NJ.   
 
Published   03/2015  
Edited:  May2015 rg
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER