Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMMON YARROW  
Achillea millefolium  L. 
Plant Symbol = ACMI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Alternate Names 
Milfoil 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Several tribes of the Plains region of 
the United States including the Pawnee and 
Chippewa tribes used common yarrow.  The Pawnee 
used the stalk in a treatment for pain relief.  The  Chippewa used the leaves 
in a steam inhalant for 
headaches.  They also chewed the roots and applied 
the saliva to their appendages as a stimulant.  The 
Cherokee drank a tea of common yarrow to reduce 
fever and aid in restful sleep.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 © William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution Department of Botany @ PLANTS 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General: Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Common 
yarrow is a perennial herb that produces one to 
several stems (2-10 dm tall) from a fibrous 
underground horizontal rootstock (rhizome).  It is 
known to be both native an d introduced.  Leaves are 
evenly distributed along th e stem, with the leaves 
near the middle and bottom of the stem being the 
largest.  The leaves have varying degrees of hairiness 
(pubescence).  Leaf blades are lanceolate in outline, 
but bipinnately dissected.  Overall leaf dimensions 
range from 0.5-3 cm wide by 3-15 cm long.  The 
flower heads (inflorescence) have a flattened dome 
shape corymbiform (2.5-4 mm thick by 4-5 mm high) 
with approximately 10-20 ray flowers.  The flowers 
are whitish to yellowish-white.  The plant commonly 
persists from May through June.          
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: The plant is frequently found in the mildly 
disturbed soil of grasslands and open forests. 
 
Establishment 
Common yarrow is a drought tolerant species of 
which there are several different ornamental 
cultivars.  Plant the seeds no more than ¼ inch deep 
due to the need of light for germination.  The seeds

also require a temperature range of 65-75 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Common yarrow responds best to soil 
that is poorly developed and well drained.  The plant 
has a relatively short life.  To prolong the life of the 
plant, divide the plant every other year and plant 12-
18 inches apart.  Common yarrow is a weedy species 
and can become invasive.  Proper care should be used 
to control the spread of the plant from its desired 
growing location.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common yarrow may suffer from mildew or root rot 
if not planted in well-drained soil. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Beaurain. B. 2001.  The garden helper. 
www.thegardenhelper.com/Achillea.htm
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas . Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas. 1881 pp. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.  How indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts . Dover Publications Inc., 
New York, New York. 397pp.  
 
Dunbar, J.D. 1880.  The Pawnee indians . Magazine of 
American History 5(5):321-342. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of the 
great plains . University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.  Cherokee 
plants their uses-a 400 year history . Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina. 65 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie . University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 340 pp. 
 
Maas Nursery. 2001.   Herbs.  Seabrook, Texas.  
<
www.maasnursery.com/yarrow.htm>.  Accessed 
20NOV01. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.  
<
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb>. 
 
Sanders, T.W. 1895.  Sanders’ encyclopedia of 
gardening. A.G.L. Hellyer 1958. Revised. W.H. and 
L. Collingridge Limited.  New York, New York. 526 
pp. 
 
Zhang, D., A.M. Armitage, J.M. Affolter, M.A. Dirr 
1996.  Environmental control of flowering and growth 
of Achillea millefolium L. “summer pastels” . 
HortScience 31(3):364-365. 
 
Prepared By:   
Matthew D. Hurteau , Formerly USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Center, c/o, Environmental 
Horticulture Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California
 
 Edited: 20nov01 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.