1 
 
  
Plant Guide
SITKA ALDER 
Alnus viridis  ( Chaix) DC.  ssp. 
sinuata  (Regel) A. Löve & D. 
Löve  
Plant Symbol = ALVIS  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center,  Corvallis, Oregon.  
 
Figure  1. Sitka alder l eaves, current year's male catkins and 
previous and current year's female cone s. Photo by Dale Darris.   
Alternate Names 
G reen alder, mountain alder, wavy -leaf alder , slide 
alder,  Alnus  alnobetula,  Alnus crispa  ssp.  laciniata , 
Alnus crispa  ssp.  sinuata,  Alnus sinuata,  Alnus viridis  
var.  sinuata, and Duschekia sinuata  (USDA NRCS, 
2011a).
 
Uses  
Erosion control  and  reclamation : Sitka alder  is a 
valuable shrub for slope and stream  bank  stabilization  
and general  erosion control on disturbed , nutrient 
poor sites . It  can be planted  for acid, coal,  placer, and 
copper  mine spoil reclamation , soil enrichment, and 
other land rehabilitation efforts where an easy to 
establish, deciduous shrub is desired  ( Uchytil , 1989) . 
The species  may also be useful  in  hedgerow s, the 
shrub  row of field windbreaks , and other 
conservation buffers.  
Forestry : As host to symbiotic  nitrogen fixing 
bacteria  in its roots , Sitka alder  is  particularly  
important for  improving forest site productivity  and  
is sometimes used as a companion or nurse shrub in  conifer plantations (
Delong and Sanborn , 2000;  
Hauessler et al. , 1990).  Compared to red alder  ( Alnus 
rubra ), Sitka alder is considered potentially less 
competitive  with young conifers because of its 
smaller stature and slower growth (Harrington and 
Deal , 1982).  I t is not used for commercial timber but 
is a source of firewood.  
Wildlife : The palatability of Sitka alder is considered 
poor and  forage value low for most  big game animals 
and livestock (Uchytil , 1989), but others report that it 
is one of the  most palatable of the native alders, being 
rated fair to good as browse for sheep in some areas 
(USDA Forest Service , 1988).  Selective browsing of 
this species by moose occurs in Idaho during summer 
months as leaves remain green (Pierce,  1984).  It is 
also considered high- quality moose browse in British 
Columbia.  Elk will browse the tender young shoots, 
while white -tailed and mule deer feed on leaves and 
twigs (Haeussler et al. , 1990).  Caribou  also browse 
on Sitka alder . 
Alder twigs and leaves are consumed by muskrats, 
rabbits, snowshoe hares, and squirrels, while the 
seeds, buds, or catkins are an important source of 
food in winter for numerous song and game birds 
(Haeussler  et al. , 1990;  Healy and Gill,  1974;  Martin 
et a l., 1951).  Beavers eat the bark and use the stems 
to build lodges and dams (USDA Forest Service , 
1988). Thickets provide thermal and hiding cover for 
big game and other wildlife, as well as nesting habitat 
for many small birds (Uchytil , 1989).  Sitka alder  is  a 
source of pollen for honey bees, native bees,  and other 
insects during the spring.  
Ethnobotanic : Native peoples of North American had 
practical uses for Sitka alder or its close relative 
green  alder ( Alnus viridis ssp.  crispa) .  The bark  wa s 
a source of  red or brown dye  which  was  used to color  
wool  and tanned  animal  skins (Agar  and Agar,  1980; 
Anderson , 1939;  Kari , 1985;  Rousseau , 1945;  Turner 
et al. , 1980) . Documentation  of  alder  being  used as a 
fragrance or scent  ( Turner et al. , 1990)  may refer to 
Sitka alder which is known for being sticky and 
sweet smelling.   Alder was  burned  as firewood and 
preferred for smoking  fish ( Ager and Agar, 1980; 
Kari , 1985) .  One or both a lders w ere  considered a 
sign of water and the hard wood was used for  making 
snowshoes , bows , or  spoons  ( Compton, 1993; Kari, 
1985;  Turner et al. , 1990 ).  
Sitka  and green  alder had several medicinal uses . 
Pistillate catkins of Sitka alder were crushed and 
eaten raw  for treating gonorrhea  ( Compton , 1993).

7 
 
female  cones (strobiles)  turn brown and scales begin 
to open.  Seed may also be sufficiently mature if the 
cones are turning br own in color and their scales 
easily separate by twisting the cone at the top and 
bottom (Hibbs and Ager , 1989).  They can be hand 
harvested or the branches flailed over a tarp. The 
cones are thoroughly dried at ambient temperatures 
by suspending them in f ine mesh bags or placing 
them on elevated screens.  Some  of t he seed  will fall 
out during drying with the remainder  removed by 
tumbling or shaking.  Red alder and presumably Sitka 
alder  cones can also be kiln dried at  16- 27°C (60-
80°F)  for  two  to  seven  days for quicker extraction  
(Hibbs and Ager , 1989).   Seed can be cleaned with an 
air screen machine and processed through an air 
column to remove  small extraneous particles  
(Harrington et al. , 2008).  At  the NRCS Corvallis 
Plant Materials Center  (PMC) , 95 cones  yielded 27 g 
(~1 oz.) of clean seed. Data  on seeds per pound vary 
widely , ranging  from  1,467,000 seeds/kg ( 666,000  
seeds/lb)  ( USDA NRCS , 2011b ) to  3,740,000 
seeds/kg ( 1,700,000  seeds/lb).  Differences may be 
genetic, environmental, or related  to  the amount of 
good versus empty seed  which is hard to determine . 
Seed of Alnus viridis  is classified as orthodox 
meaning it can be collected and stored dry with  little 
loss of viability  (Forestry Commission , 2011).  When 
Sitka alder seed  was stored in pape r envelopes and 
refrigerated at 3 -5°C (37- 41°F) at Corvallis, O R, it 
maintained a germination rate of over 50 % after three 
years.  Red alder seed has been preserved  for longer 
periods (10- 20 years) without substantial loss in 
viability when dried to less than 10 %  moisture 
content  and frozen in moisture proof containers at  
minus  12ºC (10°F) (Hibbs and Ager , 1989).  
Appropriate conditions for storage  of  Alnus viridis  
seeds  are 8 to  10 percent  moisture content at less than 
4°C  (39 °F)  (Forestry Commission , 2011).   
Vegetative  propagation:  Hardwood cuttings of Sitka 
alder  did not root in one study  (Java and Everett , 
1992), but others report  success with spring or fall 
pla nted hardwood cuttings on wet sites (DeLong and 
Sandborn , 2000).  R ooting success has been reported 
with green stem cuttings (Carpenter et al. , 1984).  
Cuttings were dipped in a solution of 2000 ppm IBA 
(indole -3 -butyric acid) and dusted with a mixture of 
Rootone 10 rooting compound and fungicide.  The 
rooting medium was sterile perlite and vermiculite 
(1:1).  They were then misted intermittently for 10 
weeks and fertilized weekly with a liquid fertilizer 
during the last month.   Results improved by applying 
bottom heat of 21°C (70°F).  Others report some 
success rooting cuttings that are taken just after the 
leaves fall and planted outdoors in a sandy soil 
(Plants for a F uture, 2011).   At Corvallis , OR, 
summer wood cuttings made  in July and treated with 
hormones were unsuccessful.     Field grafting has been reported for certain cultivars 
of alder, but the process is generally difficult for th
is 
genus .  The Corvallis  PMC  experimented with a 
device for hot -callusing graft unions of dormant stock 
but was unsuccessful (Darris et  al. , 1994).  The 
species has been propagated successfully using tissue 
culture (Tremblay and Lalonde,  1984).    
Container production:  Sitka alder is readily adapted 
to container nursery production (Hudson and Ca rlson, 
1998;  Wick et al. , 2008)  both in a greenhouse and 
outdoor  bed s. Plants grown in larger containers have  
better outplanting performance (Harrington et al. , 
2008).  The use of standard growing media that are 75 
to 100 %  peat, moderate to well drained, and 
amended with micronutrients and slow release 
fertilizer  is suggested.  Unless fall sown, the use of 
stratified seed is recommende d. Given  the 
requirement  of light  for germination,  seed  should  be 
surface sown or covered wi th a very thin layer of 
silica sand  in pots .  Germination usually occurs 
within three weeks  ( Corvallis PMC propagation 
notes;  Wick et al. , 2008).  Depending on the original 
container size, seedlings may be re- potted into 1- 
gallon or larger pots within a p eriod of 12 to 18 
weeks.   
Container plants can  be maintained in a shadehouse 
with  periodic  fertilization and irrigation. Some 
g rowers  apply a balanced soluble fertilizer one or 
more times in the spring and early summer.   A fall 
hardening phase  may  mean  dis continuation  or 
reduction  of fertiliz er and a reduction of water as  
early as August . Pruning, if needed, is done one or 
more times on soft tissue before mid -August (Hudson 
and Carlson , 1998).  
Seedling  inoculation : For optimal growth  and 
improved root nodulation, young seedlings or 
growing media should be inoculated with the 
appropriate  Frankia actinobacteria using cultured 
isolates or dilute  slurry  made from water and 
macerated nodules (Ahrens , 1994;  Quoreshi et al. , 
2007;  Subramaniam  et al. , 1991).  Superior  cultures 
can be  raised on a special medium, harvested by 
centrifugation, homogenized, suspended in distilled 
water and applied to four -week -old seedlings as a soil 
drench (Subramaniam et al. , 1991).  Others suggest 
the inoculum be  mixed with a carrier like peat and 
incorporated in to the potting media or nursery beds 
(Martin et al. , 1985).   It has been demonstrated that 
container grown green alder can be successfully 
inoculated  with Frankia  under commercial nursery  
conditions without  changing normal operational 
schedules.  Unfortunately, commercial sources of 
inoculum  are generally un available (Quoreshi et al., 
2007).

8 
 
Fr ankia  can be obtained from  fresh nodules growing 
on  the roots of donor plants , though this method is 
less reliable  and the extracted strain would be 
unknown. The  nodules  are rinsed thoroughly with tap 
water , then crushed, ground, or macerated, 
homogenized in a blender, and stored as slurry  in a 
refrigerator for a short period until used.  The 
homogenate may be filtered through muslin, diluted 
with water, and then applied to containerized 
seedlings at four weeks or a seedbed prior to sowing 
(Wheeler et al. , 1991;  Ahrens et al. , 1992).    
 
Soil obtained beneath the canopy of existing Sitka 
alder stands or from a makeshift  inoculum bed of 
older , nodulated  seedlings is a third source of 
Frankia.  Work at  the  Corvallis  PMC  confirmed that 
a thin band of this soil (dried and sifted)  placed in the 
container prior to sowing, coupled with periodic 
application of a balanced liquid fertilizer or 
incorporation of a slow -release fertilizer, can produce 
the most vigorous seedlings (Darris et al.,  1994). Low 
to moderate rates of nitrogen fertilization promote the 
formation of the nitrogen -fixing nodules (Harrington 
et al. , 2008).  
Sitka a lder will also  respond  positively  to inoculation 
with certain species of beneficial  ectomycorrhizal 
fungi  (Hudson and Carlson,  1998) . Procedures for 
precise  fungal inoculation of the root system are 
described elsewhere (Castellano and Molina,  1989). 
C ompanies also produce and sell fungal  associates 
that may function well with  Sitka alder.  The 
manufacturer ’s experts should be consulted. In some 
instance s, soil borrowed from existing stands of Sitka 
alder may suffice  at outplanting.  
Bare -root productio n:  Sitka alder has been 
successfully produced as 1 +0 and plug+1 bare -root 
stock in outdoor nursery beds. [1 +0 (1 -0 ) stock  are 1- 
year old s eedlings grown in one location before 
lifting . Plug+1 (P+1, P -1) stock are seedlings started 
in small cavity containe rs then transplanted after six  
months to a year into a nursery bed where they are 
grown for another year]. Seedlings grown in 
fumigated beds have benefited from inoculation with 
Frankia  just prior to seeding.  While  alder species can 
be successfully fall  seeded ,  most nurseries sow  in the 
spring (Harrington et al ., 2008). Presumably treated 
(stratified) seed  is used for improved  germination.  
Open bed seedling densities of 60- 180 seedlings/m
2 
(5 -15/ft2) recommended for other alders should also 
work for Sit ka alder. Management of top growth, 
timing (sowing, lifting, etc.) and grading of seedlings 
will  likely  differ by alder species, climate, and 
nursery.  However, general guidelines for nursery 
culture including  methods of bed inoculation with 
Frankia, sowin g, fertilization, irrigation, pest 
management,  transplanting, and storage developed 
for the production of  red alder (Ahrens, 1994;  Ahrens  et al.
, 1992;  Harrington et al. , 2008 ) are adaptable  to 
Sitka alder.       
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Skamania Germplasm is a selected class pre- variety 
of Sitka alder that originates from a natural stand 
growing above the north shore of the Columbia 
River, in the vicinity of Beacon Rock in Skamania 
County, W A. It was released in 2006 by the USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis, 
O R, in cooperation with the Agricultural Experiment 
Stations of Oregon and Washington.  While this 
species of alder is more common at mid to sub -alpine 
elevations, Skamania G ermplasm represents a high 
quality seed source from, and for use at, lower 
elevation.  Recommended  applications include stream  
bank stabilization, reclamation of disturbed lands, 
soil improvement  of forestlands , and conservation 
buffers (windbreaks, hedgerows). Suggested  area  of 
use is western Washington and western Oregon 
below an elevation of 457 m ( 1500 ft) (Darris et al., 
2002).   
 
 
Figure 7.   Bare -root nursery bed of  Skamania Germplasm  Sitka 
alder seedlings  at f ormer Washington DNR Nursery, Bow, WA. 
Photo by Dale Darris.
 
Genetic d ifferences among seed sources or 
provenances of Sitka alder have been demonstrated.  
A study in British Columbia with 28 populations of 
Sitka alder showed clear geographic patterns in frost 
hardiness, dry weight, growth, and germination 
parameters  that related to latitude and distance from 
the coast (Benowicz  et al., 2000).  The differences 
are probably adaptive (Centre for Forest Gene 
Conservation,  2011).  At present, there are no 
published seed zones or seed  transfer guidelines for 
this species .  In such cases , some suggest US EPA 
Level III ecoregions can be used as surrogate seed 
transfer zones (Withrow -Robinson and Johnson, 
2006).   A s w ith most  endemic  plant species,  careful 
attention  should be paid to  the natural origin of the 
seed or nursery  stock  ( longitude, latitude, elevation, 
soil,  and climate)  and  how  well it is projected to  
perform at the  planting site. Sitka alder seedlings are

9 
 
produced by a number of nurseries in the western US 
and Canada.  
References  
Ahrens, G.R., A. Dobkowski, and D.E. Hibbs. 1992. 
Red alder: guidelines for successful regeneration. 
Special publication 24. Forest Research 
Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR.   
Ahrens, G.R. 1994. Seedling quality and nursery  practices for red alder. In: D.E.  Hibbs, D.S. 
DeBell, and R.F Tarrant (editors). The Biology 
and Management of Red Alder.  Oregon State 
University Press,  Corvallis,  OR. 
Agar, T.A. and L.P. Agar. 1980. Ethnobotany of the  Eskimos of Nelson Island, Alaska. Arctic 
Anthropology 27:26- 48.  
Anderson, J. P. 1 939. Plants used by the Eskimo of 
the Northern Bering Sea and Arctic Regions of 
Alaska. Am . J. Bot. 26:714 -16.  
B.C. Ministry of Forests. 1997. Operational summary  for vegetation management dry alder complex. 
Forest Practices Branch, Ministry of Forests , 
Pr ovince of British Columbia , Victoria, BC. 
Baskin, C.C.  and J.M.  Baskin.  2002. Propagation 
protocol for production of container Alnus viridis  
(Chaix) DC plants; University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky. In: Native Plant Network. 
[http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 30 
August 2011)]. Moscow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery.  
  Batzli, J. McCray and J.O. Dawson. 1997.  Physiological and morphological responses of red 
alder and Sitka alder to flooding. Physiologia 
Plantarum 99: 653- 663. 
  Benowicz, A., Y.A. El -Kassaby, R.D. Guy, and C.C. 
Ying. 2000. Sitka alder ( Alnus sinuata Rydb.) 
genetic di versity in germination, frost hardiness, 
and growth attributes. Silvae Genetica 49: 206 -
212.   
Binkley, D. 1986. Forest n utrition management. 
Wiley, New York.  
Brockley, R.P. and P. Sanborn. 2003. Effects of Sitka  alder on the growth and foliar nutrition of  young 
lodgepole pine in the central interior of British 
Columbia. Can. J. For. Res. 33: 1761- 1771. 
Canadian Forest Service. 1995. Silvicultural terms in  Canada. Second Edition. Policy, Economics and  
International Affairs Directorate. Natural 
Resources Can ada. Canadian Forest Service.  
Ottawa, O N. 
Carpenter, C.V., L.R. Robertson, J.C. Gordon, and 
D.A. Perry. 1984. The effect of four new Frankia 
isolates on growth and nitrogenase activity in 
clones of Alnus rubra  and Alnus sinuata. Can . J . 
For . Res . 14:701- 706. 
Castellano, M.A. and R. Molina. 1989.  Mychorrhizae. In: T.D.  Landis, R.W. Tinus, S.E.  McDonald, and J.P. Barnett. The Container Tree 
Nursery Manual. Volume 5. Agriculture 
Handbook 674. USDA Forest Service, 
Washington D.C. 
 
Centre for Forest Conservation  Genetics . 2011. Sitka 
alder ( Alnus viridis  (Chaix.) D. C.) University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.  
[http://genetics.forestry.ubc.ca/cfcg/proj_catalogu
ing/s_alnuvir.html]  
Coates, D., S. Haeussler, and J. Mather.  1990. A 
guide to the response of common plants in British 
Columbia to management treatments.  FRDA 
Handbook 008.  British Columbia Ministry of 
Forests, Victoria, BC.   
Compton, B.D. 1993. Upper North Wakashan and  Southern Tsimshian ethnobotany: the knowled ge 
and usage of plants and fungi among the 
Oweekeno, Hanaksiala (Kitlope and Kemano), 
Haisla (Kitamaat) and Kitasoo peoples of the 
central and north coasts of British Columbia.  
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of British 
Columbia. Vancouver, BC.  
Darris, D.C . 2001. Tips for planting trees and shrubs: 
revegetation and landscaping. Plant Materials 
Technical Note No. 3. USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Portland, OR.  
Darris, D.C, T.R. Flessner, and J.D. Conrod Trindle. 
1994. Corvallis Plant Materials  Center Technical 
Report: plant materials for streambank 
stabilization 1980 -1992.  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Portland, O R.  
  Darris, D.C, R. Tracey, and S . Lambert . 2002.  Fact 
sheet on Skamania Germplasm Sitka alder.  
USDA -NRCS, Plant Mat erials Center, Corvallis, 
OR . 
DeAngelis, J. and G. Garth. 1993.  Management of  root weevils in the nursery and landscape. The 
Digger.  Oregon Association of Nurseries , 
Wilsonville, O R.  
DeLong, C. and P. Sanborn. 2000. Management of  Sitka alder and willows: a strategy to minimize 
loss of habitat and maximize benefit to long term 
soil productivity. Forest Research Note No. PG -
22. Forest Resources and Practices Team , 
Ministry of Forests , Pr ince George, BC.  
Elefritz, M, M.M. Atkinson, and S.A. Fitzgerald.  1998. The care and planting of tree seedlings on 
your woodland. EC 1504. Oregon State 
University Extension Service , Corvallis, OR.  
Elias, T.S. 1980. The complete trees of North 
America. Boo k Division, Times Mirror 
Magazines, Inc. ( publisher), Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Company, New York (distributor).  
Elias S., E. Ottoni, N. Verma, D. Kreuger, S. Roburn,  and C. Wulff. 1995. An ethnobotany of the UBC 
Arboretum.  University of British Columbia , 
Va ncouver, B.C. Adapted for the web 1998.  
[ http://www.botany.ubc.ca/facilities/arboretum ]

10 
 
Emery, D.E. 1988. Seed propagation of native 
California plants. Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, CA.   
Farmer, R.E., M.L. Maley, M.U. Stoehr, and F. 
Schnedenburger. 1985. Reproductive 
characteristics of green alder in northwestern 
Ontario. Can . J . Bot . 63: 2243 -2247.  
Forestry Commission. 2011. Seed storage and pre -
treatment for Alnus viridis . Great Britain. 
[ http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/INFD -7FAB3P ] 
F urniss, R.L. and V.M. Carolin. 1980. Western forest 
insects. Miscellaneous publication No. 1339. 
USDA Forest Service . U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C.   
Gracz, M. et al. 200 8. Wetland cl assification of the 
Kenai Peninsula lowlands, Alaska.  Kenai 
Watershed Forum. Fritz Creek, AK.  The Alaska 
Natural Heritage Program , University of Alaska , 
Ancho rage, AK. 
[http://www.kenaiwetlands.net/plant_community
_classification_i.htm]  
Hallman, R. 1993. Reforestation equipment. 9324- 2837- MTDC. Technology and Development 
Program, USDA Forest Service, Missoula, MT.  
Harrington, C.A. and R.L. Deal. 1982. Sitka ald er, a 
candidate for mixed stands. Can . J .  For . Res . 12 
(1): 108 -111.  
Harrington et al. 2008. Alnus  P. Mill. alder. In: F.T. 
Bonner and R.P. Karrfalt (editors). The Woody 
Plant Seed Manual. Agriculture Handbook 727. 
USDA Forest Service , Washington, D.C.  
Harvey, E.M., F.W. Bell, and J.O. Boateng. 1998.  Manual, motor –manual and mechanical brushing 
tools for conifer release. Northwest Science and 
Technology Technical Note TN –42.  In:  F.W. 
Bell, M.  McLaughlan and J. Kerley (compilers).  
Vegetation Management A lternatives – A  Guide 
to Opportunities.  Ont ario  Min istry of  Natur al 
Resour ces, Thunder Bay, O N. 
Hauessler, S. and D. Coates. 1986. Autecological  characteristics of selected species that compete 
with conifers in British Columbia: a literature 
review. Land M anagement Report No. 33. 
Ministry of Forests, Information Services Branch , 
Victoria, BC.  
Hauessler, S., D. Coates, and J. Mather. 1990.  Autecology of common plants in British 
Columbia: a literature review. FRDA Report 158. 
Forestry Canada and  B.C. Ministr y of Forests, 
Victoria, BC.  
Health Canada. 2007. Registration decision.  Chondrostereum purpureum  strain PFC2139 Cp-
PFC2139 Chontrol Paste. Pest Management 
Regulatory Agency , Ottawa, O N. 
Healy, W.M. and J.D. Gill. 1974. Alders. In:  J.D.  Gill 
and W.M. Healy (compilers). Shrubs and vines 
for Northeastern Wildlife. General Technical 
Report NE -9.USDA Forest Service. Northeastern 
Forest Experimental Station ,  Upper Darby, P A.  Hepting, G.H. 1971. Diseases of forest and shade 
trees of the United States. Agriculture Handbook 
386. USDA Forest Service.  U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington D.C.   
Hibbs, D.E. and A.A. Ager. 1989.  Red alder:  guidelines for seed collection, handling and 
storage. Special Publication 18. Forest Research 
Laboratory , Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
O R.  
Hickman, J.C. (editor). 1993. The Jepson Manual, 
higher plants of California. University of 
California Press. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and 
London . 
H itchcock, C.L., et al. 1969. Vascular Plants of the 
Pacific Northwes t.  Part 2: salicaceae to 
s axifragaceae. University of Washington Press.  
Seattle and London.    
Hudson, S. and M. Carlson. 1998. Propagation of  interior British Columbia native plants from seed. 
British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Research 
Program. Kalam alka Forestry Centre,  Vernon, 
BC.   
Java, B.J. and R.L. Everett. 1992. Rooting hardwood  cuttings of Sitka alder and thinleaf alder. In: W.P. 
Cleary, E.D. McArthur, D. Bedunah, and C.L. 
Wambolt (compilers). Proceedings -Symposium 
on Ecology and Management of  Riparian Shrub 
Communities, Sun Valley, ID, May 1991. USDA 
Forest Service.  Intermountain Research Station, 
Ogden, UT.  
Johnson, W.T. and H.H. Lyon. 1991.  Insects that  feed on trees and shrubs. Comstock Publishing 
Associates, Cornell University Press, Ith aca, NY, 
and London.    
Martin, K.J., Y. Tanaka, and D.D. Myrold. 1991.  Peat carrier increases inoculation success with 
Frankia  on red alder ( Alnus rubra Bong.) in 
fumigated nursery beds. New Forests  5: 43- 50. 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951.   
American wildlife and plants: a guide to wildlife 
food habits. Dover Publications, Inc. New York.  
McLean, A. 1967. Germination of forest range  species from southern British Columbia. J . Range 
Manage.  20: 321- 322. 
Mitchell, W. W. 1968. On the ecology of Sitka alder  in the subalpine zone of south -central Alaska. In : 
J.M.  Trappe,  J.F. Franklin,  R.F.  Tarrant,  and 
G.M.  Hansen  (editors) . Biology of alder: 
Proceedings of a symposium; 1967 April 14- 15; 
Pullman, WA. P ortland, OR:  USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station .   
Nolte, D.L. and I.J. Otto. 1996. Materials and  supplies for management of wildlife damage to 
trees. Technical Report 9624 -2808- MTCS. 
USDA Forest Service, Missoula Technolo gy and 
Development Center, Missoula, MT.

11 
 
Oregon State University. 2011 .  Alnus sinuata. In: 
Landscape Plants images, identification and 
information.  Volume 1. Oregon State University.  
Corvallis, O R.  
[http://oregonstate.edu/dept/ldplants/alsin.htm]  
Pierce, J.D. 1984. Shiras moose forage selection in  relation to browse availability in north -central 
Idaho. Can . J . Zoology. 62: 2404- 2409. 
Plants  for a  Future.  2011. Alnus sinuata  (Regel.) 
Rydb.  Species database. Plants for a Future.   
Great Britain.  
[ http://www.pfaf.org/user/Plant.aspx?LatinName
=Alnus+sinuata ]  
Quoreshi , A.M. et al. 2007. Inoculation of green alder 
( Alnus crispa ) with Frankia- ectomycorrhizal 
fungal inoculant under commercial nursery 
production conditions. Native Plants Journal 8:(3) 
271- 281. 
Rose, R. and P. Morgan. 2000.  Guide to reforestation 
in western Oregon. Oregon Department of 
Forestry and College of Forestry. Oregon State 
University, Co rvallis, OR.  
Rosetta, R. 2010. Nursery pests. In: Hollingsworth,  C.S. (editor). 2011. Pacific Northwest Insect 
Management Handbook. Oregon State University , 
Corvallis, OR.  [http://uspest.org/pnw/insects]  
Rousseau, J. 1945. Le Folklore Botanique De L'ile 
Aux Coudres. Contributions de l'Institut 
botanique l'Universite de Montreal 55:75- 111. 
Simard, S.W., and A. Nicholson. 1990. Balancing the  positive and negative effects of non -crop plants 
on conifers: pinegrass, fireweed, Sitka alder and 
paper birch. In: E . Hamilton, E . Vegetation 
Management: An Integrated Approach, Proc . of 
the Fourth Annual Vegetation Management 
Workshop, Nov. 14- 16, 1989. B.C. Ministry of 
Forests, Victoria, BC. FRDA Report No. 109: 45-
48.   
Simard, S. W, J. L. Heineman, S.M. Hagerman, W. J. 
Mather, and D. L. Sachs. 2004. Manual cutting of 
Sitka alder -dominated plant communities: effects 
on conifer growth and plant community structure. 
West. J. Appl. For. 19(4):277– 287. 
Smith, M. et al. 2007. Regional importance of Alnus  
pollen as an aeroal lergen: a comparative study of 
Alnus pollen counts from Worcester (UK) and 
Pozan (Poland).  Ann . Agric .  Environ.  Med . 
14: 123- 128.  
Subramaniam, P., I.R. Miller, and D. Burgess. 1991.  Production of Frankia  inoculated Sitka alder 
( Alnus viridis  ssp.  sinuata  (Reg.) Love & Love) 
container stock.  In : F.P. Donnelly and H.W. 
Lussenburg (compilers), Proc . of the 11th Annual 
Conference of the Forest Nursery Association of 
British Columbia, September, 1991.  
Tremblay, F.M. and M. Lalonde. 1984. Requirements 
for in vi tro propagation of seven nitrogen- fixing 
alder species. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Culture 
3:189- 199.  Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson, and 
A.Z. York. 1990. Thompson ethnobotany.  
Knowledge and usage of plants by the Thompson 
Indians of British Colu mbia. Memoir No. 3. 
Royal British Columbia Museum, Victoria, BC . 
Uchytil, R.J. 1989.  Alnus viridis subsp. sinuata.  
In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online].   
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences  
L aboratory (Producer).  Available.  
[ http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/( 2011, 
September 1 )] 
USDA Forest Service. 1988. Range plant handbook.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York.  Reprint. 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington 
D.C. 1937.   
USDA NRCS.  2007. ‘Panbowl’ River Alder Alnus 
serrulata .  Release brochure. Appalachian Plant 
Materials Center. Alderson, WV.   
USDA NRCS. 2011a . The PLANTS Database 
[ http://plants.usda.gov , 1 September 2011]. 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC.  
USDA NRCS. 2011b . Conservation plant 
characteristics for Alnus viridis ssp.  sinuata. The 
PLANTS Database [ http://plants.usda.gov, 1 
September 2011] . National Plant Data Team, 
Greensboro, NC.  
  USDA Soil Conservation Service. 1991. Wind break 
handbook. Portland, O R and Spokane, W A. 
Voss, C.  1997. A guide to stream corridor  revegetation in Western Washington.  
Washington State Department of Ecology and 
Thurston Conservation District, Olympia, WA.   
Walmsley, M ., Utzig, G ., T. Vold , D. Moon,  and J. 
van Barneveld  ( editors ). 1980. Describing 
ecosystems in the field . Land Management Report 
7 . Ministry of Forests , Victoria: BC.  
Wheeler, C.T., M.K. Hollingsworth, J.E. Hooker,  J.D. McNeill, W.L. Mason, A.J. Moffat, and L.J. 
Sheppard. 1991. T he effect of inoculation with 
either cultured Frankia  or crushed nodules on 
nodulation and growth of Alnus rubra  and Alnus 
glutinosa  seedlings in Forest Nurseries. For . Ecol . 
Manage.  43:153- 166. 
Wick, D., T. Luna, and J. Hosokawa. 2008.  Propagation protocol for production of container 
Alnus viridis  (Chaix.) DC. sinuata  (Regel) Love 
& Love plants (172 ml containers); USDI NPS -  
Glacier National Park, West Glacier, Montana. In: 
Native Plant Network. 
[ http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 30 
August 2011) ]. Moscow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery.  
Withrow-Robinson, B.  and  R. Johnson, 2006. 
Selecting native plant materials for restoration 
projects. Publication EM 8885 -E. Oregon State 
University,  Corvallis, OR.

12 
 
Prepared By : Dale  C.  Darris  
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Center   
Corvallis, Oregon  
Citation  
Darris , D.C. 2011. Plant guide for Sitka alder  ( Alnus  
viridis  ssp.  sinuata). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. 
Corvallis, OR   9 7330. 
Published  September,  2011  
Edited:  09Sept2011 jab, 09Sept2011 klp 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPOR TUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER