Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIAN RICEGRASS 
Achnatherum hymenoides  
(Roemer & J.A. Schultes) 
Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = ACHY  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
Oryzopsis hymenoides, Stipa hymenoides 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The nutritious seed of Indian ricegrass 
was one of the staple food s of American Indians. 
 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Indian ricegrass is 
highly palatable to livestock and wildlife.  It is a 
preferred feed for cattle, horses and elk in all seasons.  
It is considered a preferred feed for sheep, deer and 
antelope in spring and a desirable feed for sheep, 
deer, and antelope in late fall and winter.  It reaches 
its peak production from mid-June through mid-July.  
It holds its nutrient value well at maturity.  It is not 
considered valuable as a hay species. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : One of Indian ricegrass' 
greatest values is for stabilizing sites susceptible to 
wind erosion.  It is well adapted to stabilization of 
disturbed sandy soils in mixes with other species.  It 
is naturally an early invader onto disturbed sandy 
sites (after and in concert with needle and thread 
grass).  It is also one of the first to establish on cut 
and fill slopes.  It does not compete well with 
aggressive introduced grasses during the 
establishment period, but is very compatible with 
slower developing natives, such as Snake River 
wheatgrass ( Elymus wawawaiensis ), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), thickspike 
wheatgrass ( Elymus lanceolata ssp.  lanceolata), 
streambank wheatgrass ( Elymus lanceolata ssp. 
psammophila ), western wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum 
smithii ), and needlegrass species ( Stipa spp. and 
Ptilagrostis  spp.).  Drought tolerance combined with 
fibrous root system and fair to good seedling vigor, 
make Indian ricegrass desirable for reclamation in 
areas receiving 8 to 14 inch es annual precipitation.  
 @ Grass Images Bioinformatics Working Group Texas A&M University
 
Wildlife: Forage value is mentioned in the 
grazing/rangeland/hayland section above.  Due to the 
abundance of plump, nutritious seed produced by 
Indian ricegrass, it is cons idered an excellent food 
source for birds, such as morning doves, pheasants, 
and songbirds.  Rodents collect the seed for winter 
food supplies.  It is considered good cover habitat for 
small animals and birds. 
 
Beautification : Due to its attractive seed heads, 
Indian ricegrass is recommended for roadside, 
campground, and other low rainfall locations for 
beautification. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Indian ricegrass is 
8 to 30 inches tall. It has many tightly rolled, slender 
leaves, growing from the base of the bunch giving it a 
slightly wiry appearance.  The ligule is about 6 mm 
long and acute.  It has a wide spreading panicle 
inflorescence with a single  flower at the end of each 
hair-like branch.  Seeds are round to elongated, black 
or brown, and generally covered with a fringe of

short, dense, white callus hairs.  Indian ricegrass has 
fair to good seedling vigor.   Seed of most accessions 
are very slow to germinate due a thick hull and 
embryo dormancy.  
 
Distribution 
Indian ricegrass is a widely distributed, short to 
medium lived, native, cool-season bunchgrass 
generally found in the plains, foothills, mountains, 
and intermountain basins of the western United States 
on dry and primarily loamy- sandy-gravelly sites.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Indian ricegrass is very winter hardy and 
has a broad climatic adaptation.  It can be found at 
elevations from 2,000 up to 10,000 feet.  It grows 
best in areas with averag e annual precipitation of 8 
inches to above 14 inches.  It has been seeded in 
areas with as low as 6 inches of rainfall and 
reproduced.  It is also found on sites with 
precipitation well above 14 in ches.  It prefers sandy 
course textured soils in its southern areas of 
adaptation and can be found on sands, fine sandy 
loams, silt loams, clay loams, gravelly, rocky, to 
shale areas in the mid-northern areas of its 
adaptation.  It does well on hot, dry southern 
exposures.  In Colorado, Utah, Nevada, and locations 
to the south, ‘Nezpar’ do es best above 6500 feet 
elevation and ‘Paloma’ does best below 6500 feet 
elevation. 
 
Indian ricegrass is often  an early seral or pioneer 
species establishing seedlings in open or disturbed  sites and on sandy soils.  It is relatively short-lived 
for a perennial grass and reproduces by seed.  
 
It does not tolerate poorly drained soils, extended 
periods of inundation, winter flooding or shading.  It 
is tolerant of weakly saline and sodic conditions, but 
prefers neutral soils.  It can also tolerate fire later in 
the growing season and when the plant is dormant 
without serious damage.  
 
Species often associated with
 Indian ricegrass include 
the big sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata ) complex, 
saltbush species ( Atriplex spp.), winterfat 
( Krascheninnikovia lanata), juniper species 
( Juniperus  spp.), needle and thread ( Stipa comata) 
and other needlegrasses, bluebunch wheatgrass, 
Snake River wheatgrass, thickspike wheatgrass, 
streambank wheatgrass, western wheatgrass, and blue 
grama ( Bouteloua gracilis ). 
B&W Texas A&M University 
 
Planting: This species should be seeded with a deep 
furrow drill at a depth of 1/2 to 1 inch on medium to 
fine textured soils and 1 to 3 inches on coarse 
textured soils.  A deeper planting depth puts the seed 
in contact with moist soil conditions, which aids in 
the stratification process and makes the seed less 
likely to be dug up by rodents.  Use of older seed up 
to 4 to 6 years of age may improve germination and 
should be planted at 1/2 to 1-inch depth.  Seed may 
require acid washing to scarify the seed and improve 
germination.  Single species seeding rate 
recommended for Indian ricegrass is 8 pounds Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 24 PLS per square foot 
or 24 PLS seeds per linear  row foot at 12 inch row 
spacing.  If used as a com ponent of a mix, adjust to 
percent of mix desired.  For rangeland mixtures, 
approximately 30 to 50 percent of the mix or 2.5 to 4 
pounds PLS/acre should be considered.  For mined 
lands and other harsh critical areas, the seeding rate 
should be doubled.  Two separate seeding operations 
may be necessary when planting seed mixes, because 
most species should be planted at shallower depths 
than those recommended for Indian ricegrass.  This 
means that Indian ricegrass  should be planted first, 
followed by the seeding operation for the rest of the 
mix. 
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Dormant fall seeding may improve germination of 
dormant seeds.  Summer and late summer (June - 
September) seedings are not recommended.  Seedling 
vigor is fair to good, but the seed may have a high 
percentage of hard seed, and stands may take 2 to 5

years to fully establish.  Indian ricegrass stands 
respond well to light irrigation and light fertilization. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Bromoxynil may be applied at the 3-4 
leaf stage for early suppression of young broadleaf 
weeds and application of 2,4-D should not be made 
until plants have reached the 4-6 leaf stage or later.  
Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to reduce 
weed seed development.  Grasshoppers may damage 
new stands and other insects and use of pesticides 
may be required.  All herbicides and pesticides 
should be applied according to the label. 
 
Management 
Indian ricegrass establishes slowly and new seedings 
should not be grazed until at least late summer or fall 
of the second growing season.  It makes its initial 
growth in early spring and matures seed by mid 
summer.  
 
New stands should not be grazed until the plants are 
reproducing by seed.  Indian  ricegrass benefits from 
grazing use if it is moderately grazed in winter and 
early spring.  Livestock should be removed while 
there is still enough growing season moisture to 
allow recovery, growth, and production of seed.  
Stands will deteriorate under heavy spring grazing 
systems.  
 
The third and fourth years following establishment 
may be critical to stand survival.  Reproduction is 
dependent on seed production and quality seed in the 
soil bank must be available as mature plants begin to 
go out of the stand.  Grazing management with rest or 
deferment schedules that allow plants to produce seed 
every 2 to 3 years is recommended.  By the eighth or 
ninth year following establishment, the seed bank 
should be adequate, with a wide variation of low 
dormancy to hard seed to ensure long term stand 
survival with proper grazing management.  
 
Environmental Concerns : Indian ricegrass is 
relatively short-lived and spreads via seed 
distribution.  It is not considered "weedy" or an 
invasive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under the proper 
management, climatic, and environmental conditions.  
Most seedings do not spread from original plantings, 
or if they do spread, the rate of spread is not 
alarming.  Indian ricegrass is self-pollinated, but may 
occasionally be pollinated by native needlegrass 
species.  These natural crosses generally produce 
sterile hybrids.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of Indian  ricegrass has been very 
successful under cultivated  conditions.  Row spacing 
of 24 inches under irrigation or high precipitation 
(4.0 pounds PLS per acre) to 36 inches on dryland 
(3.0 pounds PLS per acre) is recommended.  
Cultivation will be needed for weed control and to 
maintain row culture.  
 
Seed fields are productive for about five years.  Fall 
moisture, soil fertility, and plant re-growth determine 
the succeeding years yield.   Birds will feed on seed, 
and wind can shatter seed fr om inflorescence prior to 
harvest.  Average production of 100 to 200 pounds 
per acre can be expected under dryland conditions in 
14 inch plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 
300 to 400 pounds per acre can be expected under 
irrigated conditions.  Harvesting can be completed by 
direct combining in the hard dough stage or by wind-
rowing.  Windrowing helps ensure a more complete 
threshing.  Indian ricegrass is so indeterminate that 
windrowing allows final curing in the swath prior to 
combining.  Windrowing al so reduces the risk of 
wind damage.  It is very difficult to thrash all the 
seed if direct combined, and it may be beneficial to 
re-thrash windrows after a few days for seed not 
threshed in the first operation.  Seed heads have 
moderate to high rates of shatter and require close 
scrutiny of maturing stands.  Seed is generally 
harvested in early July to early August. Seed must be 
dried immediately after combining (moisture content 
should be 12 percent in bins/15 percent in sacks).  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
‘Nezpar’ Indian ricegrass wa s originally collected in 
1935 from a site south of White Bird, Idaho by the 
Washington Plant Materials Center (PMC) staff.  It 
was selected from 152 accessions for its vegetative 
characteristics and low seed dormancy by the Idaho 
PMC and released in 1978.  It is adapted to the 
Northwest and Intermountain regions where 
precipitation averages 8 inches or above.  It has 
survived in plantings with 6 inches annual rainfall.  It 
prefers gravelly to loamy to sandy soils.  It is noted 
for its large erect plant type, robust stems, abundant 
leaves, medium to small dark nearly hairless 
elongated seeds (< 50 percent dormant seeds), and 
good to excellent seedling vigor.  Certified seed is 
available, and Aberdeen  PMC maintains breeder 
seed.

'Paloma' Indian ricegrass was collected in 1957 west 
of Pueblo, Colorado at abou t 5000 feet elevation on 
medium soils.  It was selected by New Mexico PMC 
and released cooperatively by the PMC and New 
Mexico Agricultural Extension Service in 1974.  It is 
adapted to the Southwestern Regions of the Western 
United States.  It is considered very drought tolerant, 
has good seedling vigor, forage, seed yields, and is 
long lived.  Paloma has good regrowth and spring 
recovery.  It is considered the best Indian ricegrass 
cultivar for the Southwestern Regions of the Western 
United States.  Certified seed is available, and Los 
Lunas PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Rimrock' Indian ricegrass  was collected in 1960 
from a native site averaging 10 to 14 inches of 
precipitation, north of Billings, Montana, at about 
3600 feet elevation on sandy soils.  The Montana 
PMC; ARS, Logan, Utah; and the Montana and 
Wyoming Agricultural Experiment Stations released 
Rimrock in 1996, primarily  because of its ability to 
retain mature seed better than Nezpar or Paloma.  Its 
more acute angle of glumes helps retain seed longer 
and protects it from seed  shatter caused by wind 
and/or rain.  Certified seed is available, and Bridger 
PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Jones, Thomas A. 1999.   Personal communication.  
Geneticist, USDA, ARS, Forage and Range Research 
Laboratory, Logan, Utah.  
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.   Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images .  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/image/poacr2ba.
htm>.  Version: 000417.  Bioinformatics Working 
Group, College Station, Texas. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000417.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky  Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  
The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000417.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist  
USDA, NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 30nov00 jsp;07feb03ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.