Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD ONION 
Allium unifolium Kellogg  
Plant Symbol = ALUN 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data  
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Many species of Allium are known by the general 
term of wild onion. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The young foliage of  Allium unifolium 
is delicious and can be used in the place of chives.  
The Pomo, Yuki, Wailaki, and Nomlaki gathered this 
onion for food.  The Yuki and other tribes harvested 
the bulb and base of the l eaves and fried them before 
eating.  Sometimes the bu lb was eaten raw.  The 
Pomo usually ate the bulb raw and sometimes baked 
the bulb in an ear th oven.  Today individuals of many 
tribes still gather different species of wild onions.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliac eae).  This herbaceous 
perennial plant has herbage with the characteristic 
taste and smell of onions.  The scape is 30-80 cm 
high and the leaves are 2-3, widely channeled and 
keeled.  Reproduction is from wrinkled, black seeds 
contained in a capsule or by bulbs of 1-2 cm.  Each 
ovoid to oblique bulb arises on a stout lateral  rhizome, the old bulb not persisting.  Ten to thirty 
lavender-pink to white flowers are in an umbel 
subtended by 2 or 3 thin whitish or scarious bracts. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found in moist clay or serpentine in 
closed-cone pine forests, mixed evergreen forests, 
grassy streambanks, and chaparral below 1100 m.  It 
is found in northwestern California, central-western 
California, and Oregon. 
 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Establishment 
Caution : This onion is rather uncommon today.  
Therefore, do not dig up the bulbs in the wilds, but 
rather purchase them and plan t them in the ground in 
autumn. 
 
The bulbs should be planted 1 to 3 inches deep in a 
well-drained soil in full sun or partial shade.   Allium 
species do especially well in raised beds for drainage.  
Water them after planting and then let the rains come.  
Weed around the plants.  Most animals don't eat wild 
onions.  This species of wild onion can be invasive. 
 
If establishing the plant by seed, plant the seeds in the 
fall in pots in partial shade.  Scatter the seeds on top 
of a well-drained soil.  Sprinkle a thin layer of dirt 
over the top and place quarter-inch gravel over the 
soil.  Water the pots and keep them slightly moist.  
Stop watering when the leaves shrivel in the early 
summer.  Out-Plant the two- year-old seedlings in the 
garden or wildlands during the summer or fall.  Let 
the rains do the watering. 
 
Management 
Separate the plants every several years and replant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ALUN is available from native plant nurseries within 
its range.  
 
References 
Chesnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII.  Reprinted by 
the Mendocino County Historical Society in 1974. 
 
Davies, D. 1992.    Alliums:  The ornamental onions .  
Timber Press, Inc. , Portland, Oregon.

Hickman, J.C. (ed.). 1993.  Allium.  pp. 1172-1179 
IN: The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Mathew, B. 1997.   Growing bulbs: The complete 
practical guide .  Timber Press, Inc., Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Voegelin, E.W. 1938.   Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records Vol 2:(1):1-84. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science, Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.