Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREEN MILKWEED 
Asclepias viridis Walt. 
Plant Symbol = ASVI2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
green antelopehorn 
 
Uses 
Caution: Poisonous plant .  Like many milkweeds, 
plant parts are thought to be poisonous to cattle, but 
are rarely consumed.  Smith et al. (2000) documents 
sheep loss to this species.  Monarch butterfly eggs are 
laid on plants in the  Asclepias genus.  The larvae 
consume the leaves and the toxins found in  Asclepias 
are also in the larvae and  mature butterflies.  This 
provides protection from bird predators.  The long 
silky hairs on the seed were once used in making 
candlewicks.  Other than Monarch butterflies, the 
plant provides no known wildlife value. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Milkweed Family (Asclepiadaceae). Green 
antelopehorn is a native, perennial forb or herb.  
Globally, there are 2,000  – 3,000 species in the 
milkweed (Asclepiadaceae) fa mily.  In Texas, there 
are five different genera in this family, with 35 
species in the  Asclepias genus.  Asclepias viridis  is 
the most common milkweed in Texas ranging from 
deep east Texas to the Edwards Plateau and typically 
has wider leaves than  Asclepias asperula.  They have 
alternate, entire leaves.   The leaf margins are often 
wavy.  Flowers are white and in an umbel, mostly 
one per plant.  Upon close inspection, some rose or 
purple color is evident in the center of each 
individual flower (gynostegium).  The milky 
substance that is exuded when a plant part is broken 
is very sticky, much resembling “Elmer’s glue.”  
These milkweeds bloom from late spring to middle 
summer. 
 ©  Lee Davis USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office 
 
Other milkweeds in Texas, such as  Asclepias 
oenotheroides , Asclepias incarnata,  Asclepias 
viridiflora  have similar growth habits and flowers, 
but do not have alternate leaves. 
 
Distribution 
Known from Nebraska to Ohio and Texas to Florida.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : In Texas, this species appears to prefer 
loamy, moist soils, but is found on virtually all soil 
types, except for deep sands and very wet soils.  It is 
quite common on blackland clay.  Because livestock 
avoids the plants, they tend to become more prevalent 
in some overgrazed pastures .  These plants are quite 
common along roadsides. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources

Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Davis, L. 2000.  Texas plant fact sheet:  Asclepias 
viridis.   USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical 
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
Smith, R.A., P. Scharko, D. Bolin, & C.B. Hong 
2000.   Intoxication of sheep exposed to Ozark 
milkweed (Asclepias viridis Walter) .  Veterinary and 
Human Toxicology 42(6).   Abstract accessed 07 June 
2001.  
<http://www.napcc.aspca.org/vhtox/dec00/ozark.htm
> 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited 21may01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.