Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DESERT 
WHEATGRASS 
Agropyron desertorum (Fisch.  ex Link) J.A. Schultes  
Plant Symbol = AGDE2 
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
standard crested wheatgrass, 
crested wheatgrass 
 
Uses 
Fairway or crested 
wheatgrass, Agropyron 
cristatum (L.) Gaertn; 
standard, standard crested, or 
desert wheatgrass,  Agropyron 
desertorum  (Fisch. ex Link) 
J.A. Schultes; and Siberian 
wheatgrass,  Agropyron 
fragile  (Roth) Candargy are 
perennial introduced grasses 
commonly seeded in the arid 
sections of the western 
United States.  They are long-
lived, cool season, drought 
tolerant, and winter hardy 
grasses with extensive root 
systems.  
 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: 
Crested wheatgrass is 
commonly recommended for 
forage production.  It is 
palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It is a 
preferred feed for cattle, 
sheep, horses, and elk in 
spring and also in the fall if 
green-up occurs.  It is considered a desirable feed for 
deer and antelope in spring and fall, if “green-up” 
occurs.  It is not considered a desirable feed for 
cattle, sheep, horses, deer, antelope, and elk in 
summer.  In spring, the protein levels can be as high 
as 18 percent and decreases to about 4 percent as it 
matures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain high 
throughout the active growth period.  It is commonly 
utilized for winter forage by cattle and horses, but  protein supplements are required to ensure good 
animal health.  It is noted for its ability to withstand  
 
very heavy grazing pressure (65-70 percent 
utilization) once stands are established.  Crested 
wheatgrasses are good forage producers in the areas 
where best adapted.  Crested wheatgrasses are 
generally not recommended above 12-14 inches of 
precipitation because better forage species 
alternatives are available.  Crested wheatgrass stands 
generally produce from 1.5 to 2 times more than the 
native stands, generally in the bluebunch wheatgrass 
(
Pseudoroegneria spicata ) ecosystems, they replace.  
The best forage types, in order, are Siberian, 
standard, and fairway.  
Hitchcock (1950) 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Crested wheatgrasses 
are well adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils.  
They compete well with other aggressive introduced 
plants during the establishment period.  Crested 
wheatgrass is not compatible in mixes with native 
species because it is very competitive and will out-
compete slower developing native species.  Their 
drought tolerance, fibrous root systems, and good 
seedling vigor make these species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receivi ng 8 to 16 inches annual 
precipitation.  In areas above 14 inches annual 
precipitation, ‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’ may exhibit 
their rhizomatous traits and make excellent low 
maintenance lawns when broadcast seeded to 
establish thick lawns.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover, weed  control, and to stabilize 
ditch banks, dikes, pipelines, power lines, and 
roadsides.  
 
Wildlife : Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds.  Deer, antelope, and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall.  Upland and songbirds 
utilize stands for nesting.  Historically, this species 
has been planted in monocultures, which decreases 
biodiversity.  Consider diverse species mixes for 
wildlife when planting this species. 
 
Status 
This species is introduced  from Asia.  Please consult 
the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status, such 
as, state noxious status and wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Desert wheatgrass is introduced from Asia.  
Within the crested wheatgrasses, three species are 
recognized: Fairway or crested wheatgrass 
( Agropyron cristatum), standard or desert wheatgrass 
( Agropyron desertorum),  and Siberian wheatgrass 
( Agropyron fragile ).  Fairway has short-broad spikes 
that taper at the top, smaller seeds, grows shorter, and 
has finer leaves and stems th an standard wheatgrass.  
Standard has longer spikes than fairway, but vary in 
spike shape from comb-like to oblong.  Fairway and 
standard grow from 1 to 3 feet tall with seed spikes 
1.5 to 3 inches long.  Spikelets flattened, closely 
overlapping, oriented at a slight angle on the rachis.  
The lemmas are linear-lanceolate narrowing to a 
short awn.  Glumes are awl shaped and firm, and 
keeled.  Culms are erect.  Leaves are flat, smooth 
below, slightly scabrous (coarse) above and vary in 
width from 2 to 6 mm.  Siberian is very similar to 
fairway and standard, but has finer leaves and stems, 
narrower and awnless glumes and lemmas, and the 
spikelets are more ascending, giving the spike a 
narrow, oblong, sub-cylindrical shape.  Siberian is 
more drought tolerant and retains its greenness and 
palatability later into the summer than either standard 
or fairway types.  
 
Distribution 
This species is introduced into the U.S.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Crested wheatgrasses are adapted for 
non-irrigated seedings wh ere annual precipitation 
averages 8-16 inches or  more (fairway should 
average 10 inches or more ) and where the frost-free 
period is generally less than 140 days.  Standard and 
hybrid crosses are superior above 8 inches annual 
precipitation in spring  recovery and grazing 
readiness.  On droughty sites with 7-10 inches annual 
precipitation, Siberian wheatgrass may be the best 
choice, it is known to surp ass Standard and hybrid 
crosses in rate of establishment, stand persistence, 
and total forage yield on the more arid sites.  Siberian 
has been seeded in areas with as little as 5 inches of 
precipitation with some success.  
 
Crested wheatgrass should generally be seeded below 
7,000 feet elevation.  Fairway does well up to 9,000 
feet elevation.  Crested wheatgrass does well on 
shallow to deep, moderately coarse to fine textured, 
moderately well to well drained soils.  Under saline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced.  
Fairway is not well adapted to silty soils.  Siberian is 
well adapted to light-sandy, droughty soils.  All  crested wheatgrasses are cold tolerant and can 
withstand moderate period
ic flooding, not exceeding 
7-10 days in the spring.  They are very tolerant of 
fire.  They will not tolerate long periods of 
inundation-standing water, poorly drained soils, or 
excessive irrigation.  
 
Planting : Crested wheatgrass shou ld be seeded with a 
drill at a depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine 
textured soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured 
soils.  Single species seeding rates recommended for 
all crested wheatgrasses are 5-7 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) per acre or 20 to 30 PLS per square foot.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for 
Siberian wheatgrass is 6-8 pounds PLS per acre or 
24-30 PLS per square foot.  If used as a component 
of a mix, with alfalfa ( Medicago spp.), sainfoin 
( Onobrychis viciifolia ), yellow sweetclover 
( Melilotus officinalis ), cicer milkvetch (Astragalus 
cicer), or others adjust to percent of mix desired.  For 
mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the 
seeding rate should be increased to 10-12 pounds 
PLS per acre or 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  
Mulching and light irrigation on highly disturbed, 
droughty areas are beneficial  for stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and as dormant seeding in late fall on medium to 
light textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid 
September) seedings are not recommended unless 
irrigation is available. 
 
Crested and Siberian wheatgrasses establish quickly, 
with ‘Hycrest’ and ‘Vavilov’ noted for their seedling 
vigor.  They should not be seeded with native 
species, unless seeding rates are very low (< 2 
pounds per acre).  They may compliment native 
stands that are already partially established.  Under 
favorable conditions, they are good weed barriers. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stages.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce weed seed development.  Grasshoppers and 
other insects may also damage new stands and use of 
pesticides may be required. 
 
Management 
Crested wheatgrass “greens-up” in the spring about 
10 days after bluegrass species and about 2 weeks 
earlier than native wheatgrasses.  They make good 
spring growth, little summer growth, and good fall 
growth, if moisture is available.

Crested wheatgrasses have good palatability for 
livestock and some wildlife.  Livestock and wildlife 
will graze crested wheatgrass throughout the spring 
growing season until it becomes too coarse, and again 
in fall if regrowth occurs.  Established stands can 
withstand very heavy grazing.  
 
New stands of crested wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they are firmly established and have 
started to produce seed heads.  Six inches of new 
growth should be attained in spring before grazing is 
allowed in established stands.  Three inches of 
stubble should remain at the end of the grazing 
season to maintain the long-term health of the plant.  
In addition, leaving three inches or more stubble will 
result in a 10 - 14 day earlier growth period or 
“green-up” in spring.   
 
Crested wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants 
requiring little additional treatment or care.  
However, spring/fall deferment or grazing rotations is 
recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  
 
Crested wheatgrass is competitive with weedy 
species, but can be crowded out by some aggressive 
introduced weedy species and native woody species.  
 
Crested wheatgrass can be used for hay production 
and will make nutritious feed, but is more suited to 
pasture use.  Light infrequent applications of nitrogen 
(25 pounds/acre) and light irrigation will increase 
total biomass production and lengthen the growing 
period.  Re-growth of crested wheatgrasses is slow. 
 
Environmental Concerns: Crested wheatgrasses are 
introduced, long-lived, and sp read primarily via seed.  
Spread of rhizomatous varie ties is very slow in the 
case of the ‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’.  They are not 
considered "weedy" or invasive species.  Most 
seedings do not spread beyond original plantings.  
They will cross with each othe r, but do not cross with 
native species.  
 
Crested wheatgrasses resist cheatgrass competition 
better than most native species, because it germinates 
earlier and grows more rapidly at colder 
temperatures.  This has an important competitive 
advantage when dealing with winter annual species, 
such as cheatgrass.  
 
Full, properly managed stands of crested wheatgrass 
generally withstand encroachment by native grasses 
and forbs.  When inter-seeded into native stands, 
crested wheatgrass commonly co-exists with native 
grasses, forbs, and shrubs.  Some native shrubs, such  as big sagebrush (
Artemisia tridentata ) and 
rabbitbrush ( Chrysothamnus  spp. and Ericameria  
spp.), often invade crested wheatgrass stands, 
especially if native seed sources are nearby. 
 
Due to commonly being planted in monoculture 
(single species) stands in th e past, some feel-crested 
wheatgrasses are not ecologically appropriate and 
contribute to a lack of biodiversity.  If planting this 
species, it is important to consider a diverse species 
mix to benefit many species. 
 
Seed production 
Seed production of crested wheatgrasses has been 
very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row 
spacing of 24 to 30 inches when irrigated and 36 
inches or greater under dryland conditions are 
recommended.  Early spring or late fall seedings are 
recommended under dryland conditions.  Early spring 
seedings are recommended under irrigated 
conditions.  When irrigated, spring seedings 
consistently yield more seed during the first year of 
seed production.  To obtain maximum seed 
production, fall plantings are not recommended. 
 
Control weeds during stand establishment and long 
term management of stand by clipping, hand rouging 
or light rates of herbicide (2,4-D or Bromoxynil 
according to label) after the five-leaf stage.  Fertilizer 
is generally not recommended during establishment.  
If soil nitrogen and phosphorus are low, an 
application of 10-15 pounds per acre nitrogen and 20-
30 pounds per acre phosphorus may be applied prior 
to planting.  Fertilize for full seed production 
following the establishment year in early fall or use a 
split application in early fall and again in early 
spring.  Very early spring application of nitrogen may 
be beneficial on sandy soils to promote vegetative 
growth.  When irrigated, apply adequate moisture for 
germination, establishment and to bring soils to field 
capacity.  Following stand establishment, fertilize 
and irrigate soon after seed harvest in fall to stimulate 
seed head primordia development.  Do not stress 
plants during re-growth and tillering in the fall, late 
boot stage, and during pollination.  Avoid irrigating 
during flowering.   
 
Seed fields are productive for four to five years.  
Average production of 200 to 300 pounds per acre 
can be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch 
plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 500 to 600 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  The seed heads do not readily shatter, but 
some shatter can be expected.  Harvesting is best 
completed by direct combining when the top of the 
seed head begins to shatter or wind-rowing at hard

dough stage and combining with pickup attachment 
in about 5 to 7 days.  Seed is generally harvested in 
mid July to mid August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be 
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by 
clicking on Plant Materials.  Foundation and 
registered seed is available through the appropriate 
state Crop Improvement Association or commercial 
sources to grow certified seed. 
 
Agropyron desertorum  is more drought tolerant than 
fairway.  It is not as drought tolerant as Siberian 
wheatgrass.  Standard crested wheatgrass is adapted 
to the northwest, intermountain, and Great Plains 
regions with at least 8 inches (‘Douglas’ requires 13-
14 inches) of annual precipitation below 6500 feet 
elevation.  It does well on shallow to deep, 
moderately coarse to fine textured, moderately well 
to well drained and weakly acidic to moderately 
alkaline soils.  Under saline conditions, vigor and 
production are reduced.  Standard crested wheatgrass 
is considered slightly more  saline tolerant and more 
productive than Fairway.  
 
ARS at the Northern Great Plains Research 
Laboratory, Mandan, North Dakota, developed 
‘Nordan’.  ARS and ND Agricultural Experiment 
Station released Nordan in  1953.  It is uniform, erect, 
with heavy seeds that are  awnless.  The seed heads 
are dense and compressed.  It has good seedling vigor 
and seed quality and long-term forage yields are 
equal to the newer varieties.  It is very palatable in 
spring and fall, but less so in summer.  Certified seed 
is available.  ARS at the Great Plains Research 
Laboratory maintains breeder and foundation seed. 
 
'Summit' was introduced from Western Siberian 
Experiment Station, Omsk, former USSR.  Canada 
Department of Agriculture released it in 1953.  It is 
considered very similar to 'Nordan'.  Certified seed is 
available.  The Canada Department of Agriculture, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, maintains breeder and 
foundation seed. 
 
Agropyron cristatum  ×  Agropyron desertorum  is a 
hybrid cross of the Fairway and Standard types, 
which results in a plant with excellent seedling vigor.  
These are considered Standard type crested 
wheatgrasses. 
 
ARS in Logan, Utah released ‘CD-II’ in 1996.  CD-II 
is a selection of ‘Hycrest’ and was released to ensure 
the genetic purity of the cross.  It has increased  growth characteristics under cold temperatures.  
Characteristics and performance are the same as 
Hycrest.  Certified seed is available.  ARS Logan, 
Utah maintains breeder and foundation seed.  
 
ARS in Logan, Utah developed ‘Hycrest’ by crossing 
Fairway and Standard type crested wheatgrasses.  
ARS, NRCS, and Utah Agricultural Experiment 
Station released it in 1984.  It is easier to establish 
than either of its parents and is more productive 
during the establishment period than either parent.  
Long-term productivity exceeds the Fairway type and 
it is equal to the Standard type.  The leaves and stems 
are coarser and it has more stems than the Fairway 
type.  Good stands have been established in the 8 
inch or greater precipitation zones.  It is best adapted 
to 5,000 to 9,000 feet elevation zones, but good 
stands are common to 2,500 feet.  It does well on 
shallow to deep, coarse to fine textured, moderately 
well to well drained soils.  Under slightly saline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced.  It is 
not adapted to excessively saline areas.  Certified 
seed is available.  ARS, Logan, Utah, maintains 
breeder and foundation seed. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.  
Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Harrison, R.D., N.J. Chatterton, R.J. Page, M. Curto, 
K.H. Asay, K.B. Jensen, & W.H. Horton 1996. 
Competition, biodiversity, invasion, and wildlife use 
of selected introduced grasses in the Columbia and 
Great Basins .  Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Research Report 155, Utah State University, Logan, 
Utah.  Version: 000418.  
<http://agx.usu.edu/agx/ResearchReports/USDAREP
ORT/toc.html>. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Tsvelev, N.N. 1983.   Grasses of the Soviet Union.  
Part I .  Oxonian Press Pvt. Ltd., New Dehli. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000418.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.

USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000418.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 Edited: 02apr02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.