Plant Guide
MUHLENBERG 
MAIDENCANE 
Amphicarpum 
muehlenbergianum   
Plant Symbol = AMMU2 
(Schult.) Hitchc. 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Figure  1.  Plant  Materials  Center Sta ff, Brooksville PMC, FL
 
 
Alternate Names 
blue maidencane,  Amphicarpum muhlenbergianum , 
AMFL2  Amphicarpum floridanum  Chapm. , 
goobergrass  
Uses  
Forage and Wildlife Use : Blue maidencane is  very 
palatable forage that produces high yield s in pure 
stands in flatwood and forested areas with up to 50 
percent shade.  It can be used  successfully in 
silvopastur e systems and , in South Florida , provides 
forage for nine  months for cattle and deer.  
Con tinuous heavy grazing of this plant will reduce 
stands  and allow the increase of less palatable species  
(increasers).  A ccording to the University of Florida, 
a verage annual forage production for blue 
maidencane is about 4000 lb/ac  with most of the 
growth  occurring during the summer months . 
Erosion Control :  Blue maidencane is  a facultative 
wetland species.  It most often occurs in wetlands and 
can be used in freshwater wetland restoration sites 
and constructed wetlands for wastewater 
management.  Although blue  maidencane prefers  soils that are wet for part of the year, it will no
t grow 
in deep, stagnant water.  
Because it spreads rapidly from an extensive network 
of rhizomes, blue  maidencane is an excellent 
candidate for erosion control a nd maintenance of 
wa ter quality.  Mechanized harvesting and 
propagation can be used for plant increase and 
establishment.   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) . 
Description  
General : Blue maidencane is a native, warm season 
perennial  grass with an extensive rhizom e system.  
Hairless blades are flat and firm, narrow, and lance -
s haped with no prominent mid ribs; 3 - to 5 -inches 
long; and  ¼ - to ½ -inches wide with  rough margins 
that  frequently become white at maturity.   Blades are 
g reenish blue in color  and  are evenly distributed on 
the culm.  Basal leaves are mostly absent.  Stems are 
thin and leafy up to 3 -ft  tall, but  usually decumbent 
(laying down) .  Nodes and internodes are glabrous to 
pubescent.  Shea ths are open, with no auricles, and 
l igules have hairs.   Two types of i nflorescences are 
produced, aerial and subterranean, but spikelets on 
aerial inflorescences are sterile.   Subterranean 
inflorescences are produced in a  1 to 5 spikelet 
panicle born at the end of the rhizomes.  Aerial s eed 
stalks are 1 - to 3 - feet tall  topped with 15 or more 
spikelets arranged in an  open panicle 2 - to 4 -inches 
long.  Aerial s pikelets are usually lacking a first 
glume, and the second glume and lemma are longer 
than the floret.  Aerial s pikelets are lance-shaped, 
about 7- mm long, while the subterranean spikelets 
are egg -shaped, white, self -pollinating, and reach to 
9 -mm long.  
Di stribution : Blue maidencane is common 
throughout Florida  and  extreme southern Georgia, 
but  is rare in Alabama, North Carolina,  and South 
Carolina.   In Florida, the d istribution is centered in 
south and central Florida and northward through the 
eastern half  of the state.   For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat : Blue maidencane usually occurs in wetlands 
(estimated probability 67% -99%)  and floodplains of 
streams and rivers , but it can occasionally found in 
upland sites .  It is  well adapted  to acid to neutral

sandy soils that are wet for part of the year.  
Associated grass species are creeping blu estem 
( Schizachyrium scoparium ) and broomsedge 
bluestem  (Andropogon virginicus ) in North and 
South Florida flatwoods, respectively.  It is 
associated with wiregrass  (Aristida stricta ) and 
switchgrass  ( Panicum virgatum ) in  intermittently 
ponded  flatwoods and bottlebrush threeawn  (Aristida 
spiciformis ), wiregrass  ( Aristida stricta ), hai ry 
blustem  ( Andropogon longiberbis ), and bluejoint 
panicum  (Panicum tenerum ) in slough s.  It is found 
in the low pinela nds in North and South Carolina and 
is reported to be tolerant of light  shade. 
 
Figure 2.  Plant Material s Center  Staff , Brooksville  PMC, FL 
Establishment  
As blue maidencane’s aboveground spikelets are 
sterile  and its underground seeds are very limited and 
difficult to dig , field plantings  are established 
vegetatively by rhizomes  or greenhouse plugs.  The 
recommended planting rate is 20  bu/ac  or plugs set 
on 18 inch centers .  A bushel of blue maidencane 
usually contains about 750, 6 - to 8 -inch long, 3 -mm 
diameter rhizome pieces.  Irrigated upland production 
fields can produce 2500 bu/acre  if hand dug.   Y ield 
will be lower  if  dug mechanic ally. 
Planting s ites can be prepared  with mechanical 
cultivation and plants can be established by sprigging 
or  broadcasting  rhizomes and disking them roughly 
4 -inches deep into the site.   Appropriate sites would 
be  mesic to wet flatwoods or wet prairie s,  at  
landscape positions above  (upland)  of those that 
normally support  common maidencane  (Panicum 
hemitomon) .  Treating  weed populations prior to 
planting will increase stand establishment success.  
Non -native or i nvasive rhizomatous species, such as 
bermud agrass (Cynodon dactylon)  or cogongrass 
(I mperata  cylindrica ) must be eradicated before 
planting.  
Fertilizer applications during the establishment phase 
are not recommended .  Since  the establishment area  may be wet
, runoff rates may be high  and additional 
fertilizer often promotes weed growth .  Field trials 
ha ve shown that nutrients  released  from vegetation 
management  practices (herbicide and/or cultivation to 
kill existing vegetation) during site preparation  
supports excellent establishment of blue maidenc ane 
without supplemental fertilizer applications.  
Management  
Established plants should require no  fertilizer or 
herbicide  applications .  After the first year of 
establishment individual plants should spread 
quickly.  On  appropriate sites, burning  and/or disk ing 
in winter or early spring  can reduce competition and 
help thicken stands . 
Blue maidencane is very nutritious and  will be grazed 
by cattle most of the year , while deer will graze 
stands in the winter and spring.   To ensure stands will 
not de crease  due to grazing pressure from livestock, 
they  must be rested a minimum of 120 days after 
grazing  to let plants  fully recover.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
No serious pests of blue maidencane have been 
reported.  
Environmental Concerns  
An environmental  assessment has been conducted for 
this species and no known serious environmental 
concerns were found.   Because the aboveground 
spikelets are sterile, movement from the  planting site 
is limited to vegetative  spread and there is little 
concern regarding in vasiveness.  It is  moderately 
competitive for limiting factors  (light and nutrients) 
but can only become established in a narrow range of 
conditions.  It has not been observed to hybridize 
outside the species.   There have been no perceivable 
negative impacts on ecosystem processes, 
allelopathic effects on other plants, changes in 
community composition, or impacts on habitat for 
wildlife or domestic animals.    
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed collection from blue maidencane i s not 
suggested because aerial spikelets are sterile and 
underground fertile spikelets are not abundant.  
Individual plants can be p ropagated in planting trays 
in a greenhouse  in large, cone-like deep plugs  that 
measure  1-inch diameter by 6 -inch deep.  T wo, 4 -
inch long rhizome pieces that have at least two nodes  
each should be planted in each cell in a growing 
medium that allow s f or ample drainage and is  kept 
moist, but not wet.  
Cuttings should be kept in the greenhouse for  at least 
three  months to allow for  ample root and shoot  
development.  Plants should be fertigated  throughout 
the n ursery production period with a 100 ppm of a 
complete balanced soluble fertilize r such as 15 -15- 15

or 0.7 lb/100 ft2 14- 14-14 slow release granular 
fertilizer.  
Cultivars,  Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Gator  Germplasm was collected in Citrus County, 
Florida not far from its northeastern border with 
Marion  County.  The collection site is  n orth of Tsala 
Apopka Lake  in the floodplain of the Withlacoochee  
River, so it  is often seasonally flooded.  Soil type at 
the colle ction site is Tavares fine sand with  0 to 5 
percent slopes.  The m ean annual precipitation  in the 
area is 53 inches;  average  maximum temperatures are 
83 °F; and average minimum temperatures are 59 °F, 
with approximately 300 frost -free days per year.  
References  
Brooksville FL, PMC.  2002.  2001   Activity Report. 
pp. 9- 10.  Available from the USDA, NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, 14119 Broad St., 
Brooksville, FL 34601.  
 
Clayton, W.D., M.S. Voronts ova, K.T.  Harman, and 
H. Williamson.  2011 .  GrassBase – the online  
world grass flora.  [Online]. Available at 
www.kew.org/data/grasses -
db/www/imp00402.htm  (accessed 29 March 
2011 ). 
 
Leithead, H.L., J.L. Yarlett, and T.N. Shiflet.  1971.  
100 native forage  grasses in 11 southern states.  
Agric. Handbook 389, Soil Conservation 
Service, USDA, Washington, D.C.  
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, and C.R. Bell.  1968.   Manual of the vascular flora for the Carolinas.  
Univ. of North Carolina, Press, Chapel Hill.  
 
Mullahey, J.J, G.W. Tanner, and S. Coates.  2009.   Range sites of Florida. Publication #CIR951, 
University of Florida, IFAS Extension, [Online]  
Available at www. edis.ifas.ufl.edu/uw126 
(accessed 29 March 2011) . 
 
USDA, NRCS.  2011.  The PLANTS Database . 
[Online] Available at  www.plants.usda.gov  (accessed 
29 March 2011). National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874- 4490 USA. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S.  1971.  Manual of the grasses of the  United States. 2
nd ed . A. Cha se (ed.) Dover 
Publications, New York.  
 
Watso n, L., and M.J. Dallwitz  1992.  Grass genera 
of the World:   Amphicarpum Kunth.  [Online].  
http://www.biologie.uni -hamburg.de/b -
online/delta/grass/www/amphicar.htm.  
(accessed  29 March 2011).  
 
Williams, M. J., and J. Grabowski.  2006  Broo ksville 
Plant Mat erials Center: developing sources of 
native wetland plants for revegetation in Florida.  
Proceedings of the 33
rd  Annual Conference on 
Ecosystems Restoration and Creation, Plant City, 
FL. [Online]. http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/flpmssy7475.pdf 
(accessed 29 March 2011).   
 
Yarlett, L. L.  1996.  Common grasses of Florida and  the Southeast.  The Florida Native Plant Society, 
Spring Hill, FL.  
 
Prepared By:   C.M. Sheahan, J.  Grabowski , and 
M.J.  Williams ; USDA-NRCS, Brooksville Plant 
Materials  Center, Brooksville, Florida.  
 
Citation:  Sheahan, C.M,  J.  Grabowski , and M.J. 
Williams . 2011. Plant guide for  Muhlenberg 
maidencane ( Amphicarpum muehlenbergianum ). 
USDA -NRCS, Brooksville Plant Materials Center. 
Brooksville, FL.   
 
Edited: 24Jan2011  mjw; 29Jul2011 jmg 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER