Plant Guide
KREMMLING 
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus osterhoutii         
M .E . Jones  
Plant Symbol = ASOS  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant 
Materials Program  
 
Figure1:  Kremmling milkvetch, Astragalus osterhoutii .  Photo USFWS, Alicia Langton July 2010. 
Alternate Names 
Osterhout’s milkvetch  
 
Warning:  Kremmling milkvetch is a selenium 
accumulator and may cause selenium poiso ning. 
 
Uses  
Kremmling milkvetch  ( Astragalus osterhoutii ) was 
discovered  at Sulphur Springs in Grand County 
Colorado  in 1905 by George Osterhout. The  flowers are white and showy attracting a variety of 
pollinators. 
Primary pollinators include  Apis 
mellifera , Bombus  sp., and Osmia  sp ( Watrous and 
Cane , 2011) .  Kremmling milkvetch  is of economic 
significance  as  an  indicator  of selenium and as a 
potentially toxic plant  in rangelands  (Brown and 
Shrift, 1982) .  The plants have no known agricultural, 
economic, or other human uses known at this time.  
 
Status  
The  US Fish and Wildlife  Service in  (1988) cited the 
Kremmling milkvetch  population size at  
approximately  25,000 to 50,000 individuals  across 6 
documented  occurrences within its 15 -mile range , 
predominately  in  Grand County, Colorado.  
Kremmling  milkvetch , because of its limited range, 
small population s ize, and numerous threats, became 
listed as “endangered” under the Endangered Species 
Act in 1989,  with a recovery priority number of  5C , 
indicating  a high degree of threat and low recovery 
potential,  with conflict from development.  A 
significant part of the known range and  one  
population was lost when a new reservoir was fi lled 
on the Muddy Creek in 1995  ( Center for Plant 
Conservation, 2011).
 Recently,  a t otal estimated sum 
of  11,435  individuals  were cited from 5 of the 6 
documented  occurrences, with one of the occurrences  
not observed in over 20 years  (NatureServe,  2011). 
The Nature Serve conservation status rank, an 
international effort which rank species on their 
“global” status , denotes  Kremmling  milkvetch as 
G1/S1 - critically imperiled globally and statewide, 
because of its extreme rarity ,  makes  it especially 
vulnerable to extinction.    
 
Description  
General :   
Pea family (Fabaceae).  Kremmling milkvetch,  is a 
relatively  tall plant  with linear leaflets and several 
bright green stems reaching  up to 40 inches  ( 100 
centimeters ) in height . There are 12 —25 white 
flowers,  1 in (2.4 cm) long, per inflorescence, each 
ultimately with  stipitate pendulous  pods,  1.8 in (4.5 
cm)  long.   Astragalus pattersonii   and A. bisulcatus   
are  similar species also  with a relatively tall growth 
form .  The  three species  may be  separated as follows 
(USFWS,  1992) : Kremmling milkvetch  is 
distinguished from  A.  pattersonii  by its long, 
pendulous fruits  that  are
 laterally compressed , from 
A.  bisulcatus  by its large, white flowers, and from 
both by its lime -green,  linear leaflets  ( US FWS,  
1989) .