SHADSCALE SALTBUSH 
Atriplex confertifolia (Torr. & 
Frém.) S. Watson  
Plant Symbol = ATCO  
 Shadscale saltbush. Gary Monroe @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.   
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  shadscale, spiny saltbush 
 
Scientific Names:  Atriplex jonesii Standl,  A. subconferta 
Rydb., A . collina Woot. & Standl.  
Uses  
Wildlife : Shadscale saltbush provides forage and cover for 
wildlife in arid environments. A small number of leaves 
are shed in the fall, but the majority of leaves remain 
during the winter providing a valuable source of food 
when little else is available (Holmgren et al. 2012). The 
fruit and l eaves are browsed by deer, pronghorn, bighorn 
sheep, rodents, jackrabbits and birds. Small mammals and 
reptiles use the spiny shrubs for cover from predators and 
the sun.   
 
Livestock: The palatability of the leaves and fruit of 
shadscale saltbush has been  rated as fair to good for cattle 
and sheep making shadscale an important part of winter 
diets on desert rangelands. However, the spiny branches 
limit utilization of shadscale saltbush.  
Restoration/reclamation : Attempts to establish shadscale 
saltbush in r estoration plantings have been largely 
unsuccessful. Arid conditions common to shadscale 
saltbush habitat make seeding efforts highly 
u npredictable. Establishment from containerized stock has 
shown the greatest success.   Ethnobotanical
: The Gosiute and Hopi used the leaves of 
shadscale saltbush to be eaten as greens or to be cooked 
with meal to make a pudding (Chamberlin, 1911; Whiting 
1939).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s c urrent 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
 
Description  
Shadscale saltbush is a low growing shrub (1 -3 ft) with 
spine tipped branches. The gray -green leaves are 
alternate, 1/4 to 1 inch long  and orbicular to ovate in 
outline with entire margins. Shadscale saltbush is 
dioecious (separate male and female plants). The 
staminate (male) flowers are yellow and gathered in 
clusters or spikes. Female flowers are arranged in a 1 to 6 
inch long panicle . Each flower is enclosed in 2 fruiting 
bracteoles fused at the base.  
 
There is considerable variation in ploidy races of 
shadscale saltbush. 2n=18, 36, 54, 72, 90 (Holmgren et al. 
2012).   
 
Distribution :  Shadscale saltbush occurs throughout 
western North  America from California and Oregon east 
to North Dakota and south to Arizona and Texas. The 
greatest concentrations of shadscale saltbush are found in 
the Great Basin and Colorado Plateau (Simonin 2001).  
 
Shadscale saltbush can be found in warm and cold desert 
shrub -steppe environments. Populations occur in low 
valleys, foothills and mesas from 2,500 to 7,500 ft 
elevation (Simonin 2001). It often grows in association 
with other halophytes including mat -atriplex, glasswort 
and greasewood, but can also be fo und in sagebrush and 
pinyon -juniper communities (McArthur and Monsen 
2004; Welsh et al. 2003).  
 
Adaptation  
Shadscale saltbush is highly drought tolerant and is 
adapted to sites receiving 6 to 12 inches annual 
precipitation. This species is tolerant of high  saline 
conditions (pH 7.5- 9.0) and is classified as a facultative 
halophyte (Branson et al. 1973). It prefers well drained 
soils but may inhabit a wide range of soil textures from 
fine to gravelly.  
 
Differences can be seen between communities of diploid 
a nd polyploid shadscale saltbush. Diploid plants are 
widely spaced and mixed with many other species. 
Polyploid stands are dense and uniform with few other 
species intermingled (Tiedemann et al. 1983). Diploids 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

also have more genetic flexibility and tend to occupy a 
broader variety of sites. Within the Great Basin diploid 
shadscale saltbush populations are most commonly found 
above the levels of Pleistocene lakes. As the water 
receded following the ice age, polyploid populations 
expanded into the newly avail able sites (Tiedemann et al. 
1983).  
Establishment  
Shadscale saltbush seed is highly dormant, largely due to 
the inhibitive role of the pericarp (hard tissue surrounding 
the seed). Warren and Kay (1983) tested germination 
following various methods of perica rp removal. Zero 
seeds germinated with intact pericarps. Germination 
increased to 21% with the pericarps mechanically 
removed.  
 
Shadscale saltbush seed (utricles). Steve Hurst @ USDA -NRCS 
PLANTS Database.  
Baskin and Baskin (2002) placed seeds in cold 
stratification and saw germination at 12° C and 16/12° C 
temperature cycles. Germination was equal in light and 
dark; however they did not report whether or not the 
pericarp had been removed, the length of the stratification 
period, or the total percent ge rmination. 
Pericarp removal is difficult and feasible methods for use 
in large scale seed processing are lacking. Fall seeding for 
natural breakdown of the pericarp is recommended, 
however germination from outdoor stratification is erratic 
(Tiedemann 1984) . 
Seed should be drill seeded to a depth of 1/4 to 1/2 inch in 
a firm, weed -free seed bed. Due to the nature of the soils 
common in shadscale saltbush habitat, soil crusting is 
common and may prevent seedlings from emerging. 
Shadscale saltbush is slow to d evelop and not competitive 
in the first years of establishment. It should be planted in 
solid stands or in alternate rows from grasses and other 
more competitive species (McArthur and Monsen 2004).  
Transplanting greenhouse grown stock (containerized or 
bar eroot) is the most successful method of establishing  shadscale saltbush. Transplants are not competitive, and a 
30 inch diameter clearing is recommended to reduce 
seedling competition (McArthur and Monsen 2004).
 
Management  
Overgrazing the plant is largely prevented by the presence 
of spiny branches. Typically only 15 to 20% of fresh 
growth is browsed by domestic sheep (Holmgren and 
Hutchings 1972). Extensive late spring and summer 
grazing however can cause reduction in stands.  
 
Shadscale saltbush is killed by fire; however the lack of 
continuous fine fuels in shadscale saltbush communities 
has historically prevented major losses. The introduction 
of invasive annuals such as cheatgrass has altered the 
plant communities and increased the risk of wild fire. 
Slow establishment and development of shrubs like 
shadscale saltbush following fires allows invasive annuals 
to thrive and inhibit shrub reestablishment.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Surveys of commercial seed lots have shown damage to 
shadscale saltbush by insects (Haws et al. 1984). Seed 
should be stored in cold conditions and treated with an 
insecticide (McArthur and Monsen 2004).  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Shadscale saltbush is native to western North America. It 
will spread under favorable conditions but does not pose 
any environmental concern to native plant communities.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed is harvested by hand or vacuum from wild native 
stands. Seed is hammermilled to remove the bracteoles 
and pericarp, but care should be taken to not damage t he 
seed. Inert matter can be removed with an air screen 
cleaner. There are approximately 60,500 seeds per pound 
(USDA 2014). Seed quality from native stands is variable 
depending on climatic conditions. Low seed fill in lots of 
shadscale saltbush is common  (McArthur and Monsen 
2004).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no releases of shadscale saltbush. Common 
seed harvested from native stands is available 
commercially.   
 
Ecotypes should be selected that are adapted to  the site 
and conditions to be planted. Diploid shadscale saltbush 
typically shows better adaptive flexibility and competitive 
ability and should be chosen for upland sites.  Polyploids 
are typically more drought tolerant and adapted to lower 
elevation ari d sites, but are less competitive with other 
species.

References 
Baskin, C. C., Baskin, J. M. 2002. Propagation protocol 
for production of container Atriplex  confertifolia  
plants. University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky. 
In: Native Plant Network. URL:  
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 22 
January 2014). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery.  
Branson, F.A., Miller, R.F and I.S. McQueen. 1976. 
Moisture relationships in twelve northern desert 
shrub communities near Grand Junction, Colorado. 
Ecology. 57(6): 1104- 1124. 
Chamberlin, R. V. 1911. The Ethno -Botany of the 
Gosiute Indians of Utah. Memoirs of the American 
Anthropological Association 2(5):331- 405. (p. 363). 
Haws, B.A., Bohart, G.E., Meadows, R.W., Coombs, E.M  and A.H. Roe. 1984. Status of information 
concerning insects associated with selected species of 
Atriplex . In: Tiedemann, A.R., McArthur, E.D., 
Stutz, H.C., Stevens, R., and K.L. Johnson, comps. 
Proceedings -Symposium on the biology of Atr iplex 
and related chenopods. Gen Tech Rep. INT -172. 
Intermountain forest and Range Experiment Station. 
Ogden, UT.  
Holmgren, N.H., Holmgren, P.K., Reveal, J.L. and  collaborators. 2012. Intermountain Flora. Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. V ol. 2, part 
A, subclasses magnoliidae -caryophyllidae. The New 
York Botanical Garden Press. New York, NY. 730p.  
Holmgren, R.C and S.S. Hutchings. 1972. Salt desert  shrub response to grazing use. In: McKell, Cyrus, M., 
Blaisdell, J.P, Goodin, J.R., eds. Wild land shrubs-
their biology and utilization. Symposium 
Proceedings. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT -1. USDA Forest 
Service, Intemountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station.  
McArthur, E.D. and S.B. Monsen. 2004. Chenopod  Shrubs. In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS -GTR -136- vol-2. p. 467- 491. 
Simonin, K.A. 2001. Atriplex confertifolia . In: Fire 
Effects Information System, [Online]. US 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  
Tiedemann, A.R. McArthur, E.D., Stutz, H.C., Stevens, 
R., a nd K.L. Johnson. 1983. Proceedings -Symposium 
on the biology of Atriplex  and related chenopods. 
General Technical Report INT -172. Intermountain 
forest and Range Experiment Station. Ogden, UT. 
309p.   [USDA NRCS] USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Service. 20 14. The PLANTS Database, version 3.5. 
URL: http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 21 Jan 2014). 
Baton Rouge (LA): National Plant Data Center.  
Warren, D.C. and B.L. Kay. 1984. Pericarp inhibition of  germination of Atriplex  confertifolia . In: Tiedemann, 
A.R. McArt hur, E.D., Stutz, H.C., Stevens, R., and 
K.L. Johnson. 1983. Proceedings -Symposium on the 
biology of Atriplex  and related chenopods. General 
Technical Report INT -172. Intermountain forest and 
Range Experiment Station. Ogden, UT. 309p.  
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S. and L.C.  Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University. Provo, UT. 912p.  
Whiting, A. F. 1939 Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Museum of  Northern Arizona Bulletin #15 (p. 73).  
 
Citation 
D. Tilley and L. St. John, L. 2013.  Plant guide for  
shadscale saltbush ( Atriplex confertifolia ). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Published February 2014 
Edited:  22Jan2014ls;27Jan2014jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.  
PLANTS is not responsible for the  content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER