Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLE MILKWEED
Asclepias cordifolia (Benth.) 
Jepson  
Plant Symbol = ASCO  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Uses 
Warning - Milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally, without sufficient preparation  
 
Ethnobotanic : People have used milkweed for fiber, 
food, and medicine all over the United States and 
southern Canada.  Fibers from the stems of milkweed 
have been identified in prehistoric textiles in the 
Pueblo region.  Tewa-speaking people of the Rio 
Grande still make string and rope from these fibers.  
At Zuni the silky seed fibers are spun on a hand-held 
wooden spindle and made into yarn and woven into 
fabric, especially for dancers.  Pueblo people ate 
green milkweed pods and uncooked roots from one 
of the species that forms fleshy tubers underground. 
 
Milkweeds (especially  Asclepias speciosa and 
Asclepias eriocarpa ) supply tough fibers for making 
cords and ropes, and for weaving a coarse cloth 
Milkweed stems were collect ed after the stalks dried 
in late fall to early winter.  The dried stalks were split 
open to release the fibers; milkweed fibers were  sometimes mixed with fibers of Indian hemp, 
Apocynum cannabinum
.  The bark is removed and the 
fibers released by first rubbing between the hands 
and then drawing the fibers over a stock.  Twisting 
the fiber opposite each  other and twining them 
together formed the cord; often this was 
accomplished by rolling the fibers on the thigh while 
twisting them together. 
 
Wildlife : Milkweed species are attractive to 
butterflies, bees, and other insects.  Accordingly, this 
is a wonderful horticultural plant for beautiful floral 
landscaping that attracts butterflies (particularly 
Monarchs) and other insects. 
 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Toxicity : The sap contains a lethal brew of 
cardenolides (heart poison), which produces vomiting 
in low doses and death in higher doses.  Chemicals 
from the milkweed plant make the monarch 
caterpillar's flesh distasteful to most animals.  At one 
time milkweed was classifi ed as a noxious weed due 
to reported toxic effects on livestock, and efforts 
were made to eradicate.   Milkweeds are thought to be 
poisonous to cows and sheep. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Milkweed Family (Asclepiadaceae).  
Asclepias  flowers look like crowns, with the corolla 
reflexed and hoods elevated above the corolla.  
Purple milkweed is a glabrous perennial with 
ascending stems.  Leaves  are opposite, oval, cordate 
and clasping at base, smooth, bluish green with 
purplish tints.  The corolla is spreading to reflexed, 
dark red-purple; the pales pinkish to purplish hoods 
are slightly elevated above  the corolla base, with no 
horns.  Fruits are large, oblong, pointed follicles 
tightly packed with flat, circular seeds. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Milkweed grows in clumps beside roadways 
and on abandoned farmlands and other open areas, 
reaching heights of 120 to 150 cm (4 to 5 ft) during 
the summer.  Milkweed species grow throughout the 
United States.  Purple m ilkweed occurs on rocky 
slopes, talus, woods, chaparral, mixed evergreen

forest, and lava flows, at elevations from 50 to 2000 
m.  Purple milkweed requires sun and porous soil, 
and can tolerate moderate amounts of water during its 
growing period. 
 
Establishment 
Seed Collection: Collect seeds after pods have 
ripened, but before they have split open.  The seeds 
are wind dispersed, so be careful when gathering to 
place in a paper or burlap bag to avoid losing them.  
 
Seeds can be directly sewn into the ground in the fall.  
The seed is very viable.  Planting seed the first fall 
after collecting seeds maximizes revegetation 
success.  It is not certain  how long you can store the 
seeds.  Cold treatment fo r three months improves 
seed germination in some  milkweed species from 
higher elevations or colder  climates (where it freezes 
in the winter).  
 
Revegetation successes with milkweeds seem to be 
improved by planting seeds directly in the ground.  
High mortality seems to occur with plants in pots and 
Asclepias  species don't over-winter well in pots.  
Once young plants are potted, they often don't re-
emerge in the spring.  Milkweed plants naturally die 
back in winter, but will re-sprout during the next 
growing season.  However, those planted in pots will 
not resprout. 
 
Whole Plant Collections : For milkweed species with 
rhizomes, propagation by cuttings of the tuberous 
rhizome is also easy and reliable.  The cuttings 
should be made when the plant is dormant.  Each 
piece of the rhizome should have at least one bud 
(they are about two inches apart).  Timing of 
propagation is important.  Harvest or divide plants 
and move them in October at the beginning of the 
rainy season.  Get the plants in the ground by late fall 
so they can develop enough root growth to survive 
the winter.  Irrigation the first year will improve 
survival, and by the second  year the root system 
should be well enough established so plants will 
survive on their own. 
 
Both seedlings and cuttings will usually bloom in 
their second year, although cuttings will occasionally 
bloom during their first year (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Management 
When used for fiber, milkweed is collected in the 
autumn after the leaves have begun to senesce or dry 
up.  Plants grow in places  that have been disturbed 
such as road grading and construction sites, logging 
landing fills, etc.  Pete Bu nting (per comm 2-9-1999)  
says, "In the fall when the milkweed has dried I  check to see if they will break off at the ground line.  
The plants are usually a yellow tan to gray depending 
on how long they have dried.  I like the gray for 
softer string but the fibers are shorter.  The tan stalks 
have longer fibers but are also stiff and hard to work 
but very long.  I break off as many of the plants as I 
can gather as they are going to re-sprout in the spring.  
I try and let them dry some more.  Then I process 
them.  I have used plants that have over-wintered 
under snow and they were fine but had soft, short 
fiber.  After 2 winters they are usually no good but 
you have another year's stalks to pick by then."  The 
dried stalks are then split open and the fibers are 
twisted into string. 
 
Vast quantities of fiber plants are required for the 
making of nets, regalia, and cordage by California 
Indians.  Blackburn and Anderson (1993) quote Craig 
Bates of the Yosemite Museum that it takes 
approximately five stalks of milkweed or Indian 
hemp to manufacture one foot of cordage.  A Sierra 
Miwok feather skirt or cape contain about 100 feet of 
cordage made from approximately 500 plant stalks, 
while a deer net 40 feet in length (Barrett and Gifford 
1933:178) contained some 7,000 feet of cordage, 
which would have required the harvesting of a 
staggering 35,000 plant stalks. 
 
Both milkweed and dogbane were burned in the fall 
by California Indian tribes 
to eliminate dead stalks 
and stimulate new growth.  Burning causes new 
growth to have taller, straighter stems (with longer 
fibers).  It also stimulates  flower and seed production. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Asclepias cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown. 
 
References 
Balls, E.K. 1962.   Early uses of California plants .  
University of California Press. 102 pp. 
 
Blackburn, T.C. & K. Anderson 1993.   Before the 
wilderness: Environmental management by Native 
Californians .  A Ballena Press Publication.  476 pp. 
 
Bouton, D.W. 1995.   The Monarch butterfly: A 
fragile tissue in the wind .  Continuum Publishers, 
Harpersville, New York. 
 
Bunting, P. Pers comm 2-8-1999.  Forester and 
member of the Sierra Native American Tribal 
Council.

Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo province .  Exploring ancient and 
enduring uses .  Museum of Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 
New Mexico.  289 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.   Wild plants 
and native peoples of the Four Corners .  Museum of 
New Mexico Press.  312 pp. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region . University of Nebraska 
Press.  125 pp. 
 
Grace, E.S. 1997.  The world of the Monarch 
butterfly .  Sierra Club Books, San Francisco, 
California. 114 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973. Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant's edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  686 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie .  An Ethnobotanical Guide. University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples .  
Nutrition, Botany and Use.  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California Press. Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, California.  878 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
Southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Powell, J.A. & C.L. Hogue 1979.   California insects.  
University of California Press. 388 pp.  
 
Schmidt, Marjorie G. 1980.   Growing California 
native plants .  University of California Press.  366 
pp. 
 
Stewart, B. 1997.  Common butterflies of California .  
West Coast Lady Press.  255 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.