Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BROOMSEDGE BLUESTEM  
Andropogon virginicus  L. 
Plant Symbol = ANVI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Louisiana State Office, 
National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing Land 
Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Broomsedge, popotillo, whiskey grass, and yellow 
bluestem.  Some botanists consider Andropogon 
glomeratus and Andropogon virginicus  as one 
species.  However, the two  grasses are distinct and 
consistent in appearance an d are currently recognized 
as separate species. 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Broomsedge bluestem is grazed readily by 
cattle in the spring and early summer shortly after 
growth starts.  The nutrition value is low except in 
early stages of growth.  It is unpalatable when 
mature. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping: Broomsedge bluestem is 
used as an ornament in landscapes.  The infloresence 
is orange in the fall and remains throughout the 
winter.  It provides color to the landscape. 
 
Wildlife : Broomsedge bluestem benefits wildlife.  
Several species of birds and mammals eat the seeds 
in the winter when the seeds of other plants are not 
available.  Several animals use the plants for cover 
and nesting sites (especially quail). 
 
 Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
Erosion Control : Broomsedge bluestem is found on 
low fertile soils and prevents erosion when other 
plants can not be found. 
 
Conservation Practices : Broomsedge bluestem, 
because of its growth  habit, potentially has 
application when established with certain 
conservation practices; however, conservation 
practice standards vary by  state.  For localized 
information, consult your local NRCS Field Office. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a native, 
warm-season, herbaceous, perennial bunch grass that 
begins its growth when the average daytime 
temperature is between 60° to 65° F.  The slender, 
erect culms are up to 4 feet tall.  The flattened 
sheaths are overlapping and with a few scattered 
hairs.  The upper part of  the plant is rounded and the 
lower part is slightly flattened and keeled.  The blade 
is  ⅛ to ¼ inch wide, 10 to 16 inches long and rough 
to the touch above.  The ligule is small and 
membranous.  The inflorescence has a panicle of two 
to four racemes about 1 inch  long.  The bases of the 
panicle branches are enclosed in an inflated, tawny 
spathe as long or longer than the spikelet.  The upper 
lemma of the sessile spikelet has a straight awn that 
is ½ inch long.  The pedicillate spikelet is absent.  
The seeds mature in 6 weeks to 2 months. 
 
Distribution 
Broomsedge bluestem is found on the edges of 
forests and disturbed areas throughout the eastern 
United States.  For current distribution, consult the

Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Broomsedge bluestem is found in all of 
Louisiana’s Major Land Resource Areas (MLRA) 
except for the Gulf Coast  Marsh (151).  The USDA 
Hardiness Zones for broomsedge bluestem is 5 to 10.  
It grows on a wide variety of soils, especially in old 
fields and other disturbed sites.  It is frequently found 
with  Andropogon glomeratus  but in higher, better-
drained sites.  However, broomsedge bluestem might 
have some allelopathic properties and may cause 
some other plants to not grow. 
 
Broomsedge bluestem is propagated from seeds or by 
plant division.  However, of the two propagation 
methods, it is best to plant broomsedge bluestem by 
seeds.  The seeds are produced 6 to 8 weeks from 
when the culms were produced. 
 
The seeds should be planted in late winter as a 
dormant seeding or when daily temperatures average 
in the low 60’s.  The seed can be broadcast and culti-
packed if the right field conditions exist.  The seeding 
rate should be 10 to 12 pure live seed pounds/acre.  
The seeds should be planted to a depth of ¼ to ¾ 
inch.  If the right field conditions do not exist or 
intensive seedbed preparation is undesirable, then 
disk the site and leave the surface as rough as 
possible.  Do not attempt to create a smooth uniform 
appearance for the seedbed.  Broadcast the seed and 
leave it undisturbed.  When seeding under minimal 
seedbed preparation, increase the seeding rate by 
50%. 
 
It is not recommended to mix broomsedge bluestem 
seeds with cool season gras s seeds.  In parts of the 
United States where cool season grasses dominate, 
the warm season grasses can be taken over because 
they develop slower than the cool season grasses.  It 
is also recommended that seed should not be moved 
more than 300 miles north, 100 miles east or west, or 
200 miles south of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
Broomsedge bluestem does not require fertilizers as 
the plants can grow in low fertility areas.  
Overgrazing and frequent haying of broomsedge 
bluestem results in an increase of this plant.  
However, if broomsedge bluestem becomes weedy, 
then burning, plowing, or mowing is recommended.  
Check with the local extension service for 
recommended herbicides.  Broomsedge bluestem has 
no known pests or problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Common seed is readily available from a number of 
growers, wholesalers, and retailers of native plants. 
 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 763-765. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Andropogon virginicus .  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/43753
000t.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman , USDA, NRCS, Louisiana 
Plant Materials Program 
Maraya Gates , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne , Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 06dec00 jsp; 10feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.