Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE SAGE 
Artemisia ludoviciana  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = ARLU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & University of California-Davis Arboretum 
 
Alternative Names 
Silver wormwood, white sagebrush, wild sage, prairie 
sage, wormwood, white mugwort, western mugwort, 
Louisiana sage, darkleaf mugwort, Mexican 
sagewort, Chihuahua sagewort, Garfield tea, lobed 
cudweed, man sage 
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic: Burning white sage and “smudge 
sticks” (the process of harvesting sage stems and 
tying the stem together into a “smudge stick”), was 
and is used for cleansing  and purification (Gilmore 
1977, Kindscher 1992).  White sage or “man sage” 
was perhaps the most important ceremonial plant of 
the Cheyenne (Hart 1976).   The sage was spread 
along the borders and on the altar in almost every 
ceremonial lodge (including the stone peoples lodge  or sweat lodge) with the flowering end toward the 
fire.  The leaves were burned as an incense to cleanse 
and drive away bad spirits, evil influences, bad  
 
dreams, bad thoughts, and sickness.  A small pinch of 
baneberry (
Actea rubra)  was often mixed with it for 
this purpose.  The smoke was used to purify people, 
spaces, implements, utensils, horses, and rifles in 
various ceremonies.  The Lakota also make bracelets 
for the Sun Dance from white sage (Rogers 1980).  
The Cheyenne use the white sage in their Sun Dance 
and Standing Against Thunder ceremonies (Hart 
1976).  Other tribes who used white sage include the 
Arapaho, Comanche, Gros Ventre, Creek, Navaho, 
Tewa, and Ute (Nickerson 1966, Carlson and Jones 
1939, Hart 1976, Thwaites 1905, Denig 1855, Elmore 
1944, Robbins et al. 1916, Chamberlin 1909). 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
CalPhotos 
 
The Dakota and other tribes used white sage tea for 
stomach troubles and many other ailments (Gilmore 
1977).  The Cheyenne used the crushed leaves as 
snuff for sinus a ttacks, nosebleeds, and headaches 
(Hart 1976).  The Crow made a salve for use on sores 
by mixing white sage with neck-muscle fat (probably 
from buffalo) (Hart 1976).   They used a strong tea as 
an astringent for eczema and as a deodorant and an 
antiperspirant for underarms  and feet.  The Kiowa 
made a bitter drink from white sage, which they used 
to reduce phlegm and to relieve a variety of lung and 
stomach complaints (Vestal and Shultes 1939).  
Usually, they chewed the stem and leaves and 
swallowed the juice. 
 
The Kiowa-Apaches used  a thin, sharp-pointed 
section of the stem as a moxa to relieve headaches or 
other pain (Jordan 1965).  The Chinese also use an 
Artemisia  species as a moxa to relieve pain such as 
arthritis.  The Kiowa also us ed an infusion of white 
sage plants for the lungs, to cut phlegm, and for 
stomach trouble.  The Mesquakie used the leaves as a 
poultice to “cure sores of long standing” (Smith 
1928).  They also made a tea of the leaves to treat 
tonsillitis and sore throat and a smudge of the leaves 
to drive away mosquitoes.  The Omaha used the 
leaves in a tea for bathing and used the powdered 
leaves to stop nosebleeds (Gilmore 1913). 
 
Both the Pawnee and the Bannock women drank 
Artemisia ludoviciana  tea during their moon time, or 
menstrual periods (Dunbar 1880).  During the time 
that women lived away from their lodges in a 
menstrual hut, they drank the bitter tea made from

either the leaves of white sage or the root of A. 
frigida (Gilmore 1930). 
 
The Blackfeet use the white sage in sweat-lodge 
rituals and as an ingredient in a stream vapor inhaled 
for respiratory problems.  The “Giver of Breath” 
heals the ability to breathe with this powerful plant 
medicine.  
 
According to Moerman (1986)  Artemisia ludoviciana 
was used for the following: 
•   The Fox used a poultice of leaves to heal old 
sores, a burning smudge to drive away 
mosquitoes and to “smoke ponies when they 
have the distemper”, and an infusion of leaves to 
heal tonsillitis and sore throats.  
•  The Omaha used the leaves as a bath for fevers 
and to prevent nosebleeds. 
•  The Paiute used a decoction of the plant as a 
soaking bath to relieve aching feet, to heal 
stomachaches, as a poultice for rheumatism or 
other aches, as a poultice or compress for 
headaches, to stop diarrhea, in a sweatbath for 
rheumatism, and to relieve the itching and 
discomfort of rashes and skin eruptions. 
•  The Shoshone took white sage for colds, coughs, 
headaches, stomachaches, as a compress for 
fevers, to stop diarrhea, as a physic, as a 
regulator of menstrual disorders, and for 
influenza. 
•  The Washoe used white sage as a cooling, 
aromatic wash for headaches, colds, and coughs. 
 
The lactone glycosides, sant onin and artemisin, are 
probably found in all  Artemisia species and account 
for their anthelmintic properties (Moore 1979).  
Thujone, a terpene-like ketone and essential oil, is 
also found in the plant and may be responsible for 
some of its medicinal effects (Kinscher 1992).  
However, it is poisonous in large doses.  The Food 
and Drug Administration classifies  Artemisia as an 
unsafe herb containing “a volatile oil which is an 
active narcotic poison” (Duke 1985). 
  
Wildlife & Livestock: Sagebrush furnishes essential 
cover for many of the smaller desert animals (Martin 
et al. 1951).  Its foliage and flower clusters constitute 
most of the diet of the sage grouse, and these parts 
together with the twigs b earing them are the primary 
source of food for antelope and mule deer.  Range 
cattle also make good use of sagebrush as forage.  
Other mammals, which browse the foliage and stems, 
include jackrabbits, black-tailed rabbits, white-tailed 
rabbits, cottontails, chipmunks, gophers, ground 
squirrels, and various species  of mice, prairie dogs,  kangaroo rats, and white-throated wood rats.  Elk and 
mountain sheep also browse on the foliage and twigs. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  White sage 
is a white-woolly, perennial herb 3-7 dm (1-2 1/4 ft) 
tall, with a strong odor of sagebrush.  The stems are 
erect and often clustered fr om creeping rhizomes.  
The leaves are alternate, entire to irregularly toothed 
or lobed, 3-11 cm (1.25-4.5 in) long, up to 1.5 cm 
(9/16 in) wide.  Flower head s are small tight greenish 
clusters among the leaves near the ends of the stems.  
White sage flowers from August through September.  
The fruits are dry, smooth, broadly cylindrical 
achenes.  There are four subspecies of  Artemisia 
ludoviciana  (Hickman 1993). 
 
Distribution 
White sage occurs from east of the Cascade 
Mountains in Washington and Oregon, in  California, 
north to  eastern Canada, south to Texas and northern 
Mexico, and in Montana, Utah, Colorado, and in the 
Great Plains states.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : White sage grows in riparian areas along 
both perennial and intermittent streams, in the 
sagebrush steppe, in both shortgrass and tallgrass 
prairies, and in semi-disturbed sites.  It grows on dry, 
sandy to rocky soils below 3500 m.   
 
Most of the wild sages are abundant in their natural 
habitats.  White sage and other  Artemisia species can 
be propagated by seeds, by division of the rootstock, 
or by cuttings taken in the early summer (Kindscher 
1992). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings:  Artemisia ludoviciana 
spreads vigorously from rhizomes.  Plants can easily 
be divided and replanted. 
•   In greenhouse conditions, it is best to dig up and 
separate plants in late fall or winter. This is the 
“quiescent” period that follows seed maturation, 
and leaves are senescent (dried up and brown 
colored).

•  Split the plant clump into pieces by hand, then 
cut the plant into sections, each with one or more 
buds. 
•  For dividing the whole plant, gently loosen the 
soil around the plant, taking care to not damage 
the roots, and then lift the plant gently with a 
pitchfork; shake off as much soil from the roots 
as possible. 
•  Divide the plant into smaller pieces by hand, 
retaining only healthy, vigorous sections, each 
with new buds.  
•  Replant the divisions as soon as possible.  It is 
important the plants don’t dry out, so if 
replanting is delayed a couple of hours, dip the 
plants briefly in water and keep them in a sealed 
plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you are 
ready to plant them. 
•  Cut back the old top-growth and replant the 
divided plant sections to the same depth as 
before. 
•  When replanting, ensure that the roots are well 
spread out in the planting hole and the plant 
firmed in.  Water newly planted divisions 
thoroughly; take care not to expose the roots by 
washing away soil when watering. 
•  Plants should be planted in the full sun in a light, 
loose soil.  Plants should be planted on 12-18” 
centers. 
•  As plants are becoming established, the rooting 
zone needs to be kept moist.  
 
Propagation by Seed : When the soil has warmed to at 
least 45ºF (7ºC) in the spring, sow hardy  Artemisia 
species where they are to flowers.  
•   Seeds can also be sown in  pots or seed trays and 
either out-planted in their final positions in late 
fall or over-wintered in a cold frame to be out-
planted in spring.  This technique is particularly 
useful in gardens with clay soil that is slow to 
warm up in spring. 
•   The two main methods of sowing outdoors are 
broadcast and drills.  For both, prepare the 
seedbed first by digging over the soil to one 
spade depth, then rake over and firm. 
•  Broadcast Sowing: Sprinkle seeds thinly and 
evenly on the surface of  the prepared seedbed 
and rake them in lightly.  Label the seedbeds, 
then water the area gently but thoroughly with a 
fine spray. 
•   Sowing in drills: Use either a trowel tip or the 
corner of a hoe, mark out shallow drill holes 3-6” 
(8-15 cm) apart, depending on the ultimate size 
of the plant.  Sow seeds thinly and evenly by 
sprinkling or placing them along each drill at the 
appropriate depth.  Carefully cover with soil and  pack firmly.  Label each row and water gently 
but thoroughly with a fine spray. 
•
  To prevent overcrowding, the seedlings usually 
need to be thinned; to minimize disturbance to a 
seedling being retained, press the soil around it 
after thinning the adjacent seedlings. 
•  Water the newly establishing seedlings fairly 
frequently until the roots have developed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Silver Bouquet’, ‘Silver Frost’, ‘Silver King’, ‘Silver 
Queen’, and ‘Valerie Finnis’  are several cultivars that 
have been used in varies planting throughout the 
range of  Artemisia  ludoviciana .  Consult your local 
nurseries to choose the right cultivar for your specific 
landscape.  ARLU is available through your regional 
native plant nursuries w ithin the species range. 
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883.  The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1:116-118. 
 
Beichel, C., E. McDonald, & T. Cole (eds.) 1993.  
Encyclopedia of gardening .  Dorling Kindersley.  
London, New York, & Stuttgart.  648 pp. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939.   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25:517-543. 
 
Chamberlin, R.V. 1909.   Some plant names of the Ute 
Indians .  American Anthropologist 11:27-40. 
 
Denig, E.T. 1855.   An account of medicine and 
surgery as it exists among the Creek Indians.   St. 
Louis Medicinal and Surgical Journal 13:312-318. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.  H ow Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Duke, J.A. 1985.   CRC handbook of medicinal herbs .  
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida. 
 
Dunbar, J.D. 1880.   The Pawnee Indians.   Magazine 
of American History 5(5):321-326. 
 
Elmore, F.H. 1944.   Ethnobotany of the Navajo .  
University of New Mexico, Monographs of the 
School of American Research.  Number 8. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1913a.   A study in the Ethnobotany of 
the Omaha Indians .  Nebraska State Historical 
Society 17:314-357.

Gilmore, M. 1913b.  Some native Nebraska plants 
with their uses by the Dakota.   Nebraska State 
Historical Society Proceedings and Collections 
17:358-370. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1913c.   The aboriginal geography of the 
Nebraska Country .  Mississippi Valley Historical 
Association Proceedings 6:317-331. 
 
Gilmore, M.R.  1977 (1919).   Uses of plants by the 
Indians of the Missouri River region .  Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln Nebraska.  
Reprint of a work first published as the 33
rd Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology.  
Washington, D.C. 
 
Grinnell,G.B. 1962.  T he Cheyenne Indians.  2 vols. 
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Hart, J. A. 1976.   Montana native plants and early 
peoples . Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.   
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.)1993.   The Jepson manual higher 
plants of California .  University of California Press.  
1400 pp. 
 
Jordan, J. A. 1965.   Ethnobotany of the Kiowa-
Apache .  Master’s Thesis, University of Oklahoma. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie .  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie .  University Press of Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1908.   The ethnology of the Gros 
Ventre .  American Museum of Natural History, 
Anthropological Papers 1:145-281. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  Great Plains Flora Association.  University Press of 
Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.  
Medicinal plants of Native 
American .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2, University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology Technical Reports, Number 19.  534 
pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New 
Mexico. 
 
Nickerson, G.S. 1966.   Some data on plains and 
great basin Indian uses of certain native plants .  
Tebiwa 9.1: 45-47. 
 
Robbins, W., J.P. Harrington, & B. Freire-Marreco 
1916.   Ethnobotany of the Tewa .  Bulletin 5.  
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American 
Ethnology.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Ojibwa Indians.  Bulletin of 
the Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee 
4(3):327-325. 
 
Thwaites, R.G. (ed.) 1904.   Original Journals of the 
Lewis and Clark Expedition .  6 Vols.  Dodd, Mead, 
and Company, New York, New York. 
 
Vestal, P.A. & R.E. Schultes 1939.   The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians .  Botanical Museum, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Warren Roberts 
Superintendent, Arboretum, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.