Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIGLEAF MAPLE 
Acer macrophyllum Pursh 
Plant Symbol = ACMA3 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Names 
Oregon maple, broad leaf maple, big-leaf maple 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The inner bark was often dried and 
ground into a powder and then used as a thickener in 
soups or mixed with cereals when mixing bread.  A 
fiber was obtained from the inner bark and used in 
making ropes, baskets, and crude dresses (Gunther 
1981).  The large leaves were used for storing food to 
help preserve them or burned in steaming pots to add 
flavor to food.   
 
An infusion of the bark was used in the treatment of 
tuberculosis (Moerman 1998).  A sticky gum 
obtained from the buds in the spring was mixed with 
oil and used as a hair tonic (Ibid.). 
 
Economic : The light brown wood is used in making 
furniture, cabinets, panelin g, musical instruments, 
and veneer.  In Washington and Oregon, it is used in 
the interior finish of buildings, for axe, and broom-
handles (Sargent 1933). 
 
Wildlife : The seeds provide fo od for squirrels, 
evening grosbeaks, chipmunks, mice, and a variety of 
birds.  Elk and deer browse  the young twigs, leaves, 
and saplings. 
 
Agroforestry : Bigleaf maple can be planted on sites 
infected with laminated rot for site rehabilitation.  It 
can also accelerate nutrient  cycling, site productivity, 
revegetate disturbed riparian areas, and contribute to 
long-term sustainability. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Saint Mary's College  
@ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Maple Family (Aceraceae).  Bigleaf maple 
is a native, long-lived medium to large sized 
deciduous tree that often grows to eighty feet tall.  
The leaves are simple, opposite, and very large 
between fifteen to thirty ce ntimeters wide and almost 
as long (Farrar 1995).  The flowers are yellow, 
fragrant, and produced  in noddling racemes 
appearing with the leaves in  April or May.  The fruit 
is paired, 2.5 - 4 centimeters long, and brown with 
stiff yellowish hair.  The bark is smooth and gray-
brown on young stems, becoming red-brown and 
deeply fissured, and broken  into scales on the surface 
(Preston 1989). 
 
Distribution : Acer macrophyllum  is distributed 
around the coast region of southeastern Alaska, on 
the West Side of the Cascades and Sierra Nevada 
from British Columbia through most of California.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation 
Acer macrophyllum  generally occurs in coarse, 
gravelly, dry to moist sites, often mixed with red 
alder, western redcedar, Douglas fir, and western 
hemlock.  It attains its best development near borders 
of foothills, low mountain streams, and in alluvial 
river bottoms.  Bigleaf maple is an extremely flood 
tolerant species. 
 
Establishment  
Propagation from Seed : Propagation by seeds is best 
when seeds are sown as soon as they are ripe in a

cold frame.  Pre-soak the stored seeds for twenty-four 
hours and then stratify for two to four months at 1-
8ºC.  The seeds can be harvested when they have 
fully developed but before they have dried and 
produced any germination inhibitors and sown 
immediately.  If the seeds are harvested too soon they 
will produce very weak plants or no plants at all 
(McMillan 1985). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Cuttings of young shoots 
should be done in June or July.  The cuttings should 
consist of two to three pairs of leaves and one pair of 
buds on the base.  Cuttings should be placed in a 
plastic bag to prevent moisture loss.  They must not 
be allowed to wilt.  Trim the cuttings below the 
lowest node to remove the lower leaves leaving three 
or four at the tip.  A rooting hormone may be applied 
to improve rooting before planting.  Insert the 
cuttings in a rooting medium up to half their length 
so the leaves do not touch each other.  The cuttings 
will root in two to three weeks, after which they can 
be potted (Heuser1997). 
 
Management 
Seedlings should be placed into individual pots when 
they are large enough to handle and grown there until 
they are twenty centimeters or taller before planting 
them into their permanent positions.  Pruning should 
be done in the winter or early spring to remove the 
weakest branches to allow for the passage of more 
light. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Readily available through native plant nurseries or 
seed vendors. 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the Northern United 
States and Canada .  Iowa State University Press, 
Ames, Iowa. 
 
Gunther, E. 1981.   Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington .  University of Washington Press. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook No. 410, 
Washington, D.C 
 
McMillan, B.P. 1985.   Hardy woody plants of North 
America .  Grower Books. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Pratt, M.B. 1922.   Shade and ornamental trees of 
California .  California State Board of Forestry, 
California. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1947.   Rocky Mountain trees.  2nd ed.  
Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1955.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite , formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore,  USDA, NRCS, National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.