Plant Guide
COLUMBIA 
NEEDLEGRASS  
Achnatherum nelsonii  (Scribn.) 
Barkworth 
Plant Symbol = ACNE9  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Columbia needlegrass. Sheri Hagwood, Bureau of Land 
Management.   
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  Subalpine needlegrass, 
western needlegrass  
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  Stipa  columbiana, S. 
nelsonii, S. occidentalis   
Uses  
Columbia needlegrass is a valuable forage source for 
livestock and wildlife in spring and early  summer. 
A nimals avoid grazing needlegrass species as the seeds 
mature and develop a sharp, pointed callus .  Once the seed drops from the plant, animals will ret
urn to grazing 
it.  T he vegetation  typically retains some green into fall 
and winter and will be grazed by deer and elk late in the 
season  (Monsen et al. 2004).   It is a significant component 
of the diet of pocket gophers and provides some cover for 
birds a nd small mammals (Zouhar, 2000).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Descript ion 
Columbia needlegrass  is a native perennial bunchgrass 
with culms typically ranging from 30 to 60 cm ( 12 to 24 
in ) tall but larger specimens approaching  3 m (6 f t)  tall 
have been documented (Welsh et al. 2003). The leaves are 
mostly basal with blades flat to rolled, 0.5- 5 mm (0.02 to 
0.2 in)  wide. The purple tinged inflorescence is a narrow 
panicle with erect or strongly ascending branches. 
Lemmas average 5 to 7 mm (0.2 to 0.3 in) long  and are 
covered with appressed hairs . The joint between the awn 
and the lemma is typically obscured by the apical hairs. 
The awn is twice geniculate (bent) and ranges 20 to 30 
mm  (0.8 to 1.2 in) in length. The callus is 0.7 to 3 mm  
(0.03 to 0.1 in) long and can be curved or acute  (Welsh et 
al. 2003).   
Distribution :    
Columbia needlegrass occurs in  western North America 
going as far east as Saskatchewan and Texas. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page  for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  This species can be fou nd at higher elevations, 
from 1,640 m (5,000 ft) to  2,400 m (8,000 ft)  in openings 
in  upper sagebrush zones,  mountain brush, pinyon- juniper 
and aspen -fir communities. It  has been known to form 
dense stands on open hillsides.  
Adaptation  
Columbia needlegrass occurs in areas receiving 380 mm 
( 15  in) or more mean annual precipitation . The species is 
adapted to w ell-drained fine textured soils  but can grow 
on a number of soil types from sandy loams to clay loams 
and even rocky, infertile soils ( Monsen et al. 2004).  It is 
m oderately  salin e tolerant. This species is a g ood native 
alternative  in areas typically seed ed to intermediate 
wheatgrass ( Thinopyrum intermedium ) and smooth brome 
( Bromus  inermis ) (Monsen  et al. 2004 ).