Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIBERIAN 
WHEATGRASS 
Agropyron fragile  (Roth) 
Candargy  
Plant Symbol = AGFR  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office 
 
 Loren St. John USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron sibericum, crested wheatgrass, Agropyron 
cristatum ssp.  fragile, Agropyron fragile  ssp. 
sibiricum  
 
Uses 
Crested or fairway wheatgrass,  Agropyron cristatum 
(L.) Gaertn; desert or standard wheatgrass, 
Agropyron desertorum  (Fisch. ex Link) J.A. Schultes; 
and Siberian wheatgrass,  Agropyron fragile (Roth) 
Candargy are perennial introduced grasses commonly 
seeded in the arid sections of the western United 
States.  They are long-liv ed, cool season, drought 
tolerant, and winter hardy grasses with extensive root 
systems.  
 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Crested wheatgrass is 
commonly recommended for forage production.  It is 
palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is 
a preferred feed for cattle, sheep, horses, and elk in 
spring and also in the fall if green-up occurs.  It is 
considered a desirable feed for deer and antelope in 
spring and fall, if “green-up” occurs.  It is not 
considered a desirable feed  for cattle, sheep, horses, 
deer, antelope, and elk in summer.  In spring, the 
protein levels can be as high as 18 percent and 
decreases to about 4 percent as it matures.  Digestible 
carbohydrates remain high throughout the active 
growth period.  It is commonly utilized for winter 
forage by cattle and horses, but protein supplements 
are required to ensure good animal health.  It is noted 
for its ability to withstand very heavy grazing 
pressure (65-70 percent utilization) once stands are 
established.  Crested wheatgrasses are good forage 
producers in the areas where best adapted.  Crested 
wheatgrasses are generally not recommended above 
12-14 inches of precipitation because better forage 
species alternatives are ava ilable.  Crested wheatgrass 
stands generally produce from 1.5 to 2 times more 
than the native stands, generally in the bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ) ecosystems, 
they replace.  The best forage types, in order, are 
Siberian, standard, and fairway.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Crested wheatgrasses 
are well adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils.  
They compete well with other aggressive introduced 
plants during the establishment period.  Crested 
wheatgrass is not compatible in mixes with native 
species because it is very competitive and will out-
compete slower developing native species.  Their 
drought tolerance, fibrous root systems, and good 
seedling vigor make these species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receivi ng 8 to 16 inches annual 
precipitation.  In areas above 14 inches annual 
precipitation, ‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’ may exhibit 
their rhizomatous traits and make excellent low 
maintenance lawns when broadcast seeded to 
establish thick lawns.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover, weed  control, and to stabilize 
ditch banks, dikes, pipelines, power lines, and 
roadsides.  
 
Wildlife : Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds.  Deer, antelope, and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall.  Upland and songbirds 
utilize stands for nesting.  Historically, this species

has been planted in monocultures, which decreases 
biodiversity. 
 
Status 
This species is introduced from Asia.  Please consult 
the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status, such 
as, state noxious status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Within the crested 
wheatgrasses, three species are currently recognized: 
Fairway or crested ( Agropyron cristatum),  standard 
or desert ( Agropyron desertorum),  and Siberian 
( Agropyron fragile ).  Fairway has short-broad spikes 
that taper at the top, smaller seeds, grows shorter, and 
has finer leaves and stems than standard.  Standard 
has longer spikes than fairway, but vary in spike 
shape from comb-like to  oblong.  Fairway and 
standard grow from 1 to 3 feet tall with seed spikes 
1.5 to 3 inches long.  Spikelets flattened, closely 
overlapping, oriented at a slight angle on the rachis.  
The lemmas are linear-lanceolate narrowing to a 
short awn.  Glumes are awl shaped and firm, and 
keeled.  Culms are erect.  Leaves are flat, smooth 
below, slightly scabrous (coarse) above and vary in 
width from 2 to 6 mm.  Siberian is very similar to 
fairway and standard, but has finer leaves and stems, 
narrower and awnless glumes and lemmas, and the 
spikelets are more ascending, giving the spike a 
narrow, oblong, sub-cylindrical shape.  Siberian is 
more drought tolerant and retains its greenness and 
palatability later into the summer than either standard 
or fairway.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Crested wheatgrasses are adapted for 
non-irrigated seedings, where annual precipitation 
averages 8-16 inches or  more (fairway should 
average 10 inches or more ) and where the frost-free 
period is generally less than 140 days.  Standard and 
hybrid crosses are superior above 8 inches annual 
precipitation in spring  recovery and grazing 
readiness.  On droughty sites with 7-10 inches annual 
precipitation, Siberian wheatgrass may be the best 
choice.  It is known to surpass standard and hybrid 
crosses in rate of establishment, stand persistence, 
and total forage yield on the more arid sites.  Siberian 
has been seeded in areas with as little as 5 inches of 
precipitation with some success.  
 
Crested wheatgrass should generally be seeded below 
7,000 feet elevation.  Fairway does well up to 9,000 
feet elevation.  Crested wheatgrass does well on 
shallow to deep, moderately coarse to fine textured, 
moderately well to well drained soils.  Under saline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced.  
Fairway is not well adapted to silty soils.  Siberian is 
well adapted to light-sandy, droughty soils.  All 
crested wheatgrasses are cold tolerant and can 
withstand moderate period ic flooding, not exceeding 
7-10 days in the spring.  They are very tolerant of 
fire.  They will not tolerate long periods of 
inundation-standing water, poorly drained soils, or 
excessive irrigation.  
 
Planting : Crested wheatgrass shou ld be seeded with a 
drill at a depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine 
textured soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured 
soils. Single species seeding rates recommended for 
all crested wheatgrasses are 5-7 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) per acre or 20 to 30 PLS per square foot.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for 
Siberian wheatgrass is 6-8 pounds PLS per acre or 
24-30 PLS per square foot.  If used as a component 
of a mix, with alfalfa ( Medicago spp.), sainfoin 
( Onobrychis viciifolia ), yellow sweetclover 
( Melilotus officinalis ), cicer milkvetch (Astragalus 
cicer), or others adjust to percent of mix desired.  For 
mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the 
seeding rate should be increased to 10-12 pounds 
PLS per acre or 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  
Mulching and light irrigation on highly disturbed, 
droughty areas are beneficial  for stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and as dormant seeding in late fall on medium to 
light textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid 
September) seedings are not recommended unless 
irrigation is available. 
 
Crested and Siberian wheatgrasses establish quickly, 
with ‘Hycrest’ and ‘Vavilov’ noted for their seedling 
vigor.  They should not be seeded with native 
species, unless seeding rates are very low (< 2 
pounds per acre).  They may compliment native 
stands that are already partially established.  Under 
favorable conditions they are good weed barriers. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce weed seed development.  Grasshoppers and 
other insects may also damage new stands and use of 
pesticides may be required.

Management 
Crested wheatgrass greens up in the spring about 10 
days after bluegrass species and about 2 weeks earlier 
than native wheatgrasses.  They make good spring 
growth, little summer growth, and good fall growth if 
moisture is available.  
 
Crested wheatgrasses have good palatability for 
livestock and some wildlife.  Livestock and wildlife 
will graze crested wheatgrass throughout the spring 
growing season until it becomes too coarse, and again 
in fall, if re-growth occurs.  Established stands can 
withstand very heavy grazing.  
 
New stands of crested wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they are firmly established and have 
started to produce seed heads.  Six inches of new 
growth should be attained in spring before grazing is 
allowed in established stands.  Three inches of 
stubble should remain at the end of the grazing 
season to maintain the long-term health of the plant.  
In addition, leaving three inches or more stubble will 
result in 10 - 14 day earlier sprouting or “green-up” 
in spring.   
 
Crested wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants 
requiring little additional treatment or care.  
However, spring/fall deferment or grazing rotation is 
recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  
 
Crested wheatgrass is competitive with weedy 
species, but can be crowded out by some aggressive 
introduced weedy species an d native woody species.  
 
Crested wheatgrass can be used for hay production 
and will make nutritious feed, but is more suited to 
pasture use.  Light infrequent applications of nitrogen 
(25 pounds/acre) and light irrigation will increase 
total biomass production and lengthen the growing 
period.  Re-growth of crested wheatgrasses is slow. 
 
Environmental Concerns: Crested wheatgrasses are 
long-lived and spread primarily via seed.  Spread of 
rhizomatous varieties is very slow in the case of the 
‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’.  They are not considered 
"weedy" or invasive species.  Most seedings do not 
spread beyond original plantings.  They will cross 
with each other, but do not cross with native species.  
 
Crested wheatgrasses resist cheatgrass competition 
better than most native species, because it germinates 
earlier and grows more rapidly at colder 
temperatures.  This has an important competitive  advantage when dealing with winter annual species, 
such as cheatgrass.  
 
Full, properly managed stands of crested wheatgrass 
generally withstand encroachment by native grasses 
and forbs.  When interseeded into native stands, 
crested wheatgrass commonly co-exists with native 
grasses, forbs, and shrubs.  Some native shrubs, such 
as big sagebrush (
Artemisia tridentata ) and 
rabbitbrush ( Chrysothamnus  spp. and Ericameria  
spp.) often invade crested wheatgrass stands, 
especially if native seed sources are nearby. 
 
Due to commonly being planted in monocultures 
(single species) stands in th e past, some feel-crested 
wheatgrasses are not ecologically appropriate.  It is 
important to consider the paragraph above and to 
plant multiple species mixes to avoid this perception. 
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of crested wheatgrasses has been 
very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row 
spacing of 24 to 30 inches when irrigated and 36 
inches or greater under dryland conditions are 
recommended.  Early spring or late fall seedings are 
recommended under dryland conditions.  Early spring 
seedings are recommended under irrigated 
conditions.  When irrigated, spring seedings 
consistently yield more seed during the first year of 
seed production.  To obtain maximum seed 
production, fall plantings are not recommended. 
 
Control weeds during stand establishment and long 
term management of stand by clipping, hand rouging 
or light rates of herbicide (2,4-D or Bromoxynil 
according to label) after the five-leaf stage.  Fertilizer 
is generally not recommended during establishment.  
If soil nitrogen and phosphorus are low, an 
application of 10-15 pounds per acre nitrogen and 20-
30 pounds per acre phosphorus may be applied prior 
to planting.  Fertilize for full seed production 
following the establishment year in early fall or use a 
split application in early fall and again in early 
spring.  Very early spring application of nitrogen may 
be beneficial on sandy soils to promote vegetative 
growth.  When irrigated, apply adequate moisture for 
germination, establishment and to bring soils to field 
capacity.  Following stand establishment, fertilize 
and irrigate soon after seed harvest in fall to stimulate 
seed head primordia development.  Do not stress 
plants during re-growth and tillering in the fall, late 
boot stage, and during pollination.  Avoid irrigating 
during flowering.   
 
Seed fields are productive for four to five years.  
Average production of 200 to 300 pounds per acre

can be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch 
plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 500 to 600 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  The seed heads do not readily shatter, but 
some shatter can be expected.  Harvesting is best 
completed by direct combining when the top of the 
seed head begins to shatter or wind-rowing at hard 
dough stage and combining with pickup attachment 
in about 5 to 7 days.  Seed is generally harvested in 
mid July to mid August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
Agropyron fragile is similar to standard crested 
wheatgrass, but is considered more drought tolerant 
than the fairway, standard, and hybrid cross types.  
‘P27’ and ‘Vavilov’ are Siberian crested 
wheatgrasses. 
 
'P27' was developed by the Aberdeen and Pullman 
Plant Materials Centers from collections originating 
from Kazakhstan and was released in 1953 by NRCS, 
Aberdeen and Pullman PMCs , and Idaho Agricultural 
Experiment Station.  Its seeds are awnless, have finer 
leaves, and retain greenness and palatability later into 
the summer than other crested wheatgrasses.  It yields 
less and has poorer seedling vigor than other crested 
wheatgrasses.  It is best adapted to 8 inches and 
above annual precipitation and is noted for tolerating 
longer drought periods once established better than 
other crested wheatgrasses.  It is well adapted to 
light-sandy, droughty soils.  Certified seed is 
available.  Aberdeen PMC maintains breeder and 
foundation seed.  
 
ARS in Logan, Utah developed ‘Vavilov’ from 
collections originating from the former USSR, 
Turkey, and P-27.  ARS and the Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station released it in 1994.  Seedling 
vigor is similar to Hycrest and is consistently better 
than P-27.  It is more droughts tolerant and better 
adapted to sandy soils than other crested wheatgrass 
types.  It is best adapted to 8 inches and above annual 
precipitation up to 7,000 f eet elevation and is noted 
for tolerating longer drought periods once established 
than other crested wheatgrasses.  It is expected that 
Vavilov will eventually replace P-27 on the 
commercial seed market.  Certified seed is available.  
ARS Logan, Utah maintains breeder and foundation 
seed. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Harrison, R.D., N.J. Chatterton, R.J. Page, M. Curto, 
K.H. Asay, K.B. Jensen, & W.H. Horton 1996. 
Competition, biodiversity, invasion, and wildlife use 
of selected introduced grasses in the Columbia and 
Great Basins . Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Research Report 155, Utah State University, Logan, 
Utah.  Version: 000418.  
<http://agx.usu.edu/agx/ResearchReports/USDAREP
ORT/toc.html>. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Tsvelev, N.N. 1983.   Grasses of the Soviet Union.  
Part I .  Oxonian Press Pvt. Ltd., New Dehli. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000418.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000418.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 Edited: 02apr02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.