Plant Guide
ANNUAL AGOSERIS 
Agoseris heterophylla (Nutt.) 
Greene  
Plant Symbol = AGHE2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Annual agoseris.  Photo by Mrs. W.D. Bransford, Lady Bird 
Johnson Wildflower Center. 
Alternate Names 
None known.  
Uses  
Information on the use of annual agoseris is limited.  It is 
used by sage grouse (Pyle, 1992) and a native bee 
( Andrena cressonii cressonii ) has been documented as 
visiting annual agoseris (Stubbs and others, 1992).   
Perennial species of Agoseris  (also referred to as  mountain dandelion)
 are known to be slightly or 
moderately grazed by cattle, horses and sheep (Forest 
Service, 1937).   
Status  
Please consu lt the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Composite Family  (Asteraceae).  Annual  
agoseris is a native,  tap -rooted,  annual forb  with milky 
juice .  Stems are erect, 5 -40  cm (1.97- 15.75 in)  tall.  
Leaves are mostly erect, margins glabrous or ciliate, 
usually oblanceolate to spatulate, 1 -25 cm  (0.39- 9.84 in) 
long  in a basal cluster .  Leaf margins are entire or lobed 
and may be glabrous or densely hairy.  Flower stalks 
elongate to 60 cm (24 in) after flowering and are glabrous 
or glabrate, or basally puberulent and apically hairy to 
tomentose, sometimes stipitate -glandular.  Flowers are 
yel low.  The seed is an achene with papp us bristles 4-9 
mm  (0.16- 0.35 in) long (Flora of North America, O nline).  
Chromosome number is 2n=18, 36 (Jepson Manual, 
O nline).   Agoseris  species are sometimes confused with 
closely  related genera, notably the dandelion ( Taraxacum) 
and smaller species of hawksbeard ( Crepis) (Forest 
Service, 1937).  
Distribution :  Annual agoseris is found from New Mexico 
north to Montana (but not in Wyoming) and westward to 
the Pacific Coast states and  British Columbia.   For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Annual agoseris is found on dry open lowlands 
and foothills with sagebrush/grass plant communities and 
mountain brush pla nt communities up to 7545 feet ( 2300 
m ) elevation (Jensen, 2007).  
Adaptation  
No general information on adaptation could be found.  
Annual agoseris is adapted to serpentine soils ( parent 
material serpentinite)  found in California  which has a 
mottled, greenish -gray color with a waxy feel to it.  These 
soils are lacking in nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium; 
have low calcium to magnesium ratio; and often have 
high concentrations of heavy metals.   No information 
could be found on minimum/maximum precipitation 
requirements, pH, etc.  for  annual agoseris.  
Establishment  
The competitive ability of annual agoseris may be limited 
since it  has small seeds, germinates slowly , and is