Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE PRICKLY POPPY  
Argemone albiflora  Hornem. 
ssp. texana  G.B. Ownbey  
Plant Symbol = ARALT  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
Alternate Names 
bluestem pricklypoppy 
 
Uses 
The seeds of the white prickly poppy are said to be an 
excellent source of food for quail and other birds 
because of their high oil  content.  Additionally, the 
oil from the white prickly poppy was used as an 
alternative fine lubricant during WW II.  Dr. 
Malcolm Gerngross, a researcher at Texas A&M 
College Station, found the oil content of white 
prickly poppy seed to be 25.8%, an amount 
comparable to that  found in soybeans. 
 
The white prickly poppy can be used as an 
ornamental.  Its showy flowers make it an interesting 
addition to a native garden. It can also be used as a 
cut flower; Ajilvsgi (1991) recommends searing the 
cut stem over an open flame immediately after 
cutting.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  White prickly poppy ( Argemone albiflora 
spp.  texana ) is an erect, prickly, deep-rooted, annual 
or biennial that contains bright yellow latex (Correl 
& Johnston, 1996).  A member of the poppy 
(papaveraceae) family, it has a showy white flower, 
with numerous yellow or reddish stamens (Ajilvsgi, 
1991).  The sepals of the white prickly poppy are 
topped with sharp prickles, and the sepals fall off as 
the flower expands (Zomlefer, 1994).   
 
The leaves also are spiny, which keeps cattle from 
eating it, since this plant is somewhat poisonous.  
Ajilvsgi (1991) notes that the leaves of the white 
prickly poppy are so prickly that cattle will not even 
eat it during severe drought periods.    
 
The seeds of a related species, rose or spiny prickly 
poppy ( Argemone sanguinea), provide food for 
mourning doves and bobwhite quail (Everitt, Drawe, 
& Lonard, 1999).  This species has white, lavender, 
or purple flowers (Jones, 1982).  It can be found in 
the southern half of Texas,  from the coast, to the far 
western border of the state (Ajilsvgi, 1991).  Jones 
(1982) notes that the two species are fairly similar, 
but that white prickly poppy has ascending prickles 
on its sepals, as opposed to the perpendicular prickles 
on the sepals of the rose prickly poppy.   
USDA NRCS Kika de la Gar za Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: It is often found in disturbed areas, along 
fence rows and railroad tracks, on hills and slopes, 
and in overgrazed pastures and old fields.  White 
prickly poppies tend to grow in colonies (Ajilvsgi, 
1991). 
 
Adaptation 
White prickly poppy can be found from northern 
Arkansas and southern Missouri to Texas (Correll & 
Johnston, 1996).  In Texas, it can be found in all 
regions except the panhandle and far western portions 
of the state (Ajilvsgi, 1991).  White prickly poppy 
tends to grow best in sandy or gravelly soils (Correll 
& Johnston, 1996), although it has been grown 
successfully in clayey soils at the Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center.

Establishment 
White prickly poppy is best grown from seed.  The 
fairly large seeds make it a good candidate for direct 
seeding methods.  White prickly poppy has been 
successfully seeded at the Plant Materials Center.  It 
can be drilled or broadcast in rows, strips, or small 
patches to create food plots for birds.  Broadcast at 3 
lbs of pure live seed per acre, or drill at 1 lb of pure 
live seed per acre.  There are approximately 157,600 
seeds per pound.  Seeds should be sown in the late 
fall. 
 
When germination was tested on two occasions at the 
Plant Materials Center, seed viability tended to vary 
widely.  In 1994, germination percentages ranging 
from 0 to 76 percent were found for 43 different 
accessions of white pric kly poppy.  Average 
germination for this study was 12 percent. 
Temperatures for th e 1994 germination tests were 10º 
C for 12 hours of darkness and 25º C for 12 hours of 
light.   
 
A 1999 study using a twelve accession composite 
seed source yielded germination ranging from 10 to 
22 percent, with an av erage germination of 17 
percent.  Temperatures for this study were 10º C for 
12 hours of darkness 25º C for 12 hours of light. 
 
Management  
Once white prickly poppy has been established, the 
plot should be disked annually to control competition 
and to replant seeds. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
For seed production purposes, seed can be harvested 
with a combine when the tip of the seed capsule 
begins to turn brown.  If you wait too long to harvest, 
seed shatter will occur.  Under dryland conditions at 
the Plant Materials Center, white prickly poppy 
produces approximately 130 lbs of seed per acre. 
 
References 
Ajilvsgi, G. 1984.   Wildflowers of Texas.   Shearer 
Publishing, Fredericksburg, Texas. 
 
Correll, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1996.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  The University of Texas at 
Dallas, Richardson, Texas. 
 
Everitt, J.H., D.L. Drawe,  & R.I. Lonard 1999.  Field 
Guide to the Broad-Leaved  Herbaceous Plants of 
South Texas: Used by Livestock and Wildlife.   Texas 
Tech University Press, Lubbock, Texas. 
 
Jones, F.B. 1982.   Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend.   
Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton, Texas. 
 
Zomlefer, W.B. 1994.   Guide to Flowering Plant 
Families.   University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:   
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 Edited: 07Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.