Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMUR MAPLE 
Acer ginnala Maxim. 
Plant Symbol = ACGI 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Name 
Siberian maple 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The young leaves were used as a tea 
substitute (Kunkel 1984).  Black, blue, and brown 
dyes were obtained and dried from the leaves. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The main ornamental value 
of Amur maple is its red fall color and fruit.  This is 
an excellent, low growing tree for small yards.  It is 
sometimes used for hedges or screens.  It has a fair 
rating for wildlife. 
 
Agroforestry : Acer ginnala  is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of 
winter storms and reduce home heating costs during 
the winter months. 
 
Status 
Introduced into the U.S.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural  Resources for this plant’s cu
rrent status, such as, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values.  As of 
2008, it was considered as potentially invasive in 
Connecticut. 
 
Description 
General : Maple family (Aceraceae).  Amur maple is 
an introduced, deciduous large  shrub or small tree.  It 
can be grown as a multistemmed clump or trained 
into a small tree with a single trunk.  It can also be 
sheared into a hedge.  The leaves are simple, 
opposite; eight to ten centimeters long, and coarsely 
toothed.  The fragrant, creamy whit flowers appear 
with the new foliage in Ap ril and May (Dirr 1997).  
The fruit samaras are 0.75 to 1 inch long, held in 
small panicles and are red to brown in color.  The 
bark is smooth and gray on young branches and 
grayish brown on older branches. 
 
from Conservation Trees and Shrubs for Montana 
USDA NRCS Montana State Office
 
Distribution: Amur maple is native to Manchuria, 
north China and Japan and is cultivated in gardens 
and parks (McMinn & Maino 1951).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Acer ginnala  grows best in moist well-drained soil, 
but can tolerate a wide variety of soils, poor soil 
fertility, and are pH adaptable.  This species displays 
excellent tolerance to dry and alkaline soils (Dirr 
1997).  It is reasonably drought tolerant.  It will 
tolerate shade, but develops a better fall color if 
grown in full sun.   Acer ginnala grows best in colder 
climates with cool summers.  It can be grown in 
hotter areas if care is take n to prevent dehydration. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Pre-soak the stored seed for 
twenty-four hours and then stratify for one to four 
months at 1-8ºC.  Seeds can be harvested when they 
are fully developed but before they have dried and 
produced any germination inhibitors.  Sow 
immediately in a seedbed or open frame.  Spring 
sown seeds may not germinate for another year.  
Transfer to a nursery bed in the first spring (Heuser 
1997).  If the seeds are harvested too soon they will 
produce very weak plants or no plants at all 
(McMillan 1985). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Cuttings of young shoots 
should be done in June or July.  The cuttings should 
consist of two to three pairs of leaves and one pair of

buds on the base.  Place cuttings in plastic, bag and 
seal to prevent moisture loss.  They must not be 
allowed to wilt.  Trim the cuttings below the lowest 
node to remove the lower leaves leaving three or four 
at the tip.  A rooting hormone may be applied to 
improve rooting before planting.  Insert the cuttings 
in the rooting medium up to half their length so the 
leaves don’t touch each other.  The cuttings should 
root in two to three weeks, after which they can be 
potted (Heuser1997). 
 
Management 
Containerized trees should not be planted in their 
permanent position until they are twenty centimeters 
or taller.  Amur maple should be pruned in the winter 
or early spring to help develop and maintain a good 
single trunk tree form.  Amur maple is usually pest 
free; however, sometimes,  spraying is necessary to 
controls aphids. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
 ‘Red Fruit’, ‘Bailey Compact’, ‘Flame’, 
‘Compactum’ and ‘Durand Dwarf’ are cultivars of 
Acer ginnala .  ‘Red Fruit’ is a collective term for 
types whose fruit color is brilliant red (Dirr 1990).  
‘Bailey Compact’ has a compact shrubby form, 
growing between eight to twelve feet high.  ‘Flame’ 
is a dense shrub or small tr ee with red fruits and fiery 
red fall color (Dirr 1990).  ‘Compactum’ is dense and 
compact and shows vigor ous growth reaching 
between five to six feet.  ‘Durand Dwarf’ is a 
shrubby type, with branches more dense than 
‘Compactum’, will grow three to five feet high. 
 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape. 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981.   Michigan 
trees .  The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
  Farrar, J.L. 1995.  
Trees of the Northern United 
States and Canada .  Iowa State University Press, 
Ames, Iowa. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
McMillan, B.P. 1985.   Hardy woody plants of North 
America .  Grower Books. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1951.  An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs . University of California Press, 
Berkeley & Los Angeles, California. 
 
Kunkel, G. 1984.   Plants for human consumption .  
Koeltz Scientific Books. 
 
Rosendahl, C.O. 1955.   Trees & shrubs of the upper 
Midwest .  University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
 
Taylor, N. 1965.  The guide to garden shrubs and 
trees .  Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 
Massachusetts. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   Conservation trees and shrubs 
for Montana .  Custer County Soil Conservation 
District.  Accessed: 10jan02. 
<http://www.mt.nrcs.usda.gov/pas/forestry/maple.ht
ml> 
 
Wyman, D. 1965.   Trees for American gardens .  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York  . 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite , formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore , formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 14feb 03 ahv; 24may06jsp; 080715 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.