Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DESERT FALSE INDIGO  
Amorpha fruticosa  L. 
Plant Symbol = AMFR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
River-locust, false indigo, indigobush amorpha, 
indigobush 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Resinous pustules on the plant contain 
amorpha, a contact and stomachic insecticide that 
also acts as an insect repellant (Huxley 1992).  Desert 
false indigo also contains some indigo pigment that 
can be used to make blue dye.   
 
Landscape : Amorpha fruticosa  is an exotic species 
that is often planted as an ornamental.  This shrub has 
an extensive root system  and is also fairly wind 
tolerant; it can be planted as a windbreak and also to 
prevent soil erosion (Huxley 1992).  According to 
Dayton, the early settlers used this shrub as a 
substitute for true indigo (McMinn 1939).   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Bean family (Fabaceae).  Desert false 
indigo is a native, deciduous shrub growing between 
three to ten feet high.  The leaves are four to eight 
inches long, with eleven to  twenty-five leaflets, ovate 
to oblong.  This species is highly variable as regards 
to shape of the leaf and p ubescence (The Great Plains 
Flora Association 1986).   The scented flowers are 
purplish blue with orange anthers and occur in three 
to six inch long upright spikes in June (Dirr 1997).  
The fruits are short, smooth or hairy, glandular 
legumes containing a single smooth brownish seed 
(Freeman & Schofield 1991).   
© William S. Justice Botany Department, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : Desert false indigo occurs in the 
foothills of the San Bernardino and San Jacinto 
mountains southward in the lower mountain valleys 
of San Diego county in the upper Sonoran Life Zone 
(McMinn 1939).  It extends southward to Lower 
California and eastward to Texas and the Atlantic 
Coast.  This species is al so found from Connecticut 
to Minnesota, south to Florida and Louisiana (Dirr 
1997).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.   
 
Adaptation  
Amorpha fruticosa  is commonly found on wet ground 
along rivers, streams, ponds, and ditches and 
occasionally in open wet woods (Freeman & 
Schofield 1991).  It requires well-drained soil and can 
grow in nutritionally rich soil.  This plant prefers 
acid, neutral or basic soils.  It is adaptable to infertile, 
dry and sandy soils.  Once planted, it remains for life 
(Dirr 1997).  Utilize in dry soil and full sun where 
precious few plants will prosper.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Amorpha fruticosa  seeds 
should be presoaked for twelve hours in warm water 
and sown in the early spring in a greenhouse.  The 
seeds normally germinate at 20ºC in one to two 
months.  When the seedlings are large enough to 
handle place them into indivi dual pots and grow them 
in the greenhouse for their first winter.  Plant them in 
their permanent position in the late spring or early 
summer.   
 
Management 
Desert false indigo has a symbiotic relationship with 
certain soil bacteria.  These bacteria form nodules on 
the roots and fix atmospheric nitrogen.  The growing

plant utilizes some of this nitrogen but other plants 
growing nearby can also use some (Huxley 1992).   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Materials are available through native plant seed 
sources within its range.   
 
References 
Abrams, L. 1944.   Illustrated flora of the Pacific 
States .  Vol II.  Stanford Univ ersity Press, Stanford, 
California. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Freeman, C.C. & E.K. Schofield 1991.   Roadside 
wildflowers of the Southern Great Plains .  University 
Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Genders, R. 1994.   Scented flora of the world.  
Robert Hale, London. 
 
Hylander, C.J. 1954.   The MacMillan wildlower 
book .  The MacMillan Company, New York, New 
York. 
 
Huxley, A.1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillian Press, New York, New York. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustarted manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Sheat, W.G. 1948.   Propagation of trees, shrubs and 
conifers.  MacMillan & Company. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 05apr02 ahv;  25feb03 ahv 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.