Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CRESTED 
WHEATGRASS 
Agropyron cristatum  (L.) 
Gaertn. 
Plant Symbol = AGCR 
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
fairway wheatgrass, fairway crested wheatgrass 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Crested wheatgrass is a 
perennial, introduced grass commonly seeded in the 
arid sections of the western United States.  Crested 
wheatgrass is commonly recommended for forage 
production.  It is palatable to all classes of livestock 
and wildlife.  It is a preferred feed for cattle, sheep, 
horses, and elk in spring and also in the fall, if 
additional growth occurs.  It is considered a desirable 
feed for deer and antelope in spring and fall, if 
additional growth occurs.  It is not considered a 
desirable feed for cattle, sheep, horses, deer,  antelope, and elk in the summer.  In spring, the 
protein levels can be as high as 18 percent and 
decrease to about 4 percent as it matures.  Digestible  
carbohydrates remain high throughout the active 
growth period.  It is commonly utilized for winter 
forage by cattle and horses, but protein supplements 
are required to ensure good animal health.  It is noted 
for its ability to withstand very heavy grazing 
pressure (65-70 percent utilization), once stands are 
established.  Crested wheatgrass is a good forage 
producer in the areas where best adapted.  Crested 
wheatgrass is generally not recommended above 12-
14 inches of precipitation, because better, alternative 
forage species are available.  Crested wheatgrass 
stands generally produce from 1.5 to 2 times more 
than native grass stands, generally in the bluebunch 
wheatgrass (
Pseudoroegneria spicata ) ecosystems.  
The best forage types, in order, are Siberian, desert, 
and Fairway.  
  Jeanne M. Janish Cronquist et al. (1977) ©  New York Botanical Garden 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Crested wheatgrass is 
well adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils.  It 
competes well with other aggressive introduced 
plants during the establishment period.  Crested 
wheatgrass is not compatible in mixes with native 
species, because it is very competitive and will out-
compete slower developing native species.  Their 
drought tolerance, fibrous root systems, and good 
seedling vigor make these species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receivi ng 8 to 16 inches annual 
precipitation.  In areas above 14 inches annual 
precipitation, ‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’ may exhibit 
their rhizomatous traits and make excellent low 
maintenance lawns when broadcast seeded to 
establish thick lawns.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover, weed  control and to stabilize 
ditch banks, dikes, pipelines, power lines, and 
roadsides.  
 
Wildlife : Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds.  Deer, antelope, and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall.  Upland and songbirds 
utilize stands for nesting.  Where it is planted as a 
monoculture, the resulting biodiversity is lower than 
that found in a diverse plant community. 
 
Status 
This is a species introduced from Asia.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s

current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a long-lived, 
cool season, drought tolerant, introduced, and winter 
hardy grass with an extensive root system.  Related 
species include the follo wing: Desert wheatgrass 
( Agropyron desertorum ) and Siberian wheatgrass 
( Agropyron fragile ). 
 
Spike 2 to 7 cm long.  The spikelets more widely 
spreading with the glumes somewhat contoured, 
gradually tapering into awns 2 to 5 mm long.  
Fairway or crested wheatgrass has short-broad spikes 
that taper at the top, smaller seeds, grows shorter, and 
has finer leaves and stems than desert wheatgrass.   
Desert wheatgrass has longer spikes than fairway, but 
vary in spike shape from comb-like to oblong.  
Fairway and desert grow from 1 to 3 feet tall with 
seed spikes 1.5 to 3 inch es long.  Spikelets are 
flattened, closely overlapping, oriented at a slight 
angle on the rachis.  The  lemmas are linear-lanceolate 
narrowing to a short awn.  Glumes are awl shaped 
and firm, and keeled.  Culms are erect.  Leaves are 
flat, smooth below, slightly scabrous (coarse) above 
and vary in width from 2 to 6 mm.  Siberian is very 
similar to fairway and desert, but has finer leaves and 
stems, narrower and awnless glumes and lemmas, 
and the spikelets are more ascending, which gives the 
spike a narrow, oblong, sub-cylindrical shape.  
Siberian is more droughts tolerant and retains its 
greenness and palatability later into the summer than 
either desert or fairway.  
 
Distribution 
This species was introduced from Asia and is 
naturalized from the Pacifi c coast to New York.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Crested wheatgrass should be  seeded with a drill at a 
depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine textured 
soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured soils.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for crested 
wheatgrass and its close relatives are 5-7 pounds Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 20 to 30 PLS per square 
foot.  Single species seeding rates recommended for 
Siberian wheatgrass is 6-8 pounds PLS per acre or 
24-30 PLS per square foot.  If used as a component 
of a mix, with alfalfa ( Medicago spp.), sainfoin 
( Onobrychis viciifolia ), yellow sweetclover 
( Melilotus officinalis ), cicer milkvetch (Astragalus 
cicer), or others adjust to percent of mix desired.  For 
mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the  seeding rate should be increased to 10-12 pounds 
PLS per acre or 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  
Mulching and light irrigation on highly disturbed, 
droughty areas are beneficial
 for stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and as dormant seeding in late fall on medium to 
light textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid 
September) seedings are not recommended unless 
irrigation is available. 
 
Crested and Siberian wheatgrasses establish quickly, 
with ‘Hycrest’ and ‘Vavilov’ noted for their seedling 
vigor.  They should not be seeded with native 
species, unless seeding rates are very low (< 2 
pounds per acre).  They may compliment native 
stands that are already partially established.  Under 
favorable conditions they are good weed barriers. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stages.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce weed seed development.  Grasshoppers and 
other insects may also damage new stands and use of 
pesticides may be required. 
 
Adaptation: Crested wheatgrass is adapted for non-
irrigated seedings, where annual precipitation 
averages 8-16 inches or  more (fairway should 
average 10 inches or more ), and where the frost-free 
period is generally less than 140 days.  Desert and 
hybrid cross are superior above 8 inches annual 
precipitation in spring  recovery and grazing 
readiness.  On droughty sites with 7-10 inches annual 
precipitation, Siberian wheatgrass may be the best 
choice.  It is known to surpass desert and hybrid cross 
in rate of establishment, stand persistence, and total 
forage yield on the more arid sites.  Siberian has been 
seeded in areas with as little as 5 inches of 
precipitation with some success.  
 
Crested wheatgrass should generally be seeded below 
7,000 feet elevation.  Fairway does well up to 9,000 
feet elevation.  Crested wheatgrass does well on 
shallow to deep, moderately course to fine textured, 
moderately well to well drained soils.  Under saline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced.  
Fairway is not well adapted to silty soils.  Siberian 
types are well adapted to light-sandy, droughty soils.  
All crested wheatgrasses are cold tolerant and can 
withstand moderate period ic flooding, not exceeding 
7-10 days in the spring.  They are very tolerant of 
fire.  They will not tolerate long periods of

inundation-standing water, poorly drained soils, or 
excessive irrigation.  
 
Management 
Crested wheatgrass produces leaves in the spring 
about 10 days after bluegrass species and about two 
weeks earlier than native wheatgrasses.  They make 
good spring growth, little summer growth and good 
fall growth if moisture is available.  
 
Crested wheatgrass has good palatability for 
livestock and some wildlife.  Livestock and wildlife 
will graze crested wheatgrass throughout the spring 
growing season until it becomes too coarse, and again 
in fall if re-growth occurs.  Established stands can 
withstand very heavy grazing.  
 
New stands of crested wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they are firmly established and have 
started to produce seed heads.  Six inches of new 
growth should be attained in spring before grazing is 
allowed in established stands.  Three inches of 
stubble should remain at the end of the grazing 
season to maintain the long-term health of the plant.  
In addition, leaving three inches or more stubble will 
result in a 10 - 14 day earlier growth period or 
“green-up” in spring.   
 
Crested wheatgrass is a low maintenance plant 
requiring little additional treatment or care.  
However, spring/fall deferment or grazing rotations 
are recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  
 
Crested wheatgrass is competitive with weedy 
species, but can be crowded out by some aggressive 
introduced weedy species an d native woody species.  
 
Crested wheatgrass can be used for hay production 
and will make nutritious feed, but is more suited to 
pasture use.  Light infrequent applications of nitrogen 
(25 pounds/acre) and light irrigation will increase 
total biomass production and lengthen the growing 
period.  Re-growth of crested wheatgrass is slow. 
 
Environmental Concerns: Crested wheatgrass is long-
lived and spreads primarily via seed.  Spread of 
rhizomatous varieties is very slow in the case of the 
‘Roadcrest’ and ‘Ephraim’.  They are not considered 
"weedy" or invasive species.  Most seedings do not 
spread beyond original plantings.  They will cross 
with each other, but do not cross with native species.  
 
Crested wheatgrass resists cheatgrass competition 
better than most native species, because it germinates 
earlier and grows more rapidly at colder  temperatures.  This has an important competitive 
advantage, when dealing with winter annual species, 
such as cheatgrass.  
 
Full, properly managed stands of crested wheatgrass 
generally exclude native grasses and forbs.  When 
inter-seeded into native stands, crested wheatgrass 
commonly co-exists with native grasses, forbs and 
shrubs.  Some native shrubs, such as big sagebrush 
and rabbitbrush, often invade crested wheatgrass 
stands, especially if native seed sources are nearby. 
 
Due to commonly being planted in monocultures 
(single species) stands in the past, some feel crested 
wheatgrass is not ecologically appropriate.  It is 
important to consider the paragraph above and to 
plant multiple species mixes to avoid this perception. 
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of crested wheatgrasses has been 
very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row 
spacing of 24 to 30 inches when irrigated and 36 
inches or greater under dryland conditions are 
recommended.  Early spring or late fall seedings are 
recommended under dryland conditions.  Early spring 
seedings are recommended under irrigated 
conditions.  When irrigated, spring seedings 
consistently yield more seed during the first year of 
seed production.  To obtain maximum seed 
production, fall plantings are not recommended. 
 
Control weeds during stand establishment and long 
term management of stand by clipping, hand rouging 
or light rates of herbicide (2,4-D or Bromoxynil 
according to label) after the five-leaf stage.  Fertilizer 
is generally not recommended during establishment.  
If soil nitrogen and phosphorus are low, an 
application of 10-15 pounds per acre nitrogen and 20-
30 pounds per acre phosphorus may be applied prior 
to planting.  Fertilize for full seed production 
following the establishment year in early fall or use a 
split application in early fall and again in early 
spring.  Very early spring application of nitrogen may 
be beneficial on sandy soils to promote vegetative 
growth.  When irrigated, apply adequate moisture for 
germination, establishment, and to bring soils to field 
capacity.  Following stand establishment, fertilize 
and irrigate soon after seed harvest in fall to stimulate 
seed head primordia development.  Do not stress 
plants during re-growth and tillering in the fall, late 
boot stage, and during pollination.  Avoid irrigating 
during flowering.   
 
Seed fields are productive for four to five years.  
Average production of 200 to 300 pounds per acre 
can be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch

plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 500 to 600 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  The seed heads do not readily shatter, but 
some shatter can be expected.  Harvesting is best 
completed by direct combining when the top of the 
seed head begins to shatter or wind-rowing at hard 
dough stage and combining with pickup attachment 
in about 5 to 7 days.  Seed is generally harvested in 
mid July to mid August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
Agropyron cristatum is not as drought tolerant as 
desert or Siberian wheatgrasses.  They are adapted to 
the northwest, intermountain, and Great Plains 
regions with at least 10 inches of annual 
precipitation.  They do well on shallow to deep, 
moderately coarse to fine textured, moderately well 
to well drained and weakly acidic to moderately 
alkaline (saline and sodic) soils.  Under alkaline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced. The 
Fairway type was first recognized in 1950 as being 
different than other crested types.  Fairway  is shorter, 
denser, finer stemmed, and less productive than 
desert wheatgrass at lower elevations and may exceed 
desert wheatgrass production at higher elevations.  
Cultivars include the following: ‘Douglas’, 'Ephraim', 
'Parkway', ‘Roadcrest’, and 'Ruff'. 
 
'Douglas' was developed by ARS in Logan, Utah and 
released in 1994 in cooperation with the Utah 
Agricultural Experiment Station and NRCS.  The 
breeding populations were derived from accessions 
originating in the former USSR, Iran, and Turkey.  
One accession was characterized with very broad 
leaves and was used as the female parent in all 
crosses.  Douglas has larger seed than other crested 
wheatgrasses and has excellent seedling vigor.  It 
produces less forage than other cultivars, but is 
leafier and remains green longer into the growing 
season suggesting improved forage preference and 
improved fire resistance.   Douglas requires 13-14 
inches or more annual precipitation.  It is not 
recommended for turf applications, but may work 
very well in roadside applications.  Certified seed is 
available. ARS in Logan,  Utah maintains breeder and 
foundation seed.  
 
The Forest Service Shrub La boratory in Provo, Utah 
and Utah Division of Wildlife Resources developed 
‘Ephraim’ from an accession  originating in Turkey.  
It was released in 1983 by the developing agencies in  cooperation with NRCS and Agricultural Experiment 
Stations in Arizona, Idaho, and Utah.  It is weakly 
rhizomatous, with rhizomes being expressed at higher 
precipitation zones above 14 inches.  It is well 
adapted to disturbed areas, roadsides, and mine 
spoils.  It has been used successfully as a low 
maintenance turf.  It is not well adapted to silty soils.  
It is a good seed producer.  Certified seed is 
available. Aberdeen PM
C maintains breeder and 
foundation seed. 
 
'Parkway' was developed by the Canada Department 
of Agriculture, Research Station, and Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan and released in 1969.  It is 
recommended for hay and pasture.  It is a good seed 
producer and has good lodging resistance.  It is not 
recommended for turf applications.  Certified seed is 
available.  Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
Research Station, Swift Current, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, maintains breeder and foundation 
seed. 
 
‘Roadcrest’ was developed by ARS in Logan, Utah 
and released in 1998.  It is a long-lived perennial, and 
is significantly more rhizomatous than Ephraim, the 
only other somewhat rhizomatous crested wheatgrass 
cultivar.  Roadcrest is recommended for use along 
roadsides or similar low-maintenance turf application 
areas in 10 inch and higher rainfall areas.  Certified 
seed is available.  ARS in Logan, Utah maintains 
breeder and foundation seed.  
 
'Ruff' was developed by ARS, Lincoln, Nebraska and 
released in 1974 by ARS and the Nebraska 
Agricultural Extension Service.  It is recommended 
for a short season, spring forage crop.  It can be used 
as a low maintenance turf on roadsides, parks, and 
playgrounds in low rainfall  areas of the central Great 
Plains.  Common seed is available, but certified seed 
is not available. 
 
Agropyron desertorum  is more drought tolerant than 
crested or fairway wheatgrass.  It is not as drought 
tolerant as the Siberian type.  Desert wheatgrass is 
adapted to the Northwest, Intermountain and Great 
Plains regions with at least 8 inches (‘Douglas’ 
requires 13-14 inches) of annual precipitation below 
6500 feet elevation.  It  does well on shallow to deep, 
moderately coarse to fine textured, moderately well 
to well drained and weakly acidic to moderately 
alkaline soils.  Under saline conditions, vigor and 
production are reduced.  It is considered slightly 
more saline tolerant and more productive than 
fairway wheatgrass.

The following cultivars are desert wheatgrasses: 
'Nordan' and 'Summit'.  
 
ARS at the Northern Great Plains Research 
Laboratory, Mandan, North Dakota, developed 
‘Nordan’.  ARS and ND Agricultural Experiment 
Station released Nordan in 1953.  It is uniform, erect, 
with heavy seeds that are  awnless.  The seed heads 
are dense and compressed. It has good seedling vigor 
and seed quality and long-term forage yields are 
equal to the newer varieties.  It is very palatable in 
spring and fall, but less so in summer.  Certified seed 
is available.  ARS at the Great Plains Research 
Laboratory maintains breeder and foundation seed. 
 
'Summit' was introduced from Western Siberian 
Experiment Station, Omsk, and former USSR.  
Canada Department of Agriculture released it in 
1953.  It is considered very similar to 'Nordan'.  
Certified seed is available.  The Canada Department 
of Agriculture, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, maintains 
breeder and foundation seed. 
 
Agropyron cristatum  ×  Agropyron desertorum  is a 
hybrid cross, which results  in a plant with excellent 
seedling vigor.  The following cultivars are hybrid 
crosses and considered similar to desert wheatgrass: 
‘Hycrest’ and ‘CD-II’. 
 
 ARS in Logan, Utah released ‘CD-II’ in 1996.  CD-
II is a selection of ‘Hycrest’ and was released to 
ensure the genetic purity of the cross.  It has 
increased growth char acteristics under cold 
temperatures.  Characteris tics and performance are 
the same as Hycrest.  Cer tified seed is available.  
ARS Logan, Utah maintains breeder and foundation 
seed.  
 
ARS in Logan, Utah developed ‘Hycrest’ by crossing 
Fairway and desert wheatgrasses.  ARS, NRCS, and 
Utah Agricultural Experiment Station released it in 
1984.  It is easier to establish than either of its parents 
and is more productive during the establishment 
period than either parent.  Long-term productivity 
exceeds Fairway and it is equal to the desert 
wheatgrass.  The leaves and stems are coarser and it 
has more stems than Fairway.  Good stands have 
been established in the 8 inch or greater precipitation 
zones.  It is best adapted to 5,000 to 9,000 feet 
elevation zones, but good  stands are common to 
2,500 feet.  It does well on shallow to deep, coarse to 
fine textured, moderately well to well drained soils.  
Under slightly saline conditions, vigor and 
production are reduced.  It is not adapted to 
excessively saline areas.  Certified seed is available.   ARS, Logan, Utah, maintains breeder and foundation 
seed. 
 
Agropyron fragile
 is similar to desert wheatgrass, but 
is considered more drought tolerant than fairway, 
desert, and hybrid cross types.  ‘P27’ and ‘Vavilov’ 
are Siberian wheatgrass. 
 
'P27' was developed by the Aberdeen and Pullman 
Plant Materials Centers from collections originating 
from Kazakhstan and was released in 1953 by NRCS, 
Aberdeen and Pullman PMCs , and Idaho Agricultural 
Experiment Station.  Its seeds are awnless, have finer 
leaves, retain greenness, and retain palatability later 
into the summer than other crested or desert 
wheatgrass.  It yields less and has poorer seedling 
vigor than these two related wheatgrasses.  It is best 
adapted to 8 inches and above annual precipitation 
and is noted for tolerating longer drought periods 
once established better than other wheatgrasses.  It is 
well adapted to light-sandy, droughty soils.  Certified 
seed is available.  Aberdeen PMC maintains breeder 
and foundation seed.  
 
ARS in Logan, Utah developed ‘Vavilov’ from 
collections originating from the former USSR, 
Turkey, and P-27.  ARS and the Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station released it in 1994.  Seedling 
vigor is similar to Hycrest and is consistently better 
than P-27.  It is more droughts tolerant and better 
adapted to sandy soils than other crested 
wheatgrasses.  It is best adapted to 8 inches and 
above annual precipitation up  to 7,000 feet elevation 
and is noted for tolerating longer drought periods 
once established than other crested wheatgrasses.  It 
is expected that Vavilov  will eventually replace P-27 
on the commercial seed market.  Certified seed is 
available.  ARS Logan, Utah maintains breeder and 
foundation seed. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Harrison, R.D., N.J. Chatterton, R.J. Page, M. Curto, 
K.H. Asay, K.B. Jensen, & W.H. Horton 1996. 
Competition, biodiversity, invasion, and wildlife use 
of selected introduced grasses in the Columbia and 
Great Basins .  Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Research Report 155, Utah State University, Logan,

Utah.  Version: 000418.  
<http://agx.usu.edu/agx/ResearchReports/USDAREP
ORT/toc.html>. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1951.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Tsvelev, N.N. 1983.   Grasses of the Soviet Union.  
Part I .  Oxonian Press Pvt. Ltd., New Dehli.  
Translation of : Zlaki SSSR, Fedorov, A.A. (Ed.) 
1976.  Nauka Publishers, Leningrad Section, 
Leningrad. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000417.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000417.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho. 
 Edited: 17jan01jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.