Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREENLEAF 
MANZANITA  
Arctostaphylos patula  E. 
Greene  
Plant Symbol = ARPA6  
 
Contributed By: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden & 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Uses 
The fruits of greenleaf manzanita are utilized by bear, 
deer, other small mammals, and a wide array of birds. 
Infusions of the leaves and bark were used by some 
native Americans to treat cuts and burns.  The 
crooked wood of central  stems and lower branches 
are used in several cottage industries, including lamp 
stands and other decorative wood crafts. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Heath Family (Ericaceae).  Greenleaf 
manzanita is an erect evergreen shrub 1-2 m tall, with 
a broad, rounded crown.  It has a basal burl and 
consequently resprouts after fire.  The bark of young 
twigs is resinous to short hairy with golden glands, 
but mature bark is smooth and bright red-brown.  
Leaves have short petioles with ovate to almost round 
blades that are 2-5 cm long, 1.5-4 cm wide, bright 
yellowish green, and glabrous on both sides.  The 
flowers, which open from April to June, are arranged 
in panicles with glandular  scale-like bracts that are 3- 7 mm long.  The urn-shaped corollas are white, 
sometimes tinged with pink, and 6-8 mm long.  The  
fruits are globose, 7-11 mm in diameter, smooth and 
chestnut brown, with a mealy pulp that encloses 
several, hard-walled seeds. 
 
Hybrids between greenleaf manzanita and the 
prostrate kinnikinnick (
A. uva-ursi ) are found 
wherever the two species co me into contact.  Such 
hybrids have a spreading form, dense foliage, and 
white to pinkish flowers, which offer some promise 
as landscape ornamentals in  areas experiencing cold 
winters. 
 William R. Hewlett © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
Arctostaphylos patula  is one of the most widespread 
manzanitas, ranging throughout the mountains of 
western North America as far east as Colorado.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It inhabits well-drained, rocky slopes in 
association with coniferous forests and high elevation 
chaparral.  Its general geographic range is 
characterized by cool, relatively dry summers and 
wet winters with precipitation ranging from 50 to 80 
inches per year, partly as snow.  It prefers well-
drained, acidic soils in open  sunny sites.  Greenleaf 
manzanita has a high tolerance for cold, below-
freezing winters, but depends  partly on snow cover to 
protect dormant buds.  Occasional fires may be 
important to successful seed germination and 
establishment and to crown sprouting in senescent 
plants. 
 
Natural Establishment : Arctostaphylos patula , like 
most manzanita species, requ ires insect visitation to 
ensure seed-set.  The flowers are pollinated most 
effectively by bees that gr asp the flower and shake it 
by actively beating their wings.  This process, like 
shaking a salt and pepper co ntainer, permits efficient 
collection of the pollen, which is used for food.  
Fruits are dispersed prim arily by animals, which 
presumably aid later germination by ingesting and 
digesting the fruit and softening the outer seed coat.  
However, natural germination is sporadic except after 
fire, which cracks the hard coat of seeds that have 
accumulated in the litter layer.  Greenleaf manzanita 
prefers loose, well-drained soils and, like other 
members of the heath family (Ericaceae), has an 
obligate relationship with mycorrhizal fungi.

Seed Propagation: Propagation from seed is difficult, 
because of the thick, bony seed walls and low rates of 
germination (less than 10%) without treatment.  
However, if propagation from seed is desired, 
treatment must ensure that the seed coat is broken 
without damaging the embryo.  Individual seeds may 
be filed with a steel file, but larger quantities can be 
treated by placing them into a container of boiling 
water that is removed from the source of heat after 1-
2 minutes.  Seeds also respond well to burning, which 
is accomplished by firing a 4-inch deep layer of 
combustible leaves and twigs over a flat planted with 
seeds.  These treatments crack the seed coats but may 
reduce viability.  Treated seeds should be stratified in 
a moist mix of milled spaghnum and beach sand for 
2-8 months until they germinate.  Other techniques, 
including use of sulfuric acid to soften the seed coat, 
may enhance germination, but also requires special 
precautions against spillage and contamination. 
 
Vegetative Propagation : Vegetative propagation is 
preferred over seeds.  Greenleaf manzanita is most 
easily propagated by cutting terminal shoots that 
include 1-2 inches of the woody stem from the 
previous year.  Cuttings work best if taken between 
March and May and should be dipped in a rooting 
hormone before being placed in a moist sand-peat 
mixture.  Cuttings need to be kept moist by regular 
watering or misting until roots appear.  Once rooted, 
they should be transplanted into small containers 
using potting soil, to allow for proper root 
development.  Manzanitas generally do not transplant 
well, so they should be grown to vigorous conditions 
in one-gallon containers and then moved to a 
permanent position in the late fall or early winter.  
Relatively slow growth rates during the first few 
years can be expected.  If pl ants are used in an urban 
landscape, the use of organic-rich soils and acidified 
fertilizers is recommended. 
 
Management 
Under natural conditions, no special management is 
required to maintain established manzanitas.  Either 
scarified seeds or well-rooted  container plants may be 
used to revegetate cleared sites.  In the urban 
landscape, several horticultural techniques should be 
used to ensure healthy plants.  All manzanitas should 
be planted higher than the surrounding soil to prevent 
crown rot, which can result from excessive water and 
soil moisture, especially during the summer.  
Overhead watering should also be avoided because it 
tends to encourage fungal diseases (e.g., 
Botryosphaeria ) that cause branch die-back and leaf 
spot.  Manzanitas are also susceptible to gall- producing aphids (Tamalia
), which cause young 
leaves to curl and cease growth. 
 
Periodic watering every 4-6 weeks will keep foliage 
healthy without weakening plants.  Mulching is 
desirable to control weeds, retain soil moisture, and 
reduce the need for irrigation.  Rock mulches have 
proven more successful th an organic mulches.  
Pruning should be avoided and used only to remove 
dead wood and diseased branches. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Altura' Greenleaf Manzanita was released in 1989 by 
the NRCS Plant Materials  Center in Lockeford, 
California. This is a native, erect to semi-erect, 
evergreen shrub, 3-6 feet high and about 3-5 feet 
wide. It was collected from native plants in August 
and September of 1972 at South Lake Tahoe, 
California and was developed as a critical area 
stabilization plant for dry, rocky slopes and droughty, 
well-drained soils. It is slow to establish ground 
cover, but 3-4 year old plants provide good cover and 
erosion control. Stems root at nodes when put in 
contact with the ground by heavy snows. It seems to 
be useful for environmental enhancement and 
foundation plantings around mountain homes. It 
grows well in the Tahoe Basin, but is adapted to 
elevations down to 2000 feet where precipitation is 
adequate. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Berg, A. 1974.  Arctostaphylos Adans.  Manzanita .  
pp. 228-231.  IN C. Schopmeyer (ed.).   Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States.   Agriculture 
Handbook Number 450.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Blum, G. 19??.   Floral biology and pollination 
strategies of Arctostaphylos glauca and A. pringlei 
var. drupacea (Ericaceae) .  Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of California, Ri verside, California.  134 
p. 
 
Carlson, J. & W. Sharp 1975.   Germination of high 
elevation manazanitas .  USDA, Forest Service.  Tree 
Planters’ Notes 26:10-11, 25-26.

Griffin, J.  1966.  Notes on disjunct foothill species 
near Burney, California .  Leaflets of Western Botany 
10:296-298. 
 
Griffin, J. 1967.   Soil moisture and vegetation 
patterns in northern California forests .  USDA, 
Forest Service, Pacific So uthwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Berkeley, California.  27 p. 
 
 
 
Hanes, T. 1988.   California chaparral .  pp. 417-469.  
IN M. Barbour and J. Major.   Terrestrial vegetation 
of California .  Special Publication No. 9.  California 
Native Plant Society, Sacram ento, California.  1030 
p. 
 
Kruckeberg, A. 1982.   Gardening with native plants 
of the Pacific Northwest .  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington.  252 p. 
 
Mallory, J., W. Colwell, & W. Powell 1973 .  Soils 
and vegetation of the French Gulch Quadrangle, 
Trinity and Shasta counties, California.  Bulletin 12.  
USDA, Forest Service, Paci fic Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, California.  42 
p. 
 
Rundel, P., D. Parsons, & D. Gordon 1988.   Montane 
and subalpine vegetation of the Sierra Nevada and 
Cascade Ranges .  pp. 559-599.  IN M. Barbour & J. 
Major.   Terrestrial vegetation of California .  
California Native Plant Soci ety, Special Publication 
No. 9.  Sacramento, California.  1030 p. 
 
Sawyer, J. & D. Thornburgh 1988.   Montane and 
subalpine vegetation of the Klamath Mountains .  pp. 
699-732.  IN M. Barbour & J. Major.  Terrestrial 
vegetation of California .  California Native Plant 
Society, Special Publica tion No. 9.  Sacramento, 
California.  1030 p. 
 
Sawyer, J., D. Thornbaugh, & J. Griffin 1988.  Mixed 
evergreen forest .  pp. 359-381.  IN M. Barbour & J. 
Major.   Terrestrial vegetation of California .  
California Native Plant Soci ety, Special Publication 
No. 9.  Sacramento, California.  1030 p. 
 
Smith, N. 1995.   Manzanitas: A gardener’s guide .  
Pacific Horticulture  56(1):18-33. 
 
Sweeney, J. 1968.  Ecology of some “fire type” 
vegetations in northern California .  pp. 111-125.  IN 
Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology 
Conference , Tall Timbers Research Station, 
Tallahassee, Florida. 
 
Thorne, R. 1988.   Montane and subalpine forests of 
the Transverse and Peninsular ranges .  pp. 537-557.  
IN M. Barbour & J. Major.   Terrestrial vegetation of 
California .  California Native Plant Society, Special 
Publication No. 9.  Sacramen to, California.  1030 p. 
 
Vankat, J. 1970.  Vegetation change in Sequoia 
National Park, California .  Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of California, Davis, California.  197 p. 
 
Whittaker, R. 1960.   Vegetation of the Siskiyou 
mountains, Oregon and California .  Ecological 
Monographs 30:279-338. 
 
Whittaker, R. 1961.   Vegetation history of the Pacific 
coast states and the central significance of the 
Klamath region.  Madrono 16:5-23. 
 
Prepared By 
Dieter Wilken & Julie Burgher 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California.  Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 04dec00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 7Mar05 rln; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.