Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
OHIO BUCKEYE 
Aesculus glabra Willd. 
Plant Symbol = AEGL  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Horse chestnut, buckeye, American buckeye, fetid 
buckeye, stinking buckeye, white buckeye, Texas 
buckeye (var. arguta) 
 
Warning : Ohio buckeye is highly toxic when taken 
internally.
 
Uses 
Poisonous Plant : All parts of the plant (leaves, bark, 
fruit) are highly toxic if ingested – because of the 
glycoside aesculin, the saponin aescin, and possibly 
alkaloids.  Symptoms are muscle weakness and 
paralysis, dilated pupils, vomiting, diarrhea,  depression, paralysis, and 
stupor.  Many landowners 
have eradicated it to prevent livestock poisoning.  
Native Americans ground buck eye to use as a powder 
on ponds to stun fish.   
 
Commercial : The soft, lightwood of Ohio buckeye 
has limited commercial use as sawtimber and it is of 
little commercial importance.  It is used for making 
artificial limbs because it is  light, easily worked, and 
resists splitting; it is also used in small quantities for 
various kinds of woodenware, crates, veneer, and 
toys.  Pioneers used the wood for cabin structure and 
furniture.  
 Nobel Foundation Plant Image Gallery ©SamuelRobertsNobleFoundation
 
Ornamental : The tree is an attractive ornamental, 
best in open, natural settings or parks because of its 
broad crown.  It also is sometimes cultivated as an 
ornamental shrub. 
  
Other : Buckeye seeds have sometimes been carried 
as good-luck charms and to prevent rheumatism.  
Despite the poisonous prop erties to humans and 
livestock (below), squirrel s are known to eat the raw 
seeds.  Native Americans ate roasted seeds as a 
starchy meal.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Horsechestnut Family (Hippocastanaceae).  
Native, small trees, most less than 15 m tall (rarely to 
45 m), with a dense oval to round crown, branching 
quite low, sometimes (usually on drier sites) a 
thicket-forming shrub; twig s thick, red-brown, hairy 
when young, with large triangular leaf scars; terminal 
buds large, orangish brown with keeled scales; bark 
smooth and light gray, becoming rough and scaly.  
Leaves are deciduous, opposite, palmately 
compound, leaflets 5-7(-11), oval to obovate or 
lanceolate, 6-13 cm long with a finely toothed 
margin, emerging bright green, deepening to dark 
green, often developing yellow or orange fall color, 
emitting a strong fetid odor when crushed.  The 
leaves have a somewhat unique shape.  Flowers are 
creamy to greenish yellow, about 1-2 cm long, in 
large, showy, upright, branch ed, terminal clusters at 
ends of leafy branches, on ly those flowers near the 
base of the branches of a cluster are perfect and

fertile -- the others are staminate; petals 4; stamens 
longer than petals.  Fruits are rounded capsules about 
3 cm wide, borne on a stout stalk, with a warty or 
prickly, thick, leathery husk; seeds 1(-3) smooth, 
glossy, chestnut-brown seeds, each with a pale scar 
(the “buck's eye”).  The common name refers to its 
abundance in Ohio and the supposed likeness of the 
nut to the eye of a buck; other names are derived 
from the fetid odor of the crushed leaves, bark, 
broken twigs, and flowers.   
 
Variation within the species:   Two morphological 
segments are said to exist within the species: var. 
glabra is the northern (northwestern) segment with 5 
leaflets, var.  arguta the more southern form with 7-
11 leaflets and other minor and variable differences 
in vestiture and leaflet shape.  Var.  arguta is weakly 
differentiated and commonly not recognized (see for 
example Diggs et al. 1999). 
 
Distribution 
Primarily a species of the  east-central US.  Var. 
glabra grows from western Pennsylvania, Ohio, and 
southern Michigan west to Illinois and south to 
Tennessee, Alabama, and rarely in Georgia, 
Mississippi, and states pe ripheral to the main 
northern range.  Var.  arguta (if recognized) is native 
to upland forests of Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, 
Missouri, Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, and Nebraska.  
Ohio buckeye is planted in various localities in the 
eastern US, including localities north and east of its 
main range.  For current  distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Ohio buckeye occurs in mixed hardwood forests of 
bottom lands along river and stream banks and in 
rich, moist soils of ravines and other steep to gentle 
slopes, less commonly on drier sites mixed in oak-
hickory stands, on limestone slopes in the 
southwestern portion of the range.   
 
It is shade tolerant and often found in beech-sugar 
maple woods.  In dense stands, side competition and 
shade foster straight boles and encourage natural 
pruning of this tree, which otherwise tends to have a 
large crown that retains branches on the lower 
portions.   
 
Ohio buckeye is one of the first trees to leaf out in 
spring.  Flowering: March-May, after the leaves 
appear; fruiting: September-October.   
 
Establishment 
Seeds of Ohio buckeye ordinarily germinate in the 
spring after wintering on the ground.  Seedlings can 
grow under some shade, but the species seems to 
develop best as isolated individuals in openings along 
streambanks and on other moist sites.  Young trees 
show moderate growth rates and may begin 
producing fruit at 8 years.  Most trees live 80-100 
years.   
 
Ohio buckeye can be propagated by seed (stratify 60-
120 days at 33-41 ° F); seeds must be kept moist to 
avoid loss of viability.   
 
Management 
Leaf scorch and leaf blotch are usually the most 
serious problems of Ohio buckeye.  Leaf scorch, 
seemingly a response to heat and drought along urban 
streets, results in browning of the leaf margins.  By 
late summer to early fall the trees look unsightly and 
are often partially defoliated.  Air pollution may be 
more responsible for this problem than heat or 
drought.  The leaf blotch ( Guignardia aesculi ) begins 
as brown spots or blotches on the leaves and may 
eventually give the tree a scorched appearance.  This 
disease may slow the growth rate but does no 
permanent damage to the tree and can be controlled 
on ornamentals.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This tree is available through most local nurseries.  
Aesculus  `Autumn Splendor' is similar to wild forms 
but has glossy dark green leaves that remain in good 
condition throughout the growing season, resistant to 
leaf scorch, and develops a maroon-red fall color.  
The Eurasian native horse-chestnut ( Aesculus 
hippocastanum ) is occasionally planted as an 
ornamental shade tree, but Ohio buckeye is more 
common.  Ohio buckeye is often used as an 
understock for grafting cultivars of other species of 
Aesculus . 
 
References 
Brizicky, G.K. 1963.   The genera of Sapindales in the 
southeastern United States . J. Arnold Arb. 44:462-
501.   
 
Diggs, G.M., Jr., B.L. Lipscomb, & R.J. O’Kennon 
1999.   Shinners & Mahler’s illustrated flora of north 
central Texas .  Sida, Botanical Miscellany, No. 16.   
 
Felter, H.W. & J.U. Lloyd 2000.   King's American 
dispensatory:  Aesculus .  Scanned version.  
<http://metalab.unc.edu/herbmed/eclectic/kings/aescu
lus.html>

Hardin, J.W. 1957.  A revision of the American 
Hippocastanaceae . Brittonia 9:145-171, 173-195.   
 
Samuel Roberts Nobel Foundation 1999.   Noble 
foundation plant image gallery .  Ardmore, 
Oklahoma.  29nov2000.  
<http://www.noble.org/imagegallery/index.html> 
 
Williams, R.D. 1990.   Aesculus glabra Willd. – Ohio 
Buckeye .  Pp. 92-95, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of North America.  
Volume 2 .  Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp;07feb03ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.