Plant Guide

BOXELDER

Acer negundo L.

Plant Symbol = ACNE2 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetlands Science Institute @ PLANTS 
Alternate common names 
Ash-leaf maple, California boxelder, western 
boxelder, Manitoba maple  
Uses 
The wood of Boxelder is light, soft and weak, and of 
low commercial value. It is used for pulp and rough 
lumber, usually mixed with other bottomland species, 
and has been used for boxes and crates, low-quality 
furniture, and interior finishing. 
Boxelder produces sap high in sugar content and can 
be used to produce syrup sometimes called &#34;mountain 
molasses.&#34;  Native Americans used the cambium for 
food, boiled down the sap for syrup and candy, and 
made a tea from the inner bark to induce vomiting. 
The new branches were used to make charcoal for 
ceremonial painting.   
The trees are useful for quick growth in naturalized 
riparian plantings, but they are short-lived and 
disease-prone.  The species was once planted in the 
U.S. as a street tree and ornamental cultivars have 
been developed (including forms with red fall color, 
variously variegated leaves, and without seeds).  It is 
not now commonly planted in the U.S., where its 
removal is sometimes more of a challenge.  The 
quick growth of this species, however, and its 
tolerance to urban conditions, allows it to contribute 
to shade and rapid re-greening in disturbed city sites, 
particularly in the Great Plains and the West, because 
of its drought and cold tolerance.  Boxelder can be 
used temporarily until replaced by slower growing 
but longer lasting trees. 
Boxelder was once widely planted in shelterbelts in 
the Great Plains to reduce wind erosion and dust 
storms, but these shelterbelts have largely been 
removed.  Its fibrous root system and prolific seeding 
habit make it valuable for erosion control in some 
parts of the world.  The seeds are important winter 
food for birds and small mammals, deer browse 
young plants.   
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description  
General: Maple Family (Aceraceae): Boxelder is a 
native tree growing to 20 m  tall, with broad rounded 
crown, usually developing a shallow, fibrous root 
system; bark light gray-brown with shallow fissures, 
becoming deeply furrowed; twigs slender, shiny 
green, usually glabrous but sometimes hairy.  The 
leaves are opposite, 13-20 cm long, pinnately 
compound with 3(-5 or more) leaflets 5-10 cm long 
and 3-6 cm wide, long-pointed, coarsely toothed and 
often shallowly lobed.  The flowers are yellow-green, 
about 5 mm long, the male (staminate) flowers 
fascicled, the female (pistillate) flowers in drooping 
racemes; most trees are either male or female (the 
species is essentially dioecious), but bisexual flowers 
occur on a few trees (technically polygamo-
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

dioecious).  Fruits are winged nutlets (samaras) in a 
pair, 2.5-4 cm long, clustered on long stalks. The 
common name refers to the resemblance of leaves to 
those of ash (Fraxinus).  Boxelder, its other often 
used common name, refers to a resemblance to elder 
(Sambucus) and the use of the soft wood for box 
making. 
Boxelder is unusual among American maples in 
having compound leaves.  Apart from the opposite 
leaves, seedlings and young saplings of Boxelder 
bear a remarkable resemblance to poison ivy 
(Toxicodendron radicans) and are often mistaken for 
it by beginning naturalists.   
Variation within the species: 
Substantial variation occurs over the range of the 
species; numerous forms and varieties have been 
described, but only six varieties currently recognized 
(in some treatments, for example, see McGregor 
1986).  These are primarily distinguished by 
coloration of the branches, twig and fruit pubescence, 
and leaflet number.   
Var. arizonicum Sarg. – Arizona and New Mexico 
Var. californicum (Torr. & Gray) Sarg. – California  
Var. interius (Britt.) Sarg. – midwest US into the 
western states 
Var. negundo – the eastern half of the US, with 
naturalized western outlyers 
Var. texanum Pax – south-central US 
Var. violaceum (Kirchn.) Jaeger – north-central US 
and most of Canada 
Distribution 
Boxelder is the most widely distributed of all 
American maples – its native range extends from the 
east coast of the U.S. to California, and from Alberta 
to southern Mexico and Guatemala.  The range is 
relatively continuous in the eastern U.S., but broken 
into small areas in the West and toward Central 
America.  It has become naturalized in areas far 
outside of its native range, including Europe.  It is not 
known from northern North America.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Adaptation 
Boxelder is natively a tree of river bottoms and 
disturbed sites on heavy, wet soils, often seasonally 
flooded (up to 30 days).  It is one of the most 
common bottomland trees throughout its range, 
usually following the pioneer species of cottonwood 
and willow in colonizing alluvial bottoms, then 
growing with silver and red maples, American elm, 
American sycamore, and sweetgum.  Populations in 
native habitats have decreased because of clearing of 
bottomland forest for agriculture, but they have 
greatly increased in urban areas.  Success of the 
species on disturbed urban sites owes to its prolific 
seed production and wide dispersal, ease of 
germination, tolerance of low oxygen conditions, and 
fast growth on clay or heavy fill.  Boxelder also is 
found as a pioneer species on disturbed upland sites 
where a seed source is nearby.   
Flowering: March-May (with or just before the 
leaves), fruiting: August-October.  The flowers are 
wind pollinated but also visited by bees.  
Establishment 
Flowering in Boxelder is in early spring and large 
quantities of seed are produced each year, beginning 
on trees 8-11 years old.  The seeds ripen in autumn, 
fall continuously from autumn until spring, and are 
light, large-winged, and widely wind-dispersed. 
They over-winter and germinate the following spring.  
Best germination follows stratification for 60-90 days 
at 33° F. 
Boxelder seeds germinate in shade or full sun but 
seedlings begin to die off after 1-2 years unless 
openings are formed.  Successful seedbeds vary 
greatly.  Trees are fast growing, producing up to 1-
inch diameter annual growth for the first 15-20 years.  
Early growth is best in full sun but tolerant of partial 
shade.  Young trees commonly produce stump and 
root sprouts.  Average longevity is about 60 years; 
maximum longevity is rarely more than 100.  
Management 
Boxelder is tolerant to stressful sites and requires 
little special care, but it is relatively short-lived and 
the branches of older trees are susceptible to ice and 
wind damage.  Boxelder is highly sensitive to 2,4-D 
and also is susceptible to fire and mechanical damage 
because of its thin bark. 
The boxelder bug is a common associate of boxelder 
throughout most of its range.  The nymphs feed 
mainly on female (pistillate) trees in leaves, fruits, 
and soft seeds. The trees are not greatly damaged but 
the insects sometimes invade human habitation in 
large numbers with the onset of cold weather. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Boxelder is available at most nurseries within it 
distribution.

References 
Koelling, M.R. & R.B. Heiligmann (eds.) 1996.  
North American maple syrup producers manual. 
Ohio State Univ. Extension Bull. 856. AUG00. 
<http://www.ag.ohio-
state.edu/~ohioline/b856/index.html> 
Li, H.-L. 1960. The cultivated maples. Morris 
Arbor. Bull. 11:41-47. 
Maeglin, R. R. and L. F. Ohmann 1973.  Boxelder 
(Acer negundo): a review and commentary. Bull. 
Torrey Bot. Club 100:357-363. 
McGregor, R.L. 1986.  Acer. Pp. 569-570, IN: Great 
Plains Flora Association.  Flora of the Great Plains. 
Univ. of Kansas Press, Lawrence, Kansas. 
Overton, R.P. 1990.  Acer negundo L. Boxelder. Pp. 
41-45, IN: R.M. Burns & B.H. Honkala (tech. 
coords.). Silvics of North America. Volume 2. 
Hardwoods.  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C. 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom, BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.