Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAND BLUESTEM 
Andropogon hallii Hack. 
Plant Symbol = ANHA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan 
 
 ©W.L. Wagner Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution Dept. of Systematic Biology-Botany
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Sand hill bluestem, Hall's bluestem, Hall's 
beardgrass, prairie bluestem, and turkey-foot. 
 
Key Web Sites 
Extensive information about this species is linked to 
the Plants web site.  To access this information, go to 
the Plants web site, select this plant, and utilize the 
links at the bottom of the Plants Profile for this 
species.   
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Sand bluestem is often used in 
erosion control plantings on sandy, loamy sand or 
sandy loam sites.  It establishes quickly on blowouts 
where its rhizomes aid in stabilizing sandy soils.   Generally, it is planted as part of a mixture with other 
warm season grasses. 
 
Conservation Practices;
 Sand bluestem, because of 
its growth habit, is used with certain conservation 
practices; however, conservation practice standards 
and specifications vary by state.  By going to the e-
FOTG website for your state you can read if this 
grass is applicable to your needs.  However, for 
specific county data it is best to consult the local 
NRCS Field Office.   
 
Forages : Sand bluestem is a good to excellent forage 
due to its palatability and high yield.  It is an 
important component of many native hay meadows 
and range pastures.  The  nutritive value of sand 
bluestem rises and falls with the growing season.  It 
is high in crude protein and palatability until just 
prior to seed head formation. After seed heads are 
formed the nutritive value and palatability decreases 
significantly. 
 
Wildlife : Sand bluestem is good to excellent forage 
for all browsing wildlife species.  Because it 
frequently grows in large clumps and retains an 
upright structure throughout the winter it makes an 
excellent nesting habitat for many upland birds and 
small mammals.  Wildlife also  use the seeds as a food 
source. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping:  As xeric landscaping 
becomes more popular the use of sand bluestem has 
increased in yard plantings.   Because of its height and 
erect growth form many consider it an excellent plant 
for lawn and flowerbed borders. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant rarely becomes weedy or invasive.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Servi ce office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.

Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Sand bluestem is a 
native, perennial, warm season bunch grass. Plants 
are glaucous; culms robust, often growing in large 
tufts, with prominent rhizom es reaching 4 to 8 inches 
in length and conspicuous hairy pedicels, rachis 
joints and seed heads.  In the best growing conditions 
it can reach 7 feet in height.  It has a J-shaped stem 
base, and the culms are solid, and grooved on one 
side.  The leaf blades have margins with none to few 
hairs, have prominent midribs, strongly ridged on the 
upper surface but not below.  The leaf collar is often 
hirsute.  Most leaves are found near the base. 
 
Distribution : Sand bluestem occurs predominantly 
west of the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains 
and from Canada to Mexico.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Sand bluestem is found on sandy, loamy 
sand or sandy loam soils.  It is found as part of a 
climax plant complex under good grazing or native 
hay meadow management.  It is not generally found 
where annual precipitation is less than 14 inches, 
greater than 30 inches or on  soils with a high clay 
component.  
 
Adaptation  
Sand bluestem is climatically adapted throughout the 
mid-west and Great Plains Region on sandy, loamy 
sand or sandy loam soils. 
 
Establishment 
Sand bluestem should be seeded in the spring just 
prior to the start of the growing season.  A drill 
specifically built for seeding native grasses should be 
used.  It is best if the grass is seeded into a weed free 
cover crop.  The seeding rate can vary from 6 to 12 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  The local  
NRCS Field Office should be consulted prior to 
ordering any seed to ensure the right amount and 
planting mixture is used.
  Broadcast seeding will 
result in significantly fewer viable seedlings.  
Broadcasting should only be  done on small acreages 
where
 drilling is not physically feasible.  Applying 
commercial fertilizers to native grass seedings is 
more likely to result in competitive weed growth 
rather than improve grass establishment.  If the pH is 
below 5.5, lime should be incorporated into the soil 
prior to planting.  When possible a named variety 
suitable for your growing area  should be used.  If this 
is not possible, a seed source closer than 400 miles to 
the south, 150 miles to th e north or an elevation 
increase of 1,500 feet should be used.  Sand bluestem  has relatively weak seedling vigor compared to 
weeds and cool season grasse
s; therefore, control of 
competition is necessary for successful stands. 
 
No harvest of bluestem during the establishment 
period should be allowed.  After initial establishment, 
harvesting by controlled pasturing or haying is 
possible on good stands.  The first harvest should not 
commence until the bluestem is 20 inches tall.  It 
should be grazed (5 days maximum duration) or cut 
no lower than 8 inches and then protected from use 
until 20 inches in height is reached again.  No 
cropping should occur below 8 inches or within 1 
month of anticipated frosts.  After a killing frost 
stands which have deep roots may be grazed.  High 
mowing (above the bluestem seedlings) should be 
done when the weeds reach a height of 6 to 8 inches.  
Herbicide applications for weed control should be 
considered when weeds cr eate more than 50 percent 
of the canopy.  All pesticides used must be Federally 
and locally registered and  applied in accordance with 
authorized registered uses, directions on the label, 
and other Federal or State policies and requirements. 
 
Prescribed burning can help remove weed mulch and 
standing vegetation from shading small seedlings and 
warm the ground in the early spring.  It is 
recommended a prescribed burning plan be made 
with your local NRCS Field Office prior to any actual 
burn. 
 
Management  
Native Hay Meadow : Meadows where sand bluestem 
is an important component of the plant community 
should be cut no closer than  4 inches above the soil.  
Generally, it should be cut 1 to 3 weeks before seed 
head formation.  During  seed head formation the 
nutrition and palatability of sand bluestem decreases 
significantly.  It is also important for the grass to be 
allowed to store carbohydrates in its root system for 
the next growing season.  Cutting late does not 
permit adequate regrowth of the leaf blades prior to 
frost for this to occur.  Regrowth is determined by the 
mowing date and weather conditions.  The meadow 
must be mowed before boot stage if significant 
regrowth can occur.  If  the cut meadow is grazed 
livestock should only be placed on it after the first 
killing frost. 
 
Livestock Grazing : Cattle and horses prefer sand 
bluestem over many other grasses and forbs it is 
normally associated with.  When sand bluestem is 
repeatedly overgrazed closer than 6 to 8 inches 
during the growing season  it decreases in population 
and is replaced by less productive and desirable

vegetation.  The old rule of thumb, "Take half and 
leave half", works well when dealing with sand 
bluestem.  Large creeping rhizomes help this grass 
endure overgrazing to some extent.  However, 
continual abuse causes this decreaser grass to lose 
health, develop a prostrate growth habit, and finally 
die out.  At the end of the grazing season the average 
height of sand bluestem plants in a well managed 
prairie should be at least 6 inches.  If the pasture is to 
be grazed during the winter the grass should be at 
least 8 inches tall to help trap snow and as a forage 
reserve.    
 
Prescribed burning can be a tool used to maintain or 
improve prairie ecosystems.  Fire can reduce 
competition from competitive cool-season grasses 
and remove many woody plant invaders.  However, 
because sand bluestem  predominantly grows on 
sandy soils this must be taken into account or 
"blowouts" may occur.  When burning is planned it 
should be done when new spring shoots are 1/2 to 2 
inches long. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Sand bluestem is an important part of prairie 
ecosystems.  Due to land  use changes much of the 
virgin prairie has disappeared.  When grass mixtures 
are recommended for erosi on control, or wildlife 
habitat, sand bluestem can be a vital portion of the 
native habitat and should be included in all native 
prairie grass seedings. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Sand bluestem is a poor vi able seed producer in its 
native habitat. The main way this grass spreads is by 
its rhizomes.  The rhizomes grow from axillary buds 
during June and July, turn upward in late summer, 
and then remain dormant until the next spring 
growing season. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are 4 cultivars availabl e as certified seed, i.e.  
 
‘Elida’ selected at the NRCS PMC in Los Lunas, 
NM.  Adapted to Land Resource Region (LRR) G 
and H and Plant Hardiness Zone (PHZ) 5.  Additional 
information can be obtained at:  USDA-NRCS, Los 
Lunas PMC, 1036 Miller Street S.W., Los Lunas NM 
87301 USA.   
 
‘Garden’ increased at the  NRCS PMC in Scottsbluff, 
NE.   Adapted to LRR G and H and PHZ 4b.  
Additional information can be obtained at:  USDA- NRCS, Kansas State Office, 760 South Broadway, 
Salina, KS 67401 USA. 
 
‘Goldstrike’ bred by the Nebraska AES and USDA-
ARS.  Adapted to LRR G and H and PHZ 4 and 5.  
Additional information can be obtained at:  ARS-
USDA, or Agronomy Department, University of 
Nebraska , Lincoln, NE 68583 USA. 
 
‘Woodward’  released co
operatively by Oklahoma 
and Kansas Agricultural Experiment Stations and 
USDA-ARS.  Adapted to the  Southern Great Plains.  
Additional information can be obtained at:  USDA-
NRCS, Manhattan PMC, 3800 South 20
th Street, 
Manhattan, KS 66502-9535 USA. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and Sharp, W.C.  1994.   Grass Varieties 
in the United States.   USDA Agriculture Handbook 
No. 170.  Washington, D.C. 20250 USA. Pp. 14-15. 
 
Booth, W.E.  1972.   Grasses of Montana.  Montana 
State University.  Bozeman , Montana USA.  Pp. 5. 
 
Featherly, H.I. 1946.  Manual of the Grasses of 
Oklahoma.   Bulletin of the Oklahoma Agricultural 
and Mechanical College Volume 43 No. 21.  
Stillwater, OK.  74074 USA.  Pp. 120. 
 
Gates, F.C.  1937.   Grasses in Kansas.  Report of the 
Kansas State Board of Ag riculture Volume LV No. 
220-A.  Topeka, KS. USA.  Pp. 240. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No. 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C. 20250 USA.  Pp. 759. 
 
Leithead, H.L., Yarlett, L.L.,  and Shiflet, T.N.  1971.  
100 Native Forage Grasses in 11 Southern States .  
USDA-SCS, Washington, D.C. 20250 USA Pp. 24-
25. 
 
Phillips Petroleum Company.  1963.  Pasture and 
Range Plants .  Bartlesville, OK 74004 USA.  Pp. 10. 
 
Sedivec, K.K., Tober, D.A., and Berdahl, J.  2001.  
Grass Varieties for North Dakota .  North Dakota 
State University Extension Service Publication R-
794.  Fargo, ND 58105 USA. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 2003.   Fire effects information 
system.

(http://www.fs.fed/database/feis/plants/graminoid/an
dgerp/index.html).  Washington, D.C. 20250 USA. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2003.  The PLANTS database, 
Version 3.5 (
http://plants.usda.gov).   National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Prepared By:  
Patrick J. Broyles, Soil Conservationist  
USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Patrick J. Broyles, Soil Conservationist  
USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 14jan2004 jsp; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.