Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CREEPING FOXTAIL
Alopecurus arundinaceus Poir.
Plant Symbol = ALAR 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Photo: Lars Hedenäs 
 Photo: Swedish 
Museum of Natural 
History 
 
Alternate Names 
Creeping meadow foxtail,  Alopecurus ventricosus 
 
Uses 
Grazing/livestock/pasture: Creeping foxtail is very 
well suited for pastureland or hayland. Because it 
does not undergo dormancy during the summer, 
creeping foxtail produces high yields of palatable 
forage season long. Plants  break winter dormancy 
early in spring, and leaves remain green and palatable 
even during the hottest mont hs.  Studies indicate that 
creeping foxtail yields equa l or exceed those of other 
comparable grasses. 
 
Creeping foxtail is palatable to all classes of 
livestock. Cattle show preference to creeping foxtail 
over other widely employed pasture grasses. In 
separate studies, cattle preferred creeping foxtail to 
smooth brome ( Bromus inermis ), reed canarygrass 
( Phalaris arundinaceus) and tall wheatgrass 
( Thinopyrum ponticum ). In another study, cattle 
preferred straw from seed production fields of 
creeping foxtail over thickspike wheatgrass (Elymus 
lanceolatus ), western wheatgrass  (Pascopyrum 
smithii ), basin wildrye ( Leymus cinereus) and others. 
It can be seeded in pure stands or with a legume. 
 
This species produces numerous aggressive 
underground rhizomes. These contribute to long-
lived stands and an ability to recover quickly from 
grazing.  
 
Filter fields : Because of creeping foxtail’s tolerance 
to high levels of fertilizer, particularly nitrogen and 
water, it can be used in filter fields for liquid waste 
disposal. It can also be used in a variety of other 
water settings including sewage treatment, food 
processing and livestock waste removal programs.  
With suitable moisture, creeping foxtail can also be 
used as an excellent silt trap. This species is known to 
tolerate up to six inches of silt per single deposition.  
 
Erosion control : Creeping foxtail’s vigorous rhizome 
production (up to 120 cm crown diameter/year) and 
water tolerance make it well suited to erosion control 
and stream bank stabiliza tion. Creeping foxtail can 
tolerate both high water levels and periods of 
drought, it can be used on earthen dams where water 
levels fluctuate. It survives in a broad range of pH, 
making it suitable for mine spoils, saline seeps 
(tolerant to ECs of 12) bogs and acidic roadways.  
 
Wildlife : All manner of wildlife benefit from the 
forage and cover provided by creeping foxtail. Elk 
and deer eat the succulent forage in the spring and 
fall. The tender spring growth also provides forage 
for geese and other waterfowl. Numerous species of 
birds use the dense growth for cover and nesting 
habitat. Creeping foxtail ha s been used for plantings 
around ponds, lakes, grassed waterways and other 
waterways.  
 
Legal Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for status (e.g.

threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
In addition to aggressive rhizomes, creeping foxtail 
proliferates by windborne and waterborne seeds. 
Rapid reproduction can be useful in repairing 
damaged sites; however, creeping foxtail’s ability to 
spread quickly may create management problems in 
canals, irrigation ditches and other waterways. 
 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding this 
species’ status and use.   Weed information is also 
available from the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Creeping foxtail is 
a large, long-lived, rhizomatous, sod-forming, 
perennial grass introduced from Eurasia.  
 
Culms are tall (5 to 12 dm) and stout (~8 mm). 
Cauline leaves are numerous,  flat and green, mostly 6 
to 8 mm (12), glabrous above and scabrous beneath. 
The membranous ligule is 1 to 5 mm long and is 
rounded to acute.  
 
The inflorescence is a spike- like, cylindrical panicle, 
typically 4 to 10 cm long and around 8 mm thick, 
turning purplish or black with maturity. It has a very 
similar appearance to the seedheads of timothy, but 
creeping foxtail heads turn the dark colors described 
above with maturity and Timothy seedheads turn a 
brownish – buff color. 
 
Individual spikelets are single flowered and urn-
shaped (4 to 5 mm long, 1 to 1.5 mm wide). The 
glumes are fused basally an d are strongly keeled with 
a ciliate margin, the hairs 1 to 2 mm. Lemmas are 
typically shorter than the glumes and may bear a 
straight to geniculate awn (1 to 2 mm) arising from 
below to slightly above mid-length. Anthers are 
usually purple but are occasionally yellow or orange. 
 
Anthesis occurs early in the season. Seed maturation 
begins at the top of th e inflorescence and proceeds 
downward. Spikelets disarticulate below the glumes 
with the spikelet falling as a single unit.   
 
Creeping foxtail should not be confused with other 
grass species that share the common name foxtail. 
Creeping foxtail is a close  relative of meadow foxtail 
( Alopecurus pratensis ) and can be distinguished by 
having broader leaves (8-12 mm vs. 4-8 mm) and a 
dark purplish inflorescen ce. There are also many  weedy species that bear the 
name foxtail, i.e. foxtail 
barley ( Hordeum jubatum ) and green foxtail (Setaria 
viridis). These may occupy the same habitats as 
creeping foxtail, but bear little or no resemblance.   
 
Distribution : This species is native to the colder 
regions of Europe and Asia.  It ranges naturally from 
the British Isles in the west to Siberia in the east 
going as far south as Turkey and Italy and possibly 
China. 
 
Records indicate that creepi ng foxtail was introduced 
into the United States around the end of the 19th 
century.  At the time, it was little used by farmers 
who lacked the specialized equipment to plant and 
harvest its small fluffy seeds. With the advent of 
more advanced machinery in the 1930’s and 40’s, it 
became more widely used in forage practices. 
 
Presently, it is most commonly utilized throughout 
the Pacific Northwest, Inte rmountain West, Northern 
Great Plain States and we stern Canada.  It is 
projected that creeping foxtail could be used as far 
east as the New England states.  
 
For more information on distribution, please consult 
the plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Adaptation 
Creeping foxtail is adapted to cold temperatures and 
wet conditions. It is extremely winter hardy.  It can 
establish and survive in areas where frost-free periods 
average less than 30 days annually.  Studies indicate 
creeping foxtail outperforms smooth brome on 
flooded permafrost soils in Alaska.  It also grows 
well at a broad range of elevations (500-9000 ft), but 
grows best on middle to high elevation wet to semi-
wet sites. 
 
This species is well adapted to areas of high moisture 
typically too wet for good production of most forage 
grasses, i.e. brome ( Bromus species) and 
orchardgrass ( Dactylis glomerata ) and is a superior 
forage to other semi-wetland grasses, such as tall 
fescue and other wetland grasses, such as reed 
canarygrass, meadow foxtail  and timothy.  It usually 
occurs in areas receiving more than 18 inches of 
precipitation.  It also grows readily along margins of 
ponds, lakes, bogs, ditches and in mountain 
meadows.  It can withstand periodic flooding of 60 to 
90 cm for up to 45 days.  Some varieties are also 
somewhat drought tolerant, being able to survive in 
areas with widely fluctuating water levels and 
drought during later summer periods.

Creeping foxtail does well in a broad spectrum of 
soils provided there is sufficient available water.  It 
can grow in sand, clay, peat and muck. It is 
moderately salt tolerant (up to 12 millimhos/cm) and 
tolerates both moderately acidic soils (pH 5.6 to 6.0) 
and slightly alkaline soils (pH 7.9 to 8.4). 
 
Establishment 
Creeping foxtail establishment techniques are similar 
to those for other forage grasses.  For best results the 
seedbed should be weed free, moist and firmly 
packed.  Follow seeding with a light harrowing or 
packing operation.  Optimum seeding depth is 1/8 to 
1/4 inch and no deeper than ½ inch. 
 
Timing depends almost entirely on available 
moisture.  Irrigated fields can be seeded in early to 
mid spring or late summer avoiding the hot mid 
summer period.  Irrigated fall seedings can be 
successful as late as early to mid-September allowing 
for enough time (6 to 8 weeks) for seedling 
establishment before freezi ng temperatures.  Where 
precipitation is required, seed when soil is moist but 
firm enough or frozen to support seeding equipment.  
Late fall dormant seedings (after October 20
th in most 
areas), winter and very early spring seedings are most 
effective under non-irrigated conditions where seeds 
are not allowed to germinate until spring. 
 
This species produces very light seed units (750,000 
seeds/lb) which allow for low relative seeding rates 
for adequate stand establishment.  It is recommended 
that a minimum seeding rate of 3 to 4 lb/acre is used 
for ease of handling and uniform distribution through 
seeding equipment . This rate provides 51 to 68 
seed/ft
2. 
 
It is popular to dilute the seed with inert materials, 
i.e. rice hulls, cracked corn or other cracked grains.  
For rice hulls, cracked wheat  or cracked barley, dilute 
3-4 lb/acre seed with 2 bu shel/acre dilutor, and set 
the drill to seed the equivalent of 2 bushels of barley 
per acre.  For cracked corn reduce dilutor to 1 bushel/ 
acre. 
 
When seeding with a legume, it is recommended that 
one plant in alternate rows.  Studies conducted with 
‘Lutana’ cicer milkvetch ( Astragalus cicer) and 
‘Eski’ sainfoin ( Onobrychis viciaefolia ) showed 
increases in yield over  a four-year period when 
planted in alternate rows.   
 
Management 
Young seedlings are small and weak.  Growth is slow 
for the first 4 to 6 weeks even under irrigated 
conditions.  Rhizomes can emerge as early as 8  weeks.  With the emergence of rhizomes, growth is 
rapid.  With adequate soil moisture inflorescences 
may develop in mid to late summer, but first year 
plants typically do not produce seedheads, or when 
they do, there is not enough seed for a profitable 
harvest.   
 
Under non-irrigated conditions, it is not uncommon 
to have difficulty determining stand establishment the 
first growing season.  Stand success should not be 
determined until the second or third growing season 
under non-irrigated conditions. 
 
Applications of commercial fertilizer are not required 
during the establishment period; however, creeping 
foxtail responds very favorably to applications of 50 
to 60 lb/acre actual n
itrogen once established.  
Creeping foxtail plants show little response to 
applications of potassium, phosphates and secondary 
elements.  
 
When planted with a legume, adjust fertilizer rates 
according to desires: For more grass production 
increase nitrogen, for more legume production 
increase phosphorus and potassium. 
 
Weeds can be controlled using standard herbicide 
practices, although weeds should cause few problems 
with adequate fertilizer. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Creeping foxtail has historically shown little damage 
from insects and other diseases; however, in some 
years leaf spot diseases have been recorded as a 
problem in Canada. 
 
Seed and Plant  Production 
Seed production practices  for creeping foxtail are 
more involved and difficult than those of most other 
forage grasses.  Harvest timing is critical for a good 
yield, and seed cleaning requires more time and 
equipment than for most other grass species.   
Stands should be planted in wide-spaced 36 to 48 
inch rows, but rhizomes cause sod binding and row 
closing.  This can be overcome by applying high 
levels of nitrogen and a ggressive cultivation to 
maintain desired row culture.  
 
During establishment, apply enough phosphorus for 
three years according to forage production rate.  No 
nitrogen should be added until seedlings are 
established, or drill 50 lb/acre of 11-48-0 with the 
seed.  Once seedlings are es tablished apply 30 lb/acre 
N for dryland or 60 to 80 lb/acre N for irrigated 
fields.

Nitrogen application in the fall on established fields 
positively influences inflorescence size and number.  
Apply 100 to 150 lb/acre N each year.  Studies have 
shown inflorescence production rose as nitrogen 
levels were increased up to 100 lb/acre actual N.  
After 150 lb/acre production tapered off as plants 
used more nitrogen for foliage than seed production.  
Seed yields with 100 lb/acre were as high as 570 
lb/acre while yields of 350 lb/acre were achieved 
when no nitrogen was applied.  
 
During establishment, enough water should be 
applied to get stands started.  The soil surface should 
be kept moist to avoid crusting.  In early September 
bring soil moisture up to field capacity.  Established 
fields should be irrigated in spring through the boot 
stage.  Soil moisture should be kept above 50% field 
capacity.  Good soil moisture  is necessary during the 
early phase of seed develo pment to prevent moisture 
stress, but do not irrigate during flowering or seed 
ripening.  After harvest irrigate to field capacity to 
promote vegetative production. 
 
Since seed maturation is temperature dependent, 
different regions will be harvested at different times 
of year.  For proper timing of harvest, attention must 
be paid to three indicators. (1) 75 percent or more of 
the seeds should be black. (2) 50 percent of the 
inflorescences have begun to  shatter at the tip. (3) 75 
percent of the stems are yellow up to 3 to 4 inches 
directly below the inflorescence.  These three events 
often occur quickly over a three day period.  
 
Plants are typically windrowed, dried (3 to 5 days) 
and picked up by a combine.  Seed heads shatter 
readily.  Hand harvested seeds yielded over 500 
lb/acre while machine harv ested fields yielded as 
little as 180 lb/acre.  It is recommended that you slow 
the reel speed of both th e windrower and combine to 
equal to or slightly higher than ground speed.  It is 
also recommended to make these adjustments to the 
combine: (1) slow ground speed to allow more 
separating time; (2) shut off air flow by sealing the 
fan housing or inactivating the fan; (3) remove 
screens following the siev es; (4) adjust concave 
spacing to ¼ inch; (5) adjust cylinder speed to 
approximately 3500 ft/min. (750 to 850 rpm). 
 
An alternative harvesting method employed by the 
NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials Center and others is 
the use of a seed stripper.  For best results ground 
speed should be 1.5 to 2 mph.  Tachometer speed can 
be from 1100 to 1800 rpm, and the brush speed 
should be around 425 rpm. 
 
Typical production is 300 pounds per acre irrigated 
and 150 pounds per acre non-irrigated.  Non-irrigated 
seed production is not recommended below 16 inches 
of annual precipitation.  
 
Seeds should be dried prior  to storage at temperatures 
not over 104º F (40º C).  Store seed in bins at 12% 
moisture content or sacks (15%). 
 
A barley debearder can be used to remove the fine 
hairs from the glume keels and to remove stems and 
chaff.  The debearder should be run at 500 rpm long 
enough to break down stem s. Seeds can then be 
cleaned using a #9 round hole  in the top screen, 1/18” 
x ¼” slotted middle screen and a 6 x 36 wire mesh 
bottom screen.  The fan should be set to a slow, light 
wind speed (100 to 150 rpm). 
  
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation seed is available through the appropriate 
state Crop Improvement Association or commercial 
sources to grow certified seed. 
 
‘Garrison’  creeping foxtail ( Alopecurus 
arundinaceus ) was named and released by the 
Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant 
Materials Center in Bismarck , North Dakota in 1963.  
The original collection was made in 1950 near Max, 
North Dakota where plants were growing on the 
margins of potholes. ‘Garrison’ is adapted to cold 
temperature regions where ther e is abundant water.  It 
is especially well suited to higher elevation areas that 
receive 18 inches or more precipitation annually or 
along the margins of ponds, lakes, ditches and other 
waterways.  It provides excellent forage for cattle and 
other classes of livestock by producing highly 
palatable leaves throughout the growing season.  
‘Garrison’ has a high moisture tolerance and 
produces vigorous rhizomes making it an excellent 
choice for controlling streambank and shoreline 
erosion.  Certified seed is available.  
 
Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained by the 
Bridger, Montana PMC. 
 
  ‘Retain’  creeping foxtail ( Alopecurus arundinaceus) 
was selected by the South Dakota Agricultural 
Experiment Station and released in 1979.  This is a 
five-clone synthetic single plant selection from 
‘Garrison.’  ‘Retain’ is very similar to ‘Garrison,’ but 
this cultivar retains seed on the panicle making it 
possible to harvest with a di rect cut combine.  Like 
‘Garrison,’ it is well adapted to wet areas and is flood 
tolerant.  It is highly palatable to livestock.  It 
matures early, heading in mid-May.

Breeder and foundation seed are maintained by South 
Dakota State University. Contact for availability. 
 
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to determine the best control 
methods in your area and how to use it safely.  
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W. C. Sharp 1994. Grass varieties in 
the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
 
Cornforth, B. L. St. John & D. G. Ogle. 2001. Seed 
production standards for conservation plants in the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 
14, Dec. 2001. 15p. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1935.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States . USDA, Washington DC. 
 
Ogle, D. G. 1994. Technical Note 9:  Salt tolerance of 
plants . USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 9, Oct. 
1994. 6p. 
 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard & L. 
Holzworth. 2003. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legum e, and woody species for the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 
24, Jan. 2003. 41p. 
 
Smith, R., D. Cattani, D. Feindel, R. Haas, D. Tober, 
L. Holzworth, M. Majerus, D. Hall & K. Borcher. 
Native Grass Seed Produc tion Manual (Including 
Selected Forbs). USDA-NRCS, Ducks Unlimited 
Canada, the Manitoba Forage Seed Association and 
the University of Manitoba.  
 
USDA, Soil Conservation Service 1978. ‘ Garrison’ 
Creeping Foxtail . SCS-TP-156. 
 
USDA, Soil Conservation Se rvice. 1990. Technical 
Note 7: Grass-legume-forb seed dilution with rice 
hulls . USDA-SCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 7, Oct. 1990. 
5p. 
USDA, NRCS. 2004. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 
(http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA.  
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich & L. C. 
Higgins. 1993.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press, Provo, Utah. 
 
Images courtesy of “Den Virtuella Floran” used by 
permission of the Swedish Museum of Natural 
History. 
 
Prepared By:   
Derek J. Tilley,  Range Conservationist (Plants) 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John , Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Wayne Duckwitz, Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Materi als Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota 
 
Larry Holzworth, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Montana St ate Office, Bozeman, 
Montana 
 
Mark Majerus, Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, 
Montana 
 
Dwight Tober, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS North Dakota State Office, Bismarck, 
North Dakota 
 
Species Coordinator:   
Larry Holzworth, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA-NRCS, Montana St ate Office, Bozeman, 
Montana 
 
Edited: 03Mar04 djt; 31Mar04 dgo;  7Apr04 lkh; 7Apr04 dat; 
7Apr04 wld; 7Apr04 mem; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.