Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PINEMAT 
MANZANITA  
Arctostaphylos nevadensis  
Gray  
Plant Symbol = ARNE  
 
Contributed By: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden & 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
Uses 
Conservation: Pinemat reduces erosion on steep 
slopes and along trails and roads.  
 
Wildlife : Bear, deer, and other small mammals and a 
wide array of birds, including grouse, utilize the 
fruits of hairy manzanita.  California mule deer may 
browse the foliage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Heath Family (Ericaceae).  Pinemat 
manzanita, is a low growing,  native, evergreen shrub, 
generally less than 1 m tall, and with spreading or  
 
decumbent branches.  It does not have a basal burl 
and does not crown sprout, but often roots at the 
nodes of the lowermost branches.  The bark of young 
twigs is sparsely white-woolly, but the mature bark is 
smooth and reddish brown.  Leaves are short-
petioled, with ovate to elliptic blades that are 1.5 to 3 
cm long, 1 to 1.5 cm wide, bright green, with acute 
apices, and minutely hairy or glabrous on both sides.  
The flowers, which open  from May to July, are 
arranged in racemes with mostly scale-like, linear 
bracts that are 2-5 mm long.  The urn-shaped, white 
corollas are 6-8 mm long.  The fruits are depressed-
globose, 6-9 mm in diameter, smooth and reddish 
brown, with a mealy pulp that encloses several, hard-
walled seeds. 
 Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos
 
Distribution 
Native to Washington, Oregon, California, and 
Nevada.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  Also, check the CalFlora Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Pinemat manzanita occurs on rocky 
slopes and outcrops from 5000 to 10,000 feet 
throughout the Cascades south to the Klamath 
Mountains and Sierra Nevada of California.  It is a 
common understory shrub of several coniferous 
forest communities, dominated either by fir, hemlock, 
yellow pine, or lodgepole pine.  Common associates 
include currant, chinquap in, huckleberry oak, and 
ocean spray.  Its geographic range is generally 
characterized by warm, relatively dry summers and 
cold winters with precipitation ranging from 25 to 85 
inches per year, much of it as snow.  Pinemat 
manzanita prefers well drained, acidic soils in open 
sunny sites.  It has a high tolerance for cold, below-
freezing winters, and depends on snow cover to 
protect dormant buds.  Occasional fires may be 
important to successful seed germination and 
establishment. 
 
Natural Establishment : Arctostaphylos nevadensis , 
like most manzanita species, requires insect visitation 
to ensure seed-set.  Bees that grasp the flower and 
shake them by actively beating their wings pollinate 
the flowers.  This process, like shaking a salt and

pepper container, permits efficient collection of the 
pollen, which is used for food.  Fruits are dispersed 
primarily by animals, which presumably aid 
germination by digesting the fruit and softening the 
outer seed coat.  However, natural germination is 
sporadic, except after fire, which cracks the hard coat 
of seeds that have accumulated in the litter layer.  
Pinemat manzanita prefers loose, well-drained soils 
and, like other members of the heath family 
(Ericaceae), has an obligate relationship with 
mycorrhizal fungi. 
 
Seed Propagation : Propagation from seed is difficult, 
because of the thick, bony seed walls and low rates of 
germination (less than 10%) without treatment.  
However, if propagation from seed is desired, 
treatment must ensure that the seed coat is broken 
without damaging the embryo.  Individual seeds may 
be filed with a steel file, but larger quantities can be 
treated by placing them into a container of boiling 
water that is removed from the source of heat after 1-
2 minutes.  Seeds also respond well to burning, which 
is accomplished by firing a 4-inch deep layer of 
combustible leaves and twigs over a flat planted with 
seeds.  These treatments crack the seed coats, but 
may reduce viability.  Treated seeds should be 
stratified in a moist mix of milled sphagnum and 
beach sand for 2-8 months until they germinate.  
Other techniques, including use of sulfuric acid to 
soften the seed coat, may  enhance germination, but 
also requires special precautions against spillage and 
contamination. 
 
Vegetative Propagation : Vegetative propagation is 
preferred over seed propag ation.  Pinemat manzanita 
is most easily propagated by cutting terminal shoots 
that include 1-2 inches of  the woody stem from the 
previous year.  Cuttings work best if taken between 
April and June and should be dipped in a rooting 
hormone before being placed in a moist sand-peat 
mixture.  Cuttings need to be kept moist by regular 
watering or misting until roots appear.  Once rooted, 
they should be transplanted into small containers 
using potting soil, to allow for proper root 
development.  Manzanitas generally do not transplant 
well, so they should be grown to vigorous conditions 
in one-gallon containers and then moved to a 
permanent position in the late fall or early winter.  
Relatively slow growth rates during the first few 
years can be expected.  If pl ants are used in an urban 
landscape, the use of organic-rich soils and acidified 
fertilizers is recommended. 
 
Management 
Under natural conditions, no special management is 
required to maintain established manzanitas.  Either  scarified seeds or well-rooted
 container plants may be 
used to re-vegetate cleared sites.  In the urban 
landscape, several horticultural techniques should be 
used to ensure healthy plants.  All manzanitas should 
be planted higher than the surrounding soil to prevent 
crown rot, which can result from excessive water and 
soil moisture, especially during the summer.  
Overhead watering should also be avoided, because it 
tends to encourage fungal diseases (e.g., 
Botryosphaeria ) that cause branch die-back and leaf 
spot.  Periodic watering every 4-6 weeks will keep 
foliage healthy without weakening plants.  Mulching 
is desirable to control weeds, retain soil moisture, and 
reduce the need for irrigation.  Rock mulches have 
proven more successful th an organic mulches.  
Pruning should be avoided and used only to remove 
dead wood and diseased branches. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available  from native plant nurseries 
within its area of distribution.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Axelrod, D. 1958.  The Pliocene Verdi flora of 
western Nevada .  University of California 
Publications, Geological Science 34: 61-160. 
 
Barbour, M. N. Berg, T. Kittel, & M. Kunz 1991.  
Snowpack and the distribution of a major vegetation 
ecotone in the Sierra Nevada of California .  Journal 
of Biogeography 18:141-149. 
 
Berg, A. 1974.   Arctostaphylos Adans. manzanita .  
pp. 228-231.  IN C. Schopmeyer (ed.).   Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States .  USDA, Forest 
Service, Agriculture Handbook, Number 450, 
Washington, D.C.  883 pp. 
 
Carlson, J. & W. Sharp 1975.   Germination of high 
elevation manazanitas .  USDA, Forest Service, Tree 
Planters’ Notes 26:10-11, 25-26. 
 
Ferlatte, W. 1974.   A flora of the Trinity Alps of 
northern California .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California.  206 pp. 
 
Hanes, T. 1988.   California chaparral .  pp. 417-469.  
IN M. Barbour & J. Major.   Terrestrial vegetation of

California.  California Native Plant Society, Special 
Publication No. 9.  Sacramen to, California.  1030 pp. 
 
Holland, K.L. & D.J. Keil  1995.   California 
vegetation .  Kendall-Hunt Publishing Company, 
Iowa.  516 pp. 
 
Kruckeberg, A.R. 1982.   Gardening with native 
plants of the Pacific Northwest .  University of 
Washington Press, Seattle, Washington.  252 pp. 
 
Mallory, J., W. Colwell, & W. Powell 1973 .  Soils 
and vegetation of the French Gulch quadrangle, 
Trinity and Shasta counties, California.  Bulletin 12, 
USDA, Forest Service, Paci fic Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, California.  42 
pp. 
 
Munz, P. 1959.   A California flora .  University of 
California, Berkeley, California.  1681 pp. 
 
Rundel, P. 1975.   Primary succession on granite 
outcrops in the montane southern Sierra Nevada.  
Madrono 23:209-220. 
 
Rundel, P., D. Parsons, & D. Gordon 1988.   Montane 
and subalpine vegetation of the Sierra Nevada and 
Cascade ranges .  pp. 559-599.  IN M. Barbour & J. 
Major.   Terrestrial vegetation of California .  
California Native Plant Soci ety, Special Publication 
No. 9.  Sacramento, California.  1030 pp. 
 
Smith, N. 1995.   Manzanitas: a gardener’s guide .  
Pacific Horticulture 56(1):18-33. 
 
Sawyer, J. & D. Thornburgh 1988.   Montane and 
subalpine vegetation of the Klamath Mountains .  pp. 
699-732.  IN M. Barbour & J. Major.  Terrestrial 
vegetation of California .  California Native Plant 
Society, Special Publica tion No. 9.  Sacramento, 
California.  1030 pp. 
 
Vankat, J. 1970.   Vegetation change in Sequoia 
National Park, California .  Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of California, Davis, California.  197 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Dieter Wilken & Julie Burgher 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 1212 Mission Canyon 
Road, Santa Barbara, California 93105 
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 04dec00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.