Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
QUAILBUSH 
Atriplex lentiformis  (Torr.) S. 
Wats.  
Plant Symbol = ATLE  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
big saltbush 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Native American Pima groups eat 
quailbush seeds.  They grounded the seeds into a 
meal and used them as a thickener in soups or added 
them to flour for making bread.  Most of this shrub is 
edible, young shoots are suitable for greens.  Several 
tribes used this shrub for its salty taste.  The crushed  leaves and roots were used as soap for washing 
clothes (Moerman 1998). 
 
Native Americans tribes grounded the roots and 
flowers and applied it to ant bites.  The leaves were 
chewed to treat head colds.  The crushed flowers and 
stems can be steamed and inhaled to treat nasal 
congestion (Moerman 1998). 
 
Wildlife
: Rabbits, lizards, rattlesnakes, coyotes, 
quails, and other birds use the seeds and foliage for 
food and habitat.  The foliage and twigs provide 
shelter for many small mammals and livestock.   
 © Barbara J. Collins California Luther an University 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Quailbush is a large, fast growing shrub.  It 
occurs in river floodplains, on roadsides, and in the 
borders of drainage.  The branches are widespread, 
slender, and flexible.  The leaves are alternate, 
triangular or ovate to obl ong, and are 1 ½ to 2 inches 
long.  The plants are male or female and have the 
ability to alter their sex due to environmental 
conditions. 
 
Distribution : It ranges from the Upper San Joaquin 
and Salinas Valley southward  to lower California, in 
Lower and Upper Sonoran Life Zones (McMinn 
1939).  It extends eastward into Nevada, Utah, 
Colorado, and New Mexico. For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site 
 
Adaptation 
Quailbush grows best with full sunlight in any well-
drained but not too fertile soil.  It tolerates very 
alkaline soils and can succeed in hot and dry 
climates.  This species is not often found in colder 
areas of the country but it can tolerate temperatures 
between -5 and -10º C. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : The seed is best sown in 
April or May and placed in containers or seed trays 
containing a compost of peat and sand to which a 
slow-release fertilizer has been added.  Firm the 
medium gently, sow the seed thinly and evenly on

top, and cover with its own depth of medium (Heuser 
1997).  Place the pots in a cold frame at 13º C and the 
seed should germinate between one to three weeks.  
The seedlings should be placed into individual pots 
and grown in a greenhouse for the first winter. 
 
Management 
Atriplex lentiformis will defoliate under extreme 
drought conditions.  They need to be under some 
form of water stress, salt stress, or drought stress.  
The salt they accumulate in their leaves allows them 
to extract water from the soil.  They tolerate and 
remove the excess salts by bladders in their leaves 
that act as salt sinks, keep ing the salt from the plant 
cells. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
‘Casa ’ - Released 1979 by the Lockeford Plant 
Materials Center, CA, this cultivar has exhibited 
excellent performance as a conservation plant on 
various critical areas, for upland game cover and for 
environmental enhancement on deep, medium, or 
fine-textured soils that are well to poorly drained. It 
can be grown on slightly acidic to strongly alkaline 
soils (pH 6-8.5) and survive on an annual 
precipitation of 20-25 cm (8-10 inches) when 
irrigated for initial establishment. This species occurs 
from the upper San Joaquin and Salinas valleys south 
to lower California. It extends eastward into Nevada, 
Utah, and New Mexico. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Collins, B.J. 2001.  Wildflowers of Southern 
California .  California Lutheran University, 
Thousand Oaks, California.  Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://ww1.clunet.edu/wf/index.htm> 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997 The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Junah, S., T. Ayers, R. Scott, D. Wilken, & D. Young 
1995.   A flora of San Cruz Island .  Santa Barbara 
Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, California. 
 
Kearney, T.H., R.H. Peebles, J.H. Howell, & E. 
McClintock 1960.  Arizona flora . 2nd ed.  University 
of Califonia Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, & London. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Mozingo, H.N. 1987.   Shrubs of the Great Basin: a 
natural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Las Vegas & London. 
Thomas, J.H. 1961.   Flora of the San Cruz mountains 
of California: a manual of the vascular plants .  
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. 
 
Van Dersal, W.R. 1939.   Native woody plants of the 
United States, their erosion control & wildlife values .  
United States Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana  Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 14Mar05 rln; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.