Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUSHY 
BEARDGRASS 
Andropogon glomeratus  
(Walt.) B.S.P.  
Plant Symbol = ANGL2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Louisiana State Office, 
National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing Land 
Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
bushy bluestem, bushy broomsedge, lowland 
broomsedge, and bushybeard bluestem.  Some 
botanists consider Andropogon glomeratus  and 
Andropogon virginicus  as one species.  However, the 
two grasses are distinct and consistent in appearance 
and are currently recognized as separate species. 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Although it rates low as a forage grass, 
bushy beardgrass can be used as forage during the  summer, fall, and winter months; however, it is more 
palatable during the early spring.  The palatability is 
increased after a late winter burning. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping: Bushy beardgrass is used 
as an ornamental grass in landscapes because of its 
showy plumes that turn a rust color during late fall 
and early winter.  It is r
ecommended for golf courses, 
around pond edges, stream banks and other wet sites. 
 
Wildlife : Bushy beardgrass bene fits wildlife.  The 
finch, junco, and tree sparrow eat the seeds.  The 
white-tailed deer and rabbits browse the plant.  Bushy 
beardgrass also provides cover for mottled ducks and 
fawns (white-tailed deer). 
Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
 
Conservation Practices : Bushy beardgrass, because 
of its growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with the following conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office.  NRCS  practices include the 
following: 327-Conservation Cover; 386-Field 
Border; 390-Riparian Herbaceous Cover; 393-Filter 
Strip; 512-Pasture and Hay Planting; 550-Range 
Planting; 560-Access Road ; 562-Recreation Area 
Improvement; 643-Restoration and Management of 
Declining Habitats; 644-Wetland Wildlife Habitat 
Management; 647-Early Successional Habitat 
Development/Management; 656-Constructed 
Wetland; 657-Wetland Restoration; 658-Wetland 
Creation; 659-Wetland Enhancement. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a persistent, 
warm-season, perennial, low growing bunchgrass that 
is found from late summer to fall and reaches a 
height of 6 feet.  It can be distinguished from other 
warm season grasses by its thick, massive, reddish 
brown, terminal infloresce nce composed of paired 
silky racemes and its flattened blue green foliage.  
The culms are erect, 50 to 150 cm tall, compressed, 
with broad keeled, overlapping lower sheaths and the 
flat tufts often forming dense, usually glaucous 
clumps.  The sheaths are occasionally villous; blades 
elongate, 3 to 8 mm wide; inflorescence dense and

feathery.  The sessile spikelets are 3 to 4 mm long 
with a straight awn 1 to 1.5 cm long.  The fruit/seed 
period begins in the fall and ends in the winter. 
 
Distribution 
Bushy beardgrass is found in low roadsides, moist 
pinelands, brackish and freshwater marsh borders, 
sloughs, and wet ditches.  It is native to and is found 
in nearly all of the eastern United States, mainly in 
the southern states, and extending west to California.  
Bushy beardgrass is also fo und in the West Indies, 
Yucatan, and Central America.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : The USDA Hardiness Zones for bushy 
beardgrass is 5 to 10.  Bushy beardgrass tolerates hot 
climates and coastal conditions as long as constant 
moisture is present.  It is found in irregularly to 
seasonally inundated or saturated loamy soil.  Bushy 
beardgrass is not salt tolerant and generally will not 
grow at levels above 0.5 parts per thousand.  Bushy 
beardgrass does not tolerate heavy shade but will 
grow under light shade conditions. 
 
Rootstock or seeds propagate bushy beardgrass.  
However, of the two, the best propagation method is 
transplantation of rootstock with liberal amounts of 
root-laden soil onto wet mineral soils in late winter or 
early spring.  The plants should be spaced at 18 
inches because the rate of spread is slow.  Spread is 
generally less than 0.2 feet per year in unconsolidated 
sediment. 
 
Seed germination is best when first stored at room 
temperature for 7-14 months.  The planting should be 
in late winter as a dormant seeding or when daily 
temperatures average in th e low 60’s.  For planting, 
the seed can be broadcast and culti-packed if the right 
field conditions exist.  The seeding rate should be 10-
12 pure live seed/acre.  The seeds should be planted 
to a depth of ¼ - ¾ inch.  If the right field conditions 
do not exist or intensiv e seedbed preparation is 
undesirable, then disk the site and leave the surface 
as rough as possible.  Do not create a smooth uniform 
appearance for the seedbed.  Broadcast the seed and 
allow nature to cover the seeds.  When seeding under 
minimal seedbed preparation, increase the seeding 
rate by 50%.  It is not recommended to mix bushy 
beardgrass seeds with cool  season grass seeds.  In 
parts of the United States where cool season grasses 
dominate, the warm season grasses can be taken over 
because they develop slower than the cool season 
grasses.  It is also recommended that seed not be  moved more than 300 miles north or 200 miles south 
of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
Bushy beardgrass does not require fertilizers as the 
plants can grow in low fertility areas.  Overgrazing 
bushy beardgrass results in an
 increase of this plant.  
However, if bushy beardgrass becomes weedy, then 
burning or mowing is recommended.  Check with the 
local extension service for herbicides.  Bushy 
beardgrass has no known pests or problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be 
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by 
clicking on Plant Materials or contact your local 
NRCS Field Office.  Common seed and container 
plants are readily available from a number of 
growers, wholesalers, and  retailers of native seed. 
 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 765-766. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Andropogon glomeratus .  Version: 000329.  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/43716
00t.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman , USDA, NRCS, Louisiana 
Plant Materials Program 
Maraya Gates , USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne , Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited  05dec00 jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24mar06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.