Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROCKY MOUNTAIN MAPLE  
Acer glabrum Torr. 
Plant Symbol = ACGL  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate common names 
Mountain maple, Douglas  maple, Douglas Rocky 
Mountain maple, three leaf  Rocky Mountain maple, 
rose-fruit Rocky Mountain maple,  Sierra maple, 
California mountain maple, New Mexico maple, box 
maple, rock maple, dwarf maple, 
 
Uses 
Rocky Mountain maple is planted to a limited extent 
to improve wildlife habitat, to stabilize slopes, and to 
provide low-maintenance landscaping.  The striking 
red bark and contrasting light green leaves, turning 
red in the fall, make it a desirable ornamental shrub.   
  
Rocky Mountain maple is a highly valued big game 
browse species.  Moose, elk, mule deer, and white-
tailed deer to varying degrees throughout the year eat 
its leaves and twigs, but it is especially important as a 
winter food source.  Post-wildfire brush fields, with 
Rocky Mountain maple as  an important component, 
are prime winter range and provide both cover and 
food for moose, elk, and  deer.  The species also 
provides considerable cover and nesting habitat for 
many game birds, songbirds, and small mammals, 
especially where the maples  grow more densely in 
open habitats.  In commercial timber operations, 
shrub fields of Rocky Mountain maple often interfere  with seedling establishment and early growth of 
conifers, and the maple is removed.    
 
The easily bendable stems were used by various 
American Indian tribes to make drying racks, drum 
hoops, snowshoe frames, spears, pegs, toys, and 
masks.  The fibrous bark was woven into mats and 
rope.  A bark decoction was used as a poison 
antidote.    
 
Status 
 ©
 James L. Reveal Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General:  Maple Family (Aceraceae): This is a native 
shrub 1.5-2 m tall or trees 6-10(-12) m tall, variable 
in form, with short trunk(s) and slender, upright 
branches, hairless, with slender, reddish-brown 
shoots and thin; bark smooth, gray or brown.  The 
leaves are deciduous, opposite, 4-12 cm long and 
wide, sometimes smaller, sometimes divided into 
three lanceolate leaflets but usually palmately 3(-5)-
lobed and veined, the lobes ovate with narrowly acute 
sinuses and double-toothed edges, with a reddish 
petiole, shiny dark green above, paler or whitish 
beneath, turning pale yellow to yellowish-orange or 
crimson in fall.  The flowers are greenish-yellow, 
with petals usually present, in short, branched 
terminal or axillary flat-topped clusters 2.5-5 cm 
long, on drooping stalks.  The male and female 
flowers are usually on separate plants (the species 
essentially dioecious) or on the same plant (the 
species technically polygamo- dioecious).  The fruits 
are winged nutlets (samaras) 2.5 cm long, often 
reddish tinted at maturity, in a long-stalked, wide-
spreading pair.  The common name is derived from 
the predominantly Rocky Mountain distribution.   
 
Variation within the species : Numerous varieties of 
Rocky Mountain maple have been described 
primarily on the basis of variation in stature, twig 
color, leaf lobing and si ze, and fruit shape.  The 
following are currently recognized.   
 
Var.  diffusum  (Greene) Smiley  
Var. douglasii (Hook.) Dippel  
Var. glabrum  
Var. greenei  Keller

Var. neomexicanum  (Greene) Kearney and 
Peebles  
Var. torreyi  (Greene) Smiley  
 
Distribution:  Rocky Mountain maple is broadly 
distributed in the western U.S., from southeastern 
Alaska, British Columbia, and southwestern Alberta, 
south from western Washington to southern 
California and east to southern New Mexico, 
northwestern Nebraska, an d Montana.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Moist but well-drained seepage sites, mostly in rocky 
areas, along streambanks, moist slopes, canyons, and 
ravines, sometimes dry ridges, at low to middle 
elevations and moist sites in high mountains, 900-
3300 meters.  Rocky Mountain maple is a long-lived, 
shade-tolerant seral species that often persists in the 
understory of late seral or climax coniferous stands, 
usually Douglas fir, grand fir, subalpine fir, white fir, 
or Engelmann spruce.  Because of its sprouting 
ability, it often gains dominance in seral shrub 
communities after conifer overstories are eliminated 
or reduced by wildfire or logging.    
 
This species flowers in April-June(-July) and fruits in 
August(-September and October).   
 
Establishment 
Rocky Mountain maple begins to produce seed 
probably before 10 years of age, but “resprouts” may 
produce seed by 5 years after a fire.  Seed is 
produced annually but large seed crops may not be 
produced every year.  The seeds require 
approximately 6 months of chilling to break embryo 
dormancy, usually supplied under natural conditions 
for spring germination.  They quickly lose viability 
after the first year in storage as well as under natural 
conditions.  Germination and early establishment 
occur best in partial shade, but rates of germination 
and establishment are generally low.   
 
Rocky Mountain maple produces numerous root 
crown sprouts following disturbances from fire or 
logging, but it does not appear to spread from root 
suckers or rhizomes.  It is difficult to grow from 
cuttings. 
 
Management 
Most fires top-kill Rocky Mountain maple but root 
crown sprouts allow it to persist or increase in 
postfire communities.  Hot fires may damage root 
crowns.  Rocky Mountain maple in northern Idaho 
sprouts 4-8 weeks after prescribed burns in spring  (when plants are still in winter dormancy) and 
sprouts the following spring after fall burning.  
Summer prescribed fires are 
helpful to an associated 
species, redstem ceanothus ( Ceanothus sanguineus), 
which requires high temper atures to crack seedcoats 
prior to germination.    
 
Rocky Mountain maple is best established by 
transplanting 2-year-old or older stock.  To produce 
seedlings for transplanting, seed may be sown 
directly in the field or in  nursery beds.  Unstratified 
seed should be planted in the fall for best results; 
stratified seed is planted in the spring.  Seeds should 
be stored in sealed containers at 1.6–5
oC, but viability 
may be no more than 1-3 years.  Warm stratify at 20–
35.5
oC for 180 days and then moist chill at 3–5oC for 
180 days; or moist chill for 3–6 months at 3–5oC.  
Planting depth is 0.6–2.5 centimeters.  Guidelines for 
seed storage, treatment, growing seedling transplants, 
and planting are summarized  in Olson (1974), Shaw 
(1984), and Wenger (1984).    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Rocky Mountain maple is av ailable a nurseries within 
its range. 
 
References 
Olson, D.F., Jr. & W.J. Gabriel 1974.   Acer L.  In: 
C.S. Schopmeyer (techn. coord.).   Seeds of woody 
plants in the United States .  Agric. Handb. 450.  
USDA, Forest Service, Washington, DC.   
 
Shaw, N. 1984.   Producing bareroot seedlings of 
native shrubs .  In: P.M. Murphy (compiler).   The 
challenge of producing native plants for the 
Intermountain area: Proceedings, Intermountain 
Nurseryman's Associ ation conference; Las Vegas, 
1983.  Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-168.  USDA, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Ogden, UT.   
 
Uchytil, R. J. 1989.   Acer glabrum.  IN: W.C. Fischer 
(compiler).   The fire effects information system  [Data 
base].  USDA Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station, Interm ountain Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Vories, K.C. 1981.   Growing Colorado plants from 
seed: A state of the art.  Volume I.  Shrubs .  Gen. 
Tech. Rep. INT-103.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
Ogden, Utah.

Wenger, K.F. (ed.) 1984.  Forestry handbook (ed. 2).  
John Wiley & Sons, New York, New York. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom , BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore , USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13nov00jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.