Plant Guide
PURPLE GIANT 
HYSSOP 
Agastache scrophulariifolia  
(Willd.) Kuntze 
Plant Symbol = AGSC 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May  Plant 
Materials Center   
 
USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database /  William S. Justice @ USDA-
NRCS PLANTS Database  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  
giant hyssop 
prairie hyssop 
 
Scientific Alternate Names :  
Hyssopus scrophulari ifolia  Willd.  
Agastache scrophulariifolia var.  mollis  (Fernald) A. 
Heller  
 
Uses
 
Wildlife Use : Purple giant hyssop  provides a nectar 
source for pollinator s and is well suited  for  use in 
pollinator restoration habitat.  Preliminary observation 
found that purple giant hyssop attracted 14 different 
species of Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera  in Cape 
May, New Jersey.  The  halictid bee ( Agapostemon 
virescens ),  leaf -cut ter bee ( Megachile mendica) , and 
Megachile te xana species were most frequently  
observed visiting  the flower.  Other bees known to 
frequent the flower are the European honey  bee ( Apis  mellifera
), black and gold bumble bee ( Bombus 
auricomus ), and Bombus pensy lvanicus. The flower 
a lso  attract s goldfinches and hummingbirds.  
 
Ornamental   
Purple giant hyssop  is a popular ornamental plant. 
The relatively large height of the plant makes it a 
good choice as a background against fencing.  
 
Ethnobotany  
Like other membe rs of the mint family, the purple 
giant hyssop contains essential oils that provide 
aromatic and medicinal services. Infusion of the root 
was used by the Meskwaki (a Great -Lakes region 
tribe)  as a diuretic.  There is also interest in Agastache  
for its flavo noid compounds. However, in the eastern 
United States species of A. scrophulariifolia  the 
number of compounds is greatly reduced compared to 
the western species of Agastache .  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural  Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Purple giant hyssop is a  late -flowering,  
native  perennial  herb of the mint family.  It can grow 
unusually tall for a mint;  up to 6 feet, with diamond -
shaped  stems, aromatic foliage and flowers , and 
vigorous stolons. The stems are erect and form 
clumps.  The upper braches may be purplish.  
 
The densely bran ched inflorescence is a 1 –6 in  
terminal, continuous, or interrupted flower spike , or 
raceme. The plant usually has  several spikes. The 
tops of the spikes develop into  a  flower and two 
lateral branches develop under the flower from a 
common node;  giving the inflorescence a 
symmetrical appearance. The flowe r clusters persist 
throughout the winter.  
 
The individual flowers are ¼  in  long,  15-nerved tubes 
that are lavender to pale pink. The upper lip has 2 
lobes and projects forward; and  the lower lip curves 
downwards with 3 lobes. The  individual lobes are 3 -
ner ved.  
 
Not all flowers open at the same time. The flowers 
contain 4 stamens that extend beyond the flower. The 
two lower stamens curve upwards, while the two

upper stamens curve downwards. The pollen sacs are 
nearly parallel. 
 
A. scrophulariifolia  is simila r to blue giant hyssop ( A. 
foeniculum ), however purple giant hyssop has a cup -
like whorl of green sepals (modified leaf -like bracts 
under the flower) while  A. foeniculum has blue -violet 
sepals. Often the sepals of giant purple hyssop have 
colored margins.  
 
Nutlets are .05 –.07  in ( 1.5–2 mm ), dark brown, 
rounded, and minutely hairy at the squared -off tip.  
The  stalked  leaves of purple giant hyssop are 
positioned opposite on either side of the stem. The 
s harp -pointed leaves are 4  in long and 2  in  wide, with 
a  cordate, somewhat heart -shaped or rounded base. 
The margins of t he leaves are coarsely toothed and 
s hort hairs cover the leaf stems.  The undersides of the 
leaves are green, and smooth or appear  shaggy. 
Conversely, the underside of the blue giant hyssop 
( A.  foeniculum ) is whitish. The species name is 
derived from the Scrophulariaceae or figwort family, 
for the resemblance of the leaves to the figwort. 
When crushed, the leaves  e mit a distinct, anise -like 
odor.  
 
Distribution : Purple giant hyssop is currently f ound 
in eastern and cen tral North America. It was  once 
found from New England south to Georgia, and west 
to Kansas; h owever, this extent is shrinking. It i s now 
considered uncommon in eastern and central North 
America, but is not yet considered rare. This species 
overlaps with the geographic areas of Agastache 
nepetoides  (L.) Kuntze. Purple giant hyssop is a lso 
found in eastern Asia. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : Like many members of the mint family, 
purple giant hyssop grows best in moist soil or wet 
conditions.  It is found in rich  woodland sites with 
dappled shade , woodland borders, meadows, thickets, 
the upper limits of floodplains,  and upland woods. It 
prefers  recently d isturbed, sandier  soils where 
competition is limited.  Plants will not persist under 
hot and dry conditions (USDA zone 9 or higher). 
Threats to its  habitat include changes in land use, 
competition from non -native species, and  natural 
succession.  
 
Establishm ent 
Purple giant hyssop requires cold stratification and 
sunlight to germinate. Keep the seed for 8 weeks at 
40ºF and move to 68ºF for germination.  The seeds 
will germinate in 30 –90 days  in containers with good 
drainage.  When planting in the fall, cold str atification 
is not required.  For vegetative propagation, take late 
spring cuttings from the basal growth that emerges in 
mid -March.  These cuttings can be fertilized for 
quicker establishment.    
Purple giant hyssop propagates rapidly by seed and 
transplants 
easy into natural settings. One can use it 
in dry- site seed mixes for pollinator habitat  at 8% of 
the  mix.  Sow into open ground and cove r with a light 
layer of mulch or sow into flats and grow to 1 ft in 
height before tra nsplanting. There are 60,000 –93,000 
seeds/ounce.   
 
Management  
Because purple giant hyssop requires soil disturbance 
for successful establishment, regular clearings  must 
be created  and maintained through tree -thinning, 
elimination of competing vegetation, or delaying 
natural  succession cycle s.  
 
Populations of purple giant hyssop tend to be short -
lived because they are easily out -competed. 
Therefore, field plots may ne ed to be re-established 
every 3 –4 years for a fuller look. To encourage more 
vigorous growth, cut 2 –6 in  from the plant.  
 
Pest s and Potential Problems  
Little is known  about potential pests. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests  the plant can be affected by 
mildew and rusts.  There are mixed findings on the 
plant’s su sceptibility to browsing deer.  
 
The gradual and continued loss of farmland to either 
forests or urbaniza tion continues to threaten a species 
that requires open fields and meadows for habitat.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Many nurseries sell this popular ornamental plant and 
its cultivars. Cultivars include ‘Blue Fortune’, 
‘Premium Blue’, ‘Liquorice Blue’, and ‘Premium 
Blush’. It is not known whether A. scrophulariifolia  
can be used as an important source for honey or 
essential oils.   
 
References  
Cardno J.F. n.d. Plant species list.  Native plant  
nursery. 
http://www.cardnojfnew.com/Nursery/Plants/Spe
ciesList.aspx  ( accessed  7 Feb 2012)  
Chayka, K. 2006. Agastache scrophulariifolia  (Purple giant hyssop). Minnesota wildflowers. 
http://www.minnesotawildflowers.info/flower/pu
rple-giant -hyssop  (accessed  7 Feb 2012)  
Corrigan, E.E. 2002.  Agastache scrophulariifolia 
(Willd.) Kuntze. Purple giant hyssop: 
Conservation and research p lant for New 
England . New Eng. Wildfl. Soc . Framingham, 
MA.  p. 1 -22.   
Fernald, M.L. 1950. Gray’s manual of botany, 8th ed . 
America n Book Company, NY.  
Gleason, H.A. and  A. Cronquist. 1963. Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and

adjacent Canada. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company,  NY, NY.   
Hardy plants. n.d. Seed germination database  [Online] . Available at 
http://hardy plants.com/A.htm (Last accessed: 07 
Feb 2012)  
Moerman, D.E. 2009. Native American medicinal  plants: an ethnobotanical dictionary. Timber 
Press Inc. , Portland, Oregon. p. 51.  
NatureServe. 2011. NatureServe explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life [Online].  Version 7.1. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available at 
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed 
07 Feb 2012)   
Vogelmann, J.E. 1984. Flavonoids of Agastache  section Agastache . Biochem. Syst. Ecol . 12( 4): 
363- 366.   
 
Prepared By:  
Christopher M.  She ahan.  USDA- NRCS,  Cape May 
Plant Materials Center , Cape May, NJ. 
 
Citation:  
C.M.Sheahan.  2012. Plant guide for  purple giant 
hyssop  (Agastache scrophulariifolia) . USDA-NRCS, 
Cape May Pla nt Materials Center. Cape May, NJ . 
08210.  
 
Published  07/2012 
 
Edited:  
 
F or more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site http://plant -material s.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER