Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE FIR 
Abies concolor  (Gord. & 
Glend.) Lindl. ex. Hildebr.  
Plant Symbol = ABCO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Abies grandis var. concolor , balsam fir, Colorado 
white fir, Picea concolor, Pinus concolor , silver fir, 
and white balsam.  There are two varieties of white 
fir, sometimes recognized as separate varieties and 
sometimes grouped under the white fir blanket.  They 
are Rocky Mountain fir ( Abies concolor var. 
concolor ) and California white fir ( Abies concolor 
var. lowiana , also known as Sierra white fir). 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used white fir for 
medicine, building material, and for making 
household items.  The needles were used to relieve 
pain caused by rheumatism and pulmonary ailments.  
The resin was used to heal  cuts, sores, and boils and 
was also decocted for the treatment of venereal 
diseases.  Bark infusions were used to remedy 
tuberculosis. 
 
 
 
 
Bark was used to dye bucksk in a tan color.  Branches 
were used to line storage containers and to make pipe 
stems.  The plant was used  to decorate ceremonies 
and houses. 
 
Ornamental:  White fir is a popular species in the 
Christmas tree industry.  It is drought and heat 
resistant and is often used for plantings in the rural 
and suburb landscapes of the northern United States. 
 
 Mark Brand. 2001. The University of ConnecticutPlantDatabase
Rehabilitation:  White fir is used to revegetate 
disturbed forest sites where it naturally occurs.  It is 
also an appropriate choice for use on roadcuts due to 
its ability to stabilize soil. 
 
Wildlife:  White fir habitats are included in the 
summer and winter ranges of deer, elk, and bear.  
Mountain beaver habitat use has been correlated to 
white fir abundance.  Many bird species, including 
bald eagle, northern spotted owl, brown creeper, and 
red-breasted nuthatches are  associated with white fir 
habitat types. 
 
Mule deer and black-tailed deer browse new foliage 
in the spring.  Porcupines consume white fir bark and 
can destroy saplings.  Mice  eat snow-level suckers in 
the winter while pocket gophers eat seedlings in the 
winter and fall.  Blue grouse consume the needles.  
Grouse, chipmunks, mice, flying squirrels, 
chickadees, crossbills, and Clark’s nutcracker 
consume white fir seeds.  The Douglas squirrel 
caches white fir cones during late summer and fall. 
 
Hollowed-out trunks provide protection and shelter 
for many small mammals including weasels, 
porcupines, and black bears. 
 
Wood Products:  White fir wood is used for all-
purpose construction materials like framing, 
plywood, and pulpwood.  Its straight grain makes the 
wood appropriate for use as poles and pilings.  White 
fir is also used for firewood although it does not 
produce much heat. 
 
Legal Status 
Rocky Mountain white fir ( Abies concolor var. 
concolor ) is protected in Nevada as a Christmas tree. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s

current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  White fir is a large 
coniferous tree, growing up to 55 m tall and having a 
dbh of up to 1 to 2 m, depending on location.  The 
bark is smooth, whitish-gray, and occasionally 
blistered with resin vesicles, becoming thick, hard 
and irregularly furrowed with age.  The crown tends 
to be symmetrical and dome-shaped, although the 
varieties of white fir may exhibit differences in 
crown shape.  California white fir has a cylindrical 
crown while Rocky Mountain white fir has a broader 
crown.  Branches are short and stout, arranged in 
whorls of 4 or 5.  Buds are blunt.  Leaves (needles) 
are 3-7 cm long, loosely 2-ranked, rounded at the 
ends, and curved upward.  A waxy covering give the 
needles a bluish cast.  Needles also have two white 
lines on their undersides.  Cone production varies by 
site, tree size, and age.  White fir trees begin cone 
production at about 40 years and bear cones at the 
upper third of the crown.  Cones are 10-13 cm long, 
greenish-yellow becoming dark purple, produce 
about 185-295 seeds  each, and shatter upon maturity.  
The seeds are released in the fall and germinate in the 
spring. 
 
Key characteristics of white fir include the similar 
coloring on both upper and undersides of the needles, 
smooth bark with resin blisters, long needles (in 
comparison to other fir species), resinous buds, 
circular leaf scars, and a citrus odor that is released 
when the needle is broken. 
 
Morphological and chemical characters, such as 
needle tip shape, stomatal arrangement, and terpene 
content, separate the two white fir varieties. 
 
Distribution :  White fir is native to the western 
United States, from Idaho, south through Colorado 
and New Mexico, and west through California and 
Oregon.  The Great Basin creates the gap between the 
varieties.  Rocky Mountain white fir occurs in the 
central portion of the white fir range, from 
southeastern California, Arizona, and New Mexico to 
southeastern Idaho and Colorado.  It has also been 
planted in the New England states.  California white 
fir occurs from central  California into western 
portions of Nevada and southwest Oregon.  It has 
been reported in southern California, although there 
is no confirmation that these plants are not the Rocky 
Mountain variety.   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: In the mixed conifer forests of California 
and southern Oregon, white fir may form pure stands 
or share dominance with species such as incense-
cedar, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, sugar pine, 
Jeffrey pine, and Douglas pine.  It is also a secondary 
species in subalpine woodlands represented by 
whitebark pine, limber pine, mountain hemlock, 
lodgepole pine, western white pine and foxtail pine.  
California white fir is one of the coniferous 
dominants of the California hardwood forests.  In the 
mixed-conifer forest of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, 
it may share dominance with incense cedar, 
ponderosa pine, sugar pine, and Douglas fir.  The 
mesic sites at upper elevations of the Sierra Nevada 
Mountains are referred to as the white fir zone.   
 
Within the Cascade Range of northern California and 
central Oregon, the white fir zone occurs at 
elevations above 1500 m.  It is the dominant species, 
having 18 known associa tions with species like 
lodgepole pine, western serviceberry, mountain 
hemlock and Pacific rhododendron.  It is also found 
within mixed conifer stands at mid-elevations. 
White fir is an indicator species of the lower 
elevation limit of montane forest vegetation in the 
Klamath Mountains of California and Oregon.  At 
higher elevations, white fi r shares dominance with 
red fir.  In the mountain ranges of southern 
California, white fir becomes the dominant species at 
higher elevations.  It is  associated with sugar pine, 
incense cedar, and western juniper.   
 
The white fir series in the major mountain ranges in 
the southwest can have any mixture of white fir with 
Douglas fir, Engelmann spruce, blue spruce, 
subalpine fir, ponderosa pine, and southwestern white 
pine.  It is a dominant or climax species of several 
habitat types and series in Arizona, New Mexico, 
Utah, and Colorado.   
 
In Utah, white fir occurs throughout the higher 
mountain ranges of the northwestern region and 
increases in importance through southern Utah.  It 
occurs in subalpine zones with Engelmann spruce 
and blue spruce in the Douglas fir series and 
ponderosa pine habitat types. 
 
In southern Colorado and northern New Mexico, 
white fir is a co-climax species with Douglas fir and 
is associated with blue sp ruce, limber pine, ponderosa 
pine, Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, quaking 
aspen, and Rocky Mountain juniper.  The white fir-

Douglas fir-pondersoa pine series is the most 
widespread and one of the most varied types in 
Arizona and New Mexico.  In mixed conifer forests, 
dominated by the white fir-gambel oak habitat type, 
white fir shares climax status with Douglas fir.  Other 
associates include Chihuahua pine, Rocky Mountain 
lodgepole pine, Mexican pinyon, and New Mexico 
locust. 
 
White fir is widespread in riparian areas of Utah, 
Wyoming, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico.  It 
is associated with b oxelder and narrowleaf 
cottonwood in Utah, blue spruce and lodgepole pine 
in Wyoming, and with blue spruce, cottonwood 
species, and Rocky Mountain maple in Colorado, 
Arizona, and New Mexico.  More detailed habitat 
descriptions can be found in Zouhar (2001). 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones of white fir range from 3 
to 7.  It occurs at varied elevations, ranging from 900 
m to over 3000 m.  Annual precipitation varies 
among white fir sites from 350 mm to 1240 mm.  
White fir tends to occupy more mesic sites at lower 
elevations and more xeric site s at upper elevations.  It 
grows on acidic soil, most types of parent material, 
and is tolerant of a wide range of soil conditions, 
nutrient availability, and pH.  It grows best on 
moderately deep and well-drained sandy- or clay- 
loam soils.  It is moderately sensitive to excess soil 
moisture and is less tolerant of shade compared to 
associated true firs.  De nse shade will decrease the 
growth rate, but will not kill the tree. 
 
Establishment 
Germination and early growth are best if seeds have 
fallen on bare mineral soil before the permanent 
snow cover has fallen.  Root systems are longer, 
heavier, and have more mycorrhizal root tips if 
grown in bare mineral soil.  Seedlings are best 
established in partial shade, but can also establish in 
dense shade.  Once established, it grows best in full 
sun.   
 
Management  
White fir is easily killed by fire.  Low branches 
provide a ladder for understory fire to reach the 
canopy.  Prescrib ed burning is recommended if pure 
stands of white fir are not desired and to reduce fuel 
loading.  Burns will promote suckering of other tree 
species so that pure stands of white fir will not form. 
 
White fir can be managed for timber harvest.  
Shelterwood methods have the best regeneration 
results.  Some overstory removal provides enough  light for white fir regeneration, but also provides 
enough shade to prevent the regeneration of other 
species.  Many white fir stands have been managed 
using even-aged management techniques.  
 
Mycorrhizal associations ar
e important to the growth 
and health of white fir.  Bare mineral soils promote 
these associations that aid in establishment on poor 
sites. 
 
Lack of management in white fir stands may increase 
the trees’ chances of susceptibility to insect pests and 
diseases. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Dwarf mistletoe is a common pest of white fir.  The 
parasitic plants germinate on white fir branches and 
force their roots into the phloem of the host branch.  
Dwarf mistletoe weakens the tree and leaves it 
susceptible to fungal infections and insect attacks.  It 
also creates stem cankers that leave the wood weak 
and unsuitable for use as lumber. 
 
Wounding, as a result of mechanical injuries, fire, 
insects, or frost cracks, promotes or provides entrance 
for fungi into white fir trees.   Annosus, Armillaria , 
laminated root diseases, yellow cap fungus, Indian 
paint fungus, and white pocket rot reduce plant 
productivity and cause wood decay and mortality.  
Fungal infections also promote susceptibility to 
insect infestations. 
 
The fir engraver beetle ( Scolytus ventralis), a 
member of the bark beetle family, causes high 
mortality in white fir stands.  The beetle bores holes 
into the main stem, often in bark crevices at the 
branch and trunk junctions.  Once under the bark, 
adults engrave egg galleries into the sapwood, 
disrupting the flow of water and nutrients to that 
portion of the plant.  The  appearance of yellowed or 
reddened branches on an otherwise green tree is early 
evidence of fir engraver in festation.  Fir engravers 
can kill the plant.  The only known preventative is 
proper maintenance of white fir trees. 
 
White fir in shallow soils can be damaged by strong 
winds.  The chances of windthrow are increased 
when neighboring trees are removed. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
White fir is produced by seeds.  Seeds are ready for 
collection when the cone easily breaks apart.  A cold 
stratification period up to 60 days is required.  
Germination will occur under an alternating 
temperature cycle of 30
oC daytime and 20oC 
nighttime temperatures.

White fir is easily transplanted, although it is 
somewhat sensitive to being transplanted in autumn.  
If planted in autumn, care should be taken to fertilize, 
thoroughly water, adequately mulch, amend the soil, 
and avoid winter salt spray.  These care practices will 
enhance the chances for survival during the first 
winter.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program has not 
released white fir cultivars for conservation use.   
 
Ornamental cultivars are somewhat available from 
commercial growers in ball and burlap form: 
 
‘Blue Cloak’ 
‘Blue Globe’ 
‘Blue Select’ 
‘Candicans’ 
‘Compacta’ 
‘Conica’ 
‘Dwarf Blue’ 
‘Gables Weeping’ 
‘Glenmore’ 
‘Nana’ 
‘Sherwood Blue’ 
‘Winter Gold’ 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 29 
June 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Aldworth, S.J. 1998.  Abies concolor. 
(http://project.bio.iastate.edu/trees/campustree/ISU_tr
ees.html, 29 June 2004). Iowa State University, 
Ames. 
 
Baskin, C.J., J.M. Baskin. 2001.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container Abies concolor 
(G&G) Lindl. plants.  (http://www.nativeplant 
network.org, 29 June 2004). College of Natural 
Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Brand, M. 2001.  University of Connecticut plant 
database   (http://www.hort.uconn.edu/plants/, 29 
June 2004). University of Connecticut, Storrs. 
 
Earle, C.J. 2004.  Gymnosperm database 
(http://www.conifers.org/index.htm, 29 June 2004). 
Department of Botany, University of Bonn, 
Germany. 
 
Heatley, R. 1999.  Ornamental plants plus,  Version 
3.0 
(http://www.msue.msu.edu/imp/modzz/masterzz.html
, 29 June 2004). Michigan State University 
Extension, East Lansing. 
 
Rhodes, T. 2002.  PlantFacts database 
(http://plantfacts.osu.edu/, 29 June 2004).  The Ohio 
State University, Columbus. 
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 2003. 
Dendrology tree fact sheets 
(http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/factsheets. 
cfm, 29 June 2004). Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University, Blacksburg. 
 
Zouhar, K. 2001.  Abies concolor. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 29 June 2004). 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Missoula. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 4Aug2004 sbw, 13Oct2004 rln; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.