Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PAWPAW 
Asimina triloba  (L.) Dunal 
Plant Symbol = ASTR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate names 
False banana, pawpaw apple, custard apple, custard 
banana, poor man’s banana, banana tree, Indiana 
banana, Nebraska banana, Hoosier banana, Michigan 
banana, white plum. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Some Native American tribes 
cultivated the pawpaw for fruit and are responsible 
for its widespread range today.  The Cherokee and 
many other tribes used the pawpaw fruit for food.  
The fruit, which is the largest edible fruit native to 
America, is high in amino acids.  The Iroquois used 
the mashed fruit to make sm all cakes that were dried 
and stored.  The dried cakes were soaked in water 
and cooked to make a sauce  or relish that was served 
with corn bread.  Raw and cooked fruits were dried 
by the sun or on a fire.  These were stored for use in 
the future or taken on hunt s.  The Cherokee used the 
inner bark to make cordage.  By twisting the bark, 
they made string and strong ropes.  
 
Other :  The twigs and leaves contain extracts that 
have insecticidal properties.  The leaves contain anti-
carcinogens. 
 
Wildlife : Opossum, raccoon, foxes and squirrels eat 
the fruits. Larvae of the  lovely Zebra Swallowtail  butterfly (
Eurytides marcellus ) feed exclusively on 
the leaves.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 © William S. Justice  Smithsonian Institution, Botany Department @ PLANTS 
Description 
General:  Custard-apple or Annona family 
(Annonaceae).  This perenn ial tree or shrub grows 
from 3 to 12 m tall. The drooping, pear-shaped leaves 
are alternate, from 10 to 30 cm long, with smooth 
margins and pointed tips.  Th e leaves are coated with 
fine whitish hairs on the  upper surface with rusty-
colored hairs on the under-side.  Leaves are aromatic, 
with a smell reminiscent of bell pepper. 
Inconspicuous but interesting flowers (4 to 5cm in 
diameter) with 3 sepals, are green upon opening and 
turn to dark purple or maroon in color.  From 1 to 4 
flowers grow in the leaf ax ils before leafing, usually 
in April or May.  The six velvety petals (2cm-2.5cm 
long) are stiff and curl slightly backwards.  Yellowish 
green to brown, cylindrical , mango-shaped fruits are 
7-16 cm long and grow solitarily or 2 to 4 together.  
The large fruits (5 to 16 ounces) ripen between 
August and October.  Fruits have a thin skin, which 
contain a yellow custard-like pulp that is said to taste 
like papaya.  Some varieties contain a whitish-green 
pulp that is less flavorful.  Fruits contain several flat 
2cm long seeds.  The deciduous leaves turn bright 
yellow before dropping in the fall.  
 
Similar species:  A. parivflora , is called the “dwarf 
pawpaw” or “possum-simmon.”   A. tetramera, 
commonly known as ‘opossum pawpaw’, is a rare 
and endangered species from southern Florida. Other 
similar species include  A. incarna, A. longifolia, A. 
obovata, A. pygmaea, A. reticulata, A. X nashii.   
  
Distribution : This plant grows over much of Eastern 
North America from Ontario and Michigan south to 
Florida and Texas.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Pawpaws grow in humid climates and are highly frost 
tolerant.  They grow in the shade in open woods 
usually in wet, fertile bottomlands, but can grow in 
upland areas on rich soils.  Pawpaws occur as

understory trees in oak-hickory forest in the mid-
south where they are found in clusters or thickets.  
They do not do well in coastal environments.  The 
plants purportedly may do well in the Pacific 
Northwest and parts of California.  Growth trials are 
being conducted at Oregon State University. 
 
Establishment 
The appearance of this tree  gives a tropical flavor to 
temperate gardens and provides edible landscaping. 
Pawpaws can serve as a screen or can be grown in a 
container as a specimen tree.  Both trees and shrubs 
have a conical pyramid-like shape when grown in 
sun, and a more open structure if grown in shade. 
They can be planted in the shade of tall, open trees or 
in partial shade, although they fruit best in sun.  If 
planting in open sun, provide a shading structure to 
allow filtered sun for the first few years.  The plants 
prefer moist, slightly acidic soils and require regular 
watering, but are adaptable to many conditions.  They 
do not perform well in poorly drained soils and need 
protection from the wind.   At least two plants are 
needed for cross-pollination.   
 
Seeds:  Seeds can be sown in the fall to over-winter 
or can be stratified by exposing to cold temperature 
(32-40 degrees) for 90 to 120 days.  Seed should 
never be allowed to dry out.  If sowing seeds into 
containers use deep pots or tubes to allow for healthy 
roots. 
 
Transplanting seedlings :  Transplant seedlings in the 
spring.  Larger plants do not transplant well.  The 
roots are widely spreading, so purchase plants that 
have been grown in deep pots or tubes to insure 
healthy plants.  The roots are brittle, so use care when 
transferring from containers.  Water the transplants 
frequently during the growing season. 
 
Vegetative propagation :  Pawpaws can be propagated 
by whip-and–tongue, bark inlay, cleft graft, or chip 
budding techniques.   
 
Management 
This plant spreads quickly by suckers to form a 
“pawpaw patch.”  Remove suckers as they form if a 
tree form is desired.  Sucker formation slows as the 
tree develops.  Other than control of suckers, the 
plants do not require pruning.  The plants are disease 
and pest resistant and they are not browsed by deer. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Davis’ is commercially cultivated for fruit; 
‘Sunflower,’ ‘Mary Foos Johnson,’ ‘Taylor,’ 
Overleese,’ ‘Sweet Alice,’ are popular cultivars.   A. parviflora
 is a dwarf variety of pawpaw.  These plant 
materials are somewhat available from commercial 
sources. 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey  1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, NY.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H.  1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians . Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
California Rare Fruit Growers, Inc.  1999.  PawPaw 
Fruit Facts . <
http://www.crfg.org/pubs/ff/pawpaw. 
html.>(April 29, 2001). 
 
Flint, H.L.  1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America .  Second Edition. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist  1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and Exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press.  Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 208 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey  1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history . Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Hann, J.H.  1986.   The use and processing of plants 
by Indians of Spanish Florida .  Southeastern 
Archaeology 5(2):91-102. 
 
Hummer, K. 1996.  NCGR-Corvallis: Pawpaws in 
Oregon . <
http://www.ars-grin.gov/ars/PacWest/ 
Corvallis/ncgr/cool/pawpaws.html> (April 29, 2001). 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson  1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998.   Native American 
ethnobotany .  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 927 
pp. 
 
Ottesen, C.  1995.   The native plant primer .  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Podems, M. & B. Bortz  1975.   Ornamentals for 
eating .  Rodale Press, Emmaus, Pennsylvania. 67 pp. 
 
Pomper, K., S.C. Jones, R.N. Peterson, T.Turner, & 
D.R. Layne  1990.  Paw Paw Planting Guide . 
Kentucky Sate University Cooperative Extension

Program. <http://www.pawpaw.kysu.edu/ 
pawpaw/ppg.html>. (April 29, 2001). 
 
Small, J.K.  1933.  Manual of southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I.  1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp.  
 
Swanson, R.E.  1994.   A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Whitthoft, J.  1947.   An early Cherokee 
ethnobotanical note  (Communicated by W.N. 
Fenton).  Journal of the Washington Academy of 
Sciences:37(3): 73-75. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 21May2001  jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.