Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA BUCKEYE  
Aesculus californica  (Spach) 
Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = AECA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Horse chesnut; Indian names: de-sa' ka-la' (Pomo); 
far'-sokt (Nomlaki); sympt'-ol (Yuki); ah'-te (Coast 
Miwok) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: This tree had multiple cultural uses 
among California Indian tribes.  Many indigenous 
groups utilized buckeye seeds for food, often when 
other plant food sources were scarce.  These tribes 
included the Costanoan, Salinan, Kitanemuk, 
Serrano, Wappo, Sierra Miwok, Coast Miwok, 
Chumash, Kawaiisu, Northern Maidu among others.  
The Pomo ate the seeds even when other important 
food plants were plentiful.  The seeds are poisonous 
to humans in the raw state.  Thus, the nuts were 
cracked open with a rock,  the shells removed, the 
seeds pounded into flour,  and their toxic saponins 
removed in a lengthy leaching process.  The meal 
was subsequently cooked and eaten.  There are many 
different methods for processing and cooking 
buckeye seeds for food, depending upon the tribe.  
The seeds have medicinal properties and were cut 
into pieces, mixed with water, and made into 
suppositories for hemorrhoids by the Costanoan and  Kawaiisu.  The Pomo cut bark from the base of the 
tree and made a poultice, which was laid on a 
snakebite.  Young buckeye 
shoots were sometimes 
used as spindles or twirling sticks in fire-making kits 
of the Sierra Miwok, Northern Maidu, Wappo, Yahi 
and other tribes. Many tr ibes mashed buckeye nuts 
and poured the contents into quiet pools to stupefy or 
kill fish. 
 
Wildlife : Do not plant buckeyes  near apiaries as the 
flowers are poisonous to ho ney bees.  No wildlife eat 
buckeye seeds except squirrels, such as the California 
ground squirrel ( Citellus beecheyi ). 
 Beatrice F. Howitt © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Buckeye Family (Hip pocastanaceae).  This 
native, deciduous shrub or tree reaches 12 m in 
height with a broad, rounded crown.  The palmately 
compound leaves occur in leaflets of 5 to 7 and each 
leaflet is oblong-lanceolate and finely serrate.  The 
inflorescence has many showy flowers in a panicle-
like arrangement and it is erect, 1-2 dm. in length.  
Each individual flower has 4-5 petals and these are 
white to pale rose with 5-7 exserted stamens.  The 
fruit is pear-shaped and smooth.  The large, shiny 
light-brown seeds are 2-5 cm.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : The California buckeye is one of the first 
shrubs to leaf out in spring and one of the earliest to 
shed its leaves in mid-summer. It is found on dry 
slopes, canyons and the borders of streams in many 
plant communities below 1700 m. in northwestern 
and central western California, Cascade Range, 
Sierra Nevada foothills, Tehachapi Mountains, Great 
Central Valley, and southwestern Mohave Desert. 
 
General : Harvest the large seeds from the tree or 
shrub about November.  Plant them in the ground 
immediately--half buried in  an area of full sun or 
light shade.  There is a light spot on the seed, which

is the growing point when being formed.  The radicle 
will sprout from this area so make sure that this spot 
is covered with soil. Plant the seeds in a well-drained 
soil.  Water the soil immediately after planting, and if 
there is not enough rain during the rainy season, 
supplement it with hand watering.  The plants will 
also need some summer watering the first year so a 
good rule to follow is to keep the soil damp.  The tree 
is a fast grower and can achieve as much as ten 
inches in height in one year.  After buckeye seeds 
have been in the ground one full year, they should 
become established, and will not need continual care.   
 
Management  
When the shrub is mature, dead and dying branches 
can be lightly pruned if necessary. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources. 
 
References 
Beard, Y.S. 1979.   The Wappo: A report.  Malki 
Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Collier, M.E.T. & S.B. Thalman (editors) 1991.  
Interviews with Tom Smith and Maria Copa: Isabel 
Kelly's ethnographic notes on the Coast Miwok 
Indians of Marin and southern Sonoma Counties, 
California .  Miwok Archeological Preserve of Marin 
Occasional Papers Number 6. 
 
Dixon, R.B. 1905.   The Huntington California 
expedition: the Northern Maidu .  Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History 17(3):119-346. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V.P. Lawson. 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo plants .  American Indian Studies 
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Harrington, J.P. 1942.   Culture element distributions: 
XIX central California coast .  Anthropological 
Records 7(1): 1-45. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Stone, W.J. 1993.  Hippocas tanaceae.  Page 682 IN: 
The Jepson manual: Higher plants of California .  
J.C. Hickman (ed.). University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinators 
Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
c/o/ Plant Science Dept.,  University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 29jun03 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.