Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK MANGROVE 
Avicennia germinans (L.) L. 
Plant Symbol = AVGE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Golden Meadow, Louisiana 
 Garret Thomassie, USDA NRCS Golden Meadow PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
None in common usage 
 
Uses 
Black mangrove is valuable in soil conservation in 
brackish and salt water marshes.  It serves as nursery 
habitat for crustaceans and fish, and filters sediment 
for building new marsh.   Black mangrove also mixes 
well with other native plants to reduce wave energy  
 
Status 
This species is native to the Gulf of Mexico and has 
not been identified as invasive or detrimental to the 
environment.  Black mangrove is a native and 
valuable component of the marsh ecosystem.  
 
Please consult the PLANTS website and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) 
 
Description 
General : Black mangrove is a subtropical native 
woody shrub that grows in salt marshes.  Mangroves 
are very hardy, having become adapted to harsh 
environments where water and salinity levels 
fluctuate.  Pneumatophores, or breather roots, form a 
network, collecting silt and debris and controlling 
erosion.    The pneumatophores are also
 excellent nursery areas 
for crustaceans in the marsh plant community. Height 
will vary from 4 to 9 feet.  Leaves are 1 to 5 inches 
long, elliptical, opposite, thick, leathery, dark green, 
glabrous (smooth) above, and grayish with a tight 
felt-like pubescence beneath.  Glands on the 
underside secrete salt.  Clusters of small sessile 
flowers with white petals, approximately ½ inch in 
diameter, are borne in the  leaf axils or growing tips 
on the twigs.  The fruit are flat, approximately 1 inch 
long, dark green and glabrous beneath a velvety 
pericarp.  The bark on the black mangrove is thick, 
dark brown or blackish, with rough irregular flattened 
scales.  Twigs are grayish in color and smooth, with 
enlargements at the joints.  Mangrove detritus (dead 
leaves and twigs) in water feeds microorganisms that 
provide food for young marine life. 
 
Distribution :  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Black mangrove grows in the intertidal 
zone throughout the Gulf of Mexico.  Black 
mangrove is a truly unique plant species that, when 
established properly, and under applicable conditions, 
has provided land stabilization due to the easy 
transport of seedlings, quick aerial root production, 
Best practice has been to plant two to three year old 
seedlings because undergroun d root systems increase 
sediment holding capabilities.  This plant also 
provides for wildlife and marine habitats. 
(USDA/NRCS Plant Guide: Small, J.K 1933.) 
 
Adaptation 
Black Mangrove adaptation is in the sub-tropical to 
tropical Gulf of Mexico in intertidal zones.   
 
This plant is susceptible to freezing and the native 
range can be changed drastically by hard winters.  
The contributions of genetic diversity and habitat are 
presently under study to determine cold hardiness. 
 
Establishment 
Black mangrove establishes in nature from seed that 
floats and can travel some di stance on the tides.  Seed 
will germinate quickly to anchor young seedlings in 
good habitat.  
 
In the nursery, seed collected in the wild will not 
survive more than three to four weeks.  Seed should 
be soaked in water, the pericarp removed and the 
seed planted in any commercial potting soil

Germination normally occurs within a couple of 
weeks and seedlings take root. 
 
 
 
Recalcitrant seed on left, pericarp removed on right 
Garret Thomassie, USDA NRCS Golden Meadow PMC 
 
Our experience indicates that a normal variety of 
commercially available pots will suffice for 
germination and early growth.  Plants can be 
maintained in fresh water tanks that hold moisture at 
the bottom of the pots.   
 
Management  
There are no data on managing native black 
mangrove stands.  In the Gulf of Mexico the range of 
black mangrove is “managed”  by the winter weather.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests that could threaten black 
mangrove stands in the wild. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Black mangrove has persisted in the intertidal marsh 
and is a valuable component of the ecosystem.  Loss 
of black mangrove is a concern as it is a woody 
species that persists and assists in habitat 
development and in breaking wave energy and adds 
nesting habitat for birds including the pelican. 
 
Care must be taken to planting as black mangrove is 
very susceptible to freezing.  More work needs to be 
done in collecting ecotypes that might be more frost 
resistant, or attention to habitat differences. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Experience at the NRCS-Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center has shown that seed collected in the 
Fall (October to early December in South Louisiana) 
can be maintained for about a month, but should be 
planted as soon as possible after soaking removing 
the pericarp.   There is work presently being 
conducted on maintaining seed for delayed  germination, but at present, seed should have the 
pericarp removed and planted as soon as possible.  
Seed may be held longer with aeration (Personal 
communication Mat Benoit). 
 
Two year old seedlings or older (18 inches tall) seem 
to be best for successful out planting.  Various sizes 
of tubes and pots have been used with success.  The 
greater the root mass (not pot bound) the greater the 
chance of successful out planting. 
 
Planting where the tidal flow will cover and uncover 
the root collar is best.  Soil types can vary from muck 
soils to areas that have some sand. 
 
 Interior marsh planting 
Garret Thomassie, USDA NRCS Golden Meadow PMC 
 
New plantings in areas of high wave energy may 
have to be protected by baffles or anchoring the 
seedlings in place until the root system is capable of 
supporting the plant.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Ma
terials Centers have 
released one variety:  Pelican Germplasm black 
mangrove is a pre-varietal release from the Golden 
Meadow Plant Materials Center, Galliano, Louisiana, 
selected to provide a plant for soil conservation in 
brackish and salt water marshes. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government”.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Benoit, M. (Feb) 2007. Personal communication .  
Nicholls State University,  Lake Charles, Louisiana

Small, J.K. 1933. Manual of the Southeastern Flora, 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill. 
 
USDA/NRCS Plant Guide  Avicennia germinans 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, Golden 
Meadow, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By : Richard H. Neill , USDA NRCS 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, Galliano, 
Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator : Richard H. Neill , USDA 
NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, 
Galliano, Louisiana 
 
Edited: Joel Douglas a nd Morris Houck; 080827 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.