Plant Guide
DWARF BEAR POPPY 
Arctomecon humilis Coville 
Plant Symbol = ARHU3  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 
Figure 1. Dwarf bearpoppy.  Jane Villa-Lobos @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database . 
 
Alternate Names  
Coville bear -claw poppy  
Common bear poppy  
Low bear -claw poppy  
 
Uses  
There are no known human or wildlife associated uses of 
dwarf  bear poppy.  
 
Status  
Dwarf bear poppy was listed by the USDI Fish and 
Wildife Service as an endangered species in 1979 (USDI 
FWS 1979). At the time of the listing in 1979 this species 
was known to exist in only 5 small disjunct populations 
on very specialized and localized so ils. Several factors 
place dwarf bear poppy in danger of extinction throughout 
its range. The greatest threat to dwarf bear poppy comes 
from housing and industrial development. The area 
currently occupied by the city of Bloomington, Utah 
covers approximately one third of dwarf bear poppy’s 
historically known habitat. Strip mining of gypsum 
deposits in dwarf bear poppy communities also poses a 
threat to the species. Additional threats come from private 
collectors taking plants for ornamental and home 
cultiva tion. However, the unique soil requirements of the 
species preclude it from surviving outside of its native 
range.   Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered sp
ecies, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Poppy family (Papaveraceae).  Dwarf bear 
poppy is a mound forming perennial forb arising from an 
underground woody caudex and long taproot. The leaves 
are 0.5 to 8 cm (0.2 to  3 in) long and 4 to 16 mm (0.16 to 
0.63 in) wide with 3 or 4 lobes or teeth at the tip. Flowers 
sit atop a 2 to 9 cm (0.8 to 3.5 in) stalk. The petals (4 to 6) 
are white and 2 to 4 cm (0.8 to 1.5 in) long. The fruit is an 
egg -shaped capsule filled with sh iny black, 2.5 to 3 mm 
(0.10 to 0.12 in) long seeds (Welsh et al. 2003).  
 
Distribution : 
Dwarf bear poppy is limited in distribution to the St. 
George area in extreme Southwestern Utah. There are 
approximately 12 populations within 10 miles of St. 
George wi th larger populations near Red Bluff, Webb 
Hill, White Dome, Punchbowl Dome and Atkinville.  
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Dwarf bear poppy is found in mixed warm desert shrub 
co mmunities  from 750 to 1050 m (2,500 to 3,400 ft) 
elevations (Nelson and  Harper 1991). The dominant plant 
species associated with dwarf bear poppy habitat are 
Fremont indigo bush ( Psorothamnus fremontii ), 
cheesebush ( Hymenoclea salsola), Mormon tea ( Ephedra 
torreyana), shadscale ( Atriplex confertifolia), shrubby 
buckwheat ( Eriogonum corymbosum ) and Fremont 
pepperweed ( Lepidium fremontii).   
 
Adaptation  
The area in which dwarf bear poppy is found is known as 
the Dixie Corridor, where the Mohave Desert floristi c 
province meets the Colorado Plateau. The non -alkaline, 
gypsiferous soils form cryptogamic soil crusts, which 
exclude most plant species. The result is a region of 
“badlands” with low rolling hills and sparse vegetation 
(USDI FWS 1985).  Dwarf bear poppy is restricted in 
range to areas with gypsum surbstrates derived from the 
Shnabkaib Member of the Moenkopi Formation (Nelson 
and Harper 1991).