Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED ALDER 
Alnus rubra Bong. 
Plant Symbol = ALRU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Pacific Coast alder, Oregon alder, western alder,  
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Native American tribes from Alaska to 
Southern California have long recognized the value 
of red alder and put its bark layers, roots, leaves, 
twigs, cones, and sap to use for a variety of purposes.  
The inner bark was often dried, grounded into a 
powder and then used as a thickener in soups or 
mixed with cereals when making bread.  
 
Various layers of the red alder bark yield red, red-
brown, brown, orange, and yellow dyes 
(Moerman1998).  The various colors from the bark 
were used to color baskets, hides, moccasins, quills,  and hair.  The native Americans of the Pacific 
Northwest extracted a red dye from the inner bark, 
which was used to dye fishnets.  Oregon tribes used 
the innerbark to make a reddish-brown dye for basket 
decorations (Murphey 1959).  Yellow dye made from 
red alder catkins was used to color quills.   
 
A mixture of red alder sap and charcoal was used by 
the Cree and Woodland tribes for sealing seams in 
canoes and as a softener for bending boards for 
toboggans (Moerman 1998).   
 © Tony Morosco 
@ CalFlora 
 
Wood and fiber:  Red alder wood is used in the 
production of wooden products such as food dishes, 
furniture, sashes, doors, millwork, cabinets, paneling 
and brush handles.  It is also used in fiber-based 
products such as tissue and writing paper.   
In Washington and Oregon, it was largely used for 
smoking salmon.  The Indians of Alaska used the 
hallowed trunks for canoes (Sargent 1933).   
 
Medicinal:  The North American Indians used the 
bark to treat many complaints such a headaches, 
rheumatic pains, internal injuries, and diarrhea 
(Moerman 1998).   
 
The Salinan used an extract of the bark of alder trees 
to treat cholera, stomach cramps, and stomachaches 
(Heinsen 1972).  The extract was made with 20 parts 
water to 1 part fresh or aged  bark.  The bark contains 
salicin, a chemical similar to aspirin (Uchytil 1989).   
 
Infusions made from the bark of red alders were 
taken to treat anemia, colds, congestion, and to 
relieve pain.  Bark infusions were taken as a laxative 
and to regulate menstruation.  The Pomo boiled the 
bark in water to make a wash to treat skin irritations 
and sores (Goodrich et al. 1980).  Bark poultices 
were applied to reduce swelling.  Chewing the bark 
helped to heal sores and ulcers in the mouth.   
 
Externally the sap was applied to cuts and a poultice 
of the bark has been applied to eczema, sores, and 
aches (Moerman 1998).  Th e twigs were made into 
infusions that served as liniments for sprains and 
backaches.   
 
Basketry:   The roots of red alder were used in baskets 
made by the Hupa, Whilkut, Nongatl, Lassik, 
Wailaki, Yurok Wiyot, and Pomo tribes (Merrill 
1923).  Red alder roots form the brown pattern in

baskets made by the Whilkut tribe of northwestern 
California.   
 
Wildlife: Deer and elk eat the l eaves, twigs, and buds.  
Red alder seeds attract many bird and small mammal 
species including redpolls, siskins, goldfinches, and 
mice.  Most of the seeds remain on the tree well into 
the fall and winter months, providing valuable 
resources for seed-eating birds, insects and mammals 
when other foods are scarce.  Beavers eat the bark 
and build dams and lodges w ith the stems.  Red alder 
trees provide valuable nesting for birds and thermal 
cover for black-tailed deer and other wildlife.   
 
Livestock : Horses, cattle, sheep and goats browse on 
the leaves, twigs and buds of young alder trees.   
 
Conservation  and erosion control: Red alder is an 
excellent species for re-est ablishing woodlands.  The 
trees are used in forested riparian buffers to help 
reduce stream bank erosion, protect water quality, 
and enhance aquatic environments.  Plantings of red 
alder are effective in controlling erosion on steep 
slopes in disturbed areas (Uchytil 1989).  These fast-
growing trees help to prevent soil erosion because of 
their dense canopy cover and thick litter layer that 
forms within the first 3 to 5 years.  The leaf litter is 
high in nitrogen content (Labadie 1978).   
 
Wood: Red alder wood is a high quality hardwood 
with a fine, even textured, cherry-like grain that is 
important commercially in the Pacific Northwest 
(Labadie 1978).  It is used for cabinetry and furniture 
making as well as a variety of other purposes 
including plywood, veneers, paneling, pulp, and 
firewood.   
 
Other:  The small cones cling to the branches long 
after the leaves have fallen and make decorative 
additions to flower arrangements (Brenzel 2001).   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Birch family (Betulaceae).  Red alder is a 
deciduous tree native to th e Pacific Northwest of 
North America.  The trees are medium-sized, 
reaching various heights from 15 to 30 meters tall 
when mature.  These fast-g rowing trees often grow 1 
meter per year until 20 years of age.  The trees can 
live to 100 years of age with trunks from 36 to 46 cm 
in diameter.  A shrub form occurs when the trees  grow in open exposed areas.  The branches are 
slender and spreading.  The thin bark is generally 
smooth, ashy gray to grayish-brown, and is usually 
covered with white lichens as it ages.
  The inner bark 
is reddish brown.   
 
The alternately arranged leaves are dark green, 
simple and broadly ovate.  The leaves are 6 to 15 cm 
long with a pointed tip.  The leaf edges are serrated 
or softly lobed and slightly rolled under, giving a 
dark-green edging effect from the underside of the 
leaf.  The undersides of th e leaves are rusty colored 
and covered with fine soft hairs.   
 
The trees are monoecious, bearing both female 
flowers and male catkins.  The tassel-like catkins 
grow in cluster of two to four.  The catkins are 
greenish-yellow and 10 to 16 cm long.  The flowers 
appear in spring either before or with the leaves.  The 
flowers develop into small-scaled cones (fruits) that 
are 2 to 2.5cm long and 1  to 1.5 cm across.  Each 
cone contains from 50 to 100 seeds that are tiny flat 
nutlets.  The abundant seeds  are wind dispersed from 
May to winter months.   
 
Red alder trees invade clearings or burned-over areas 
and forms temporary forests (Grimm 1967).  Over 
time, red 
alders build 
up the soil 
with their 
copious litter, 
and enriched 
it with 
nitrogen 
compounds 
formed by 
symbiotic 
bacteria that 
live in little 
nodules on 
their roots.  
Red alder 
stands are 
eventually 
succeeded by 
Douglas fir, 
western 
hemlock, and 
sitka spruce.   
Distribution : 
Red alder is 
most often observed in moist areas within 200 
kilometers of the Pacific Coast of North America 
from Alaska to Southern California at elevations 
below 762 meters (Uchytil 1989).  It also occurs 
 Environmental Affairs Office Washington State Department of 
Transportation

along streams and lakes from the Yukon Territory 
and British Columbia south through the Rocky 
Mountain region to Colorado and New Mexico, and 
along Sierra Nevada to Lower California (Britton 
1908).  Red alder has spread to upland areas since 
European contact because of  increased disturbance, 
such as logging, which opens up sites for 
colonization.   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
 
Habitat: Red alder trees are often associated with 
mixed evergreen forests and redwood forests in 
coastal areas.  The trees grow in riparian forests 
along streams, in swamps and in marshy areas.   
 
Adaptation 
Red alder has two adaptations that allow the trees to 
colonize bare infertile substrates: 1) the roots have 
nodules that house symbiotic bacteria which fix 
nitrogen from the air contai ned in the pores of the 
soil, and 2) the seeds need sunlight to germinate.   
 
Actinomycetes (filamentous  bacteria) in the genus 
Frankia  invade alders through their root hairs and 
stimulate cell division, forming nodules on the roots 
(Pojar & Mackinnon 1994).  Species of  Frankia 
remove nitrogen from the air and ‘fix’ it in a form 
useful to plants (Ibid.).  Red alder provides a home 
for the actinomycete, which in turn ‘leaks’ some of 
the nitrogen, making it available for the alder (Ibid.).  
Alder improves soils fertility by fixing atmospheric 
nitrogen in a form that can be used by other plants.  
This conversion is why fo rests stands containing 
alder generally have a rich understory (Ibid.).   
 
Young trees can survive disturbance by resprouting 
from the stumps (Labdie 1978).  Red alder trees 
tolerate flooding and can grow in areas where the 
water is brackish (Brenzel 2001).   
 
Establishment 
Red alder prefers moist, well-drained, deep sandy 
loams (Labadie 1978) and full sun.  Quick growing 
red alders can be planted with slower growing trees 
such as oak to provide quick screening (Lowry 1999).   
 
Propagation from Seed : Red alder trees are generally 
propagated from seed.  Matu re seeds can be collected 
beginning in May.  Spring sown seeds of  Alnus rubra 
should germinate successfully as long as they are not 
covered as the seeds require sunlight to germinate 
and germinate best in full sun.  Sow the seeds in 
containers or seed trays  containing a slow release  fertilizer.  Firm the medium and place the seeds 
thinly and evenly on top.  When large enough to 
handle, the seedlings can be placed into individual 
pots.  If growth is sufficient, they may be planted into 
their permanent positions in the summer, if not they 
can be planted the following spring.   
 
The seeds do not requir
e pretreatment, however 
germination can be improved by cold stratification 
for 1 to 3 months (Emery 1988).  To do this, mix the 
seeds with three parts moistened peat moss or 
vermiculite.  Place the mixture into an airtight jar or 
sealed plastic bag in the refrigerator for 1 to 3 months 
before planting.  This pro cess is not necessary if the 
seeds are planted in the fall, as the temperatures and 
moisture over winter will accomplish the same 
purpose.   
 
Management  
If desired, red alder trees can be pruned for shape 
when young (Labadie 1978).  Follow up pruning is 
minimal and consists of removing any suckers that 
may form as well as removing dead wood or crossing 
branches.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Aphids and tent caterpillars and borers can be 
problems for red alder trees.   
 
Related Species 
White alder (Alnus rhombifolia ) was also widely used 
for the same purposes as red alder by Native 
American tribes.  White alder occurs in inland areas 
while red alder generally grows in areas of maritime 
influence.  Red alder and white alder can be difficult 
to distinguish from each other.  White alder does not 
have red inner bark or rolled leaf margins.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plants are readily available through native 
plant nurseries.   
 
References 
Baskin, Carol J., Baskin, Jerry M. 2002.  
Propagation protocol for production of container 
Alnus rubra Bong.  Plants University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky . IN: Native Plant Network. 
[Online].  Available: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org.  Moscow (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery. [22 February 2002].

Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.  Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, California.  
768 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens, Georgia. 
 
Emery, D.E.  1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California.  115 pp.   
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the Northern United 
States and Canada .  Iowa State University Press, 
Ames, Iowa. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   Mission San Antonio de Padua 
Herbs: Medicinal herbs of early days .  Third edition. 
Lockwood, California.  142pp. 
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
California.  248 pp.   
 
Lowry, J.L. 1999.   Gardening with a wild heart: 
Restoring California’s native landscapes at home.  
University of California Pres s, Berkeley, California.  
252 pp.   
 
Martin, A.C., A.L. Welson, & H.S. Zim 1951.  
American wildlife and plants .  McGraw Hill Book 
Company, New York, New York.  
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  2nd ed.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Merrill, R.E. 1923.  Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians.   IN: A. L. Kroeber, Editor, 
University of California Publications in American 
Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol XX.  Pp. 215-242.   
 
Mirov, N.T. & C.J. Kraebel 1939.   Collecting and 
handling seeds of wild plants.   Civilian Conservation  Corps Forestry Publication No. 5.  US. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  42 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  
Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(2002). 
 
Munz, P.A. & D.D. Keck 1963.   A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, California.  1681 pp.   
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1933.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Thomas, J.H. 1961.  Flora of the San Cruz mountains 
of California: a manual of the vascular plants .  
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. 
 
Uchytil, R.J. 1989.   Alnus rubra. IN: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory 
2001, May.   Fire Effects Information 
System, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [22 February 
2002].  
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 410. 
 
Washington State Department of Transportation 
2002.   Alnus rubra .  Environmental Affairs Office, 
Olympia, Washington.  Accessed: 10jan02. 
<http://www.wsdot.wa.gov/eesc/environmental/progr
ams/culres/ethbot/a-c/Alnusrubra.htm>

Wyman, D. 1965.  Trees for American gardens .  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York. 
 
Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Diana L. Immel 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California  
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09j un03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.