BLACK OAT 
Avena strigosa  Schreb  
Plant Symbol = AVST2  
 
Figure  1:  Black oat seed head (Photo by Burlingham Seeds)    
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  black bristle -pointed oat, bristle oat, 
lopsided oat, sand oat, small oat  
 
Scientific Names:  Avena  agraria -mutica  Brot ,  
Avena  agraria  Brot  
Description  
General :  Black oat is an upright, winter annual member 
of the Poaceae famil y.  Heights vary from 2 ½ –5 feet tall 
depending on the growing conditions.  Leaf blades are 
flat, rough and numerous.  The panicle is open, loose and 
oval shaped.  The primary panicle branch es droop with 
pendulous spikelets.  Spikelets usually have two fertile 
florets with multiple awns.  The primary a wn is straight, 
black and 0.7 –1.4 inches long.  Black oat sexually 
reproduces a hairy caryopsis.  In Alabama, black oat seed 
ripens in mid -May  through early June (USDA -ARS -
NSDL, 2005; Clayton et al., 2014 ).  Distribution
:  Black oat has a Mediterranean origin and 
has been used in European countries since the Bronze 
Age  for cereal or fodder (Diedrichsen, 2014; Kubiak , 
2009).  Its use in Europe declined dramatically with the 
introduction of the  more productive common oat ( Avena 
sativa ).  Currently, black oat is grown in Brazil, the 
temperate areas of Argentina and Uruguay, the temperate 
area of Chile, and the tropical high altitude areas in 
Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru as a winter season cover cro p 
(FAO, 2004).   It is also grown on marginal soils in the 
Outer Hebrides of Scotland and Australia (Scholten  et al., 
2009; Kubiak, 2009).  Black oat is used in the 
southeastern United States, Hawaii,  and Arizona for 
forage, pasture and as a cover crop.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS website.  
Adaptation  
Black oat does best on  sandy  or  loamy soils but can also 
grow in heavy clay and soils with low nutrient value.   It is 
not highly shade tolerant but can tolerate dr ought (Plants 
for A Future, 2012).  Black oat is not cold hardy and will 
winter kill at temperatures less than 19°F depending on 
growth stage (Ashford and Reev es, 2003).  In the United 
States,  the black  oat cultivar  ‘SoilSaver’  is adapted for use 
as a winter cover crop in USDA  Plant Hardiness Zones 
8b- 10a (USDA- ARS-NSDL, 2005).  
Uses  
Cover Crop/Green manure:   Black oat is used as a cool 
season, annual, rotational  cover crop either alone or 
seeded into a  cover crop mixture.  It is not frost tolerant.  
Black oat produces dry matter amounts similar to other 
winter cereals such as rye and  wheat of 4,000– 7000 
pounds per acre when planted alone (USDA -ARS -NSDL, 
2010).  However, in experiments in Alabama, black oat 
grew quicker than wheat and rye (Patterson et al., 1996).  
Additionally, researchers have found that black oat has a 
higher nitrogen concentration  and lower C:N ratio  than 
four other winter cereals commonly used as cover crops 
(Bauer and Reeves, 1999).    
 
Weed Management:   Similar to many other cover crop 
species, black oat leaf tissue has been found to have 
allelopathic effects that can inhibit sma ll seeded weed 
species (Price et al., 2008).  In greenhouse and field 
experiments conducted in Germany, black oat reduced the 
shoot dry matter of weeds and volunteer wheat by up to 
98% (Brust and Gerhards, 2012).  In a study conducted 
without herbicide in  Alabama, black oat provided more 
effective weed control in conservation tillage cotton than 
rye  in years it was not winter killed  (Reeves et al., 2005). 
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide