Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
THINLEAF ALDER 
Alnus incana (L.) Moench.  
Plant Symbol = ALIN2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Thin-leafed alder, grey alder, mountain alder, river 
alder 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans reportedly pounded 
the wood of thin leaf alder  into a powder to produce a 
red dye (Lanner 1983).  The wood was occasionally 
used for firewood.  It is al so valued by cabinetmakers 
and is used in making clogs, bowls, and woodcuts. 
 
Wildlife : Cottontails, muskrats, moose, elk, deer, and 
snowshoe hares eat the leaves and twigs.  Redpolls, 
siskins, chickadees, and goldfinches eat alder seeds, 
buds, and catkins.  Beavers eat the bark and build 
dams with the stems.   
 
Agroforestry : Alnus incana  is an excellent pioneer 
species for revegatating disturbed riparian areas or as 
a mass planting to achieve a screen or windbreak.  
Thin-leaf alder is used in tree strips for windbreaks, 
which are planted and managed to protect livestock,  enhance production, and control soil erosion.  
Windbreaks can help communities with harsh winter 
conditions better handle the impact of winter storms 
and reduce home heating co
sts during the winter 
months.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 Gerald and Buff Corsi © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Description 
General:  Thin-leafed alder is  a native, deciduous 
shrub or tree.  The leaves are ovate, double serrated, 
and pointed at the tip.  Male catkins are produced in 
the autumn in-groups of three or four.  The female 
catkins are borne separately on the same plant in late 
winter or early spring.  The fruit are small, brown, 
scale-like cones produced in  early autumn.  The bark 
is thin, smooth, and green-gray, grayish-brown, or 
reddish-brown (Preston 1948).   
 
Distribution : Thin-leaf alder is distributed throughout 
Europe and much of North America.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
This shrub or small tree tolerates a wide range of soil 
types.  It grows best in heavy moist soils in light 
shaded areas.  It has a high flood tolerance and 
typically grows near rivers and moist stream borders 
on poorly developed soil.  Thin-leaf alder is 
frequently found growing in the understory of 
coniferous forests on moist sites.  It is also adaptable 
to a range of soil pH levels.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seed is best sown as soon as 
it is ripe in a cold frame.  If  Alnus incana seeds are 
not sown in the fall, they require cold stratification 
for three months before germination.  Sow the seeds 
in containers or seed tray s containing a slow release 
fertilizer.  Firm the medium and place the seeds 
thinly and evenly on top.  When large enough to 
handle, the seeds can be placed into individual pots.  
If growth is sufficient, they may be planted into their 
permanent positions in the summer, if not they can be 
planted in the spring.

Management 
Thin-leaf alder often occurs in dense thickets, which 
reportedly results from underground rhizomes or 
suckers (Dayton 1931).  If plants are damaged, 
sprouting can occur from the stump, root collar, or 
from the root crown following fire.  After top-
removal of plants by beavers, they have been 
observed to sprout heavily from the cut.   
Propagation from cuttings is not recommended and 
plants are not widely available in nurseries.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Somewhat available throug h native plant nurseries 
within it range.   
 
References 
Arno, S.F. 1977.   Northwest trees.  The 
Mountaineers, Seattle, Washington.   
 
Coombes, A.J. 1992.   Eyewitness handbooks: trees .  
Dorling Kindersley, Inc., New York, New York.   
 
Davis, Brian. 1987.   The gardener’s illustrated 
encyclopedia of trees and shrubs .  Rodale Press, Inc., 
Emmaus, Pennsylvania.   
 
Dayton, W.A. 1931.   Important western browse 
plants .  Misc. Publication 101.  Washington, D.C.   
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Company, Champaign, Illinois.   
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia.   
 
Epple, A.O. 1995.   A field guide to the plants of 
Arizona .  Falcon Press, Helena, Montana.   
 
Haeussler, S & D. Coates 1986.   Autecological 
characteristics of selected species that compete in 
British Columbia: a literature review .  Land 
Management Report No. 33.  Victoria, BC.   
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut.   
 
Lanner, R.M. 1983.   Trees of the Great Basin: a 
natural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada.   
 
Martin, A.C.; H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants .  McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, Inc., New York, New York.   
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, & London.   
 
Nelson, R.A. 1992.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  Roberts Rinehart Publishers, Newot, 
Colorado.   
 
Preston, R.J., Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  The 
Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa.   
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
1937.   Range plant handbook .  Washington, DC.   
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09j un03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.