Plant Guide
WOOLLY MILKWEED 
Asclepias vestita Hook. & Arn.  
Plant Symbol = ASVE2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS California P lant Materials 
C enter  
 
Figure 1: Wooly milkweed flower and leaves. Photo ©Neal Kramer, 2010 
@ CalPhotos  
 
Warning : Milkweed may be toxic when taken internally, 
without sufficient preparation.  
Alternate Names  
Two subspecies  have been recognized:   
Asclepias vestita  ssp.  vestita  
Asclepias vestita ssp.  parishii (Jeps.) Woodson . 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic : Milkweed is used as a food and fiber 
source.  Wappo and Sierra Miwok tribes consumed the 
leaves and roots of milkweed  gathered in the spring  by 
repeatedly  boiling the plant in water and changing the 
water until it ran  clear.  Chumash women used sap from 
the stems to produce a chewing gum  (Anderson , 2005) .  
Milkweed is an important fiber source for cordage .  
Tribes including the  Chumash, Miwok, Washoe , and 
N orthern Paiute  collected milkweed s talks once the plant 
die d back in  the fall or  winter .  Milkweed f iber strands are 
twisted together to form the cordage  rope  ( Anderson 
2005, Timbrook, 2007) .  This twined fiber is used to 
produce nets, netting bags, feather  capes, deer nets, bow 
strings, and other items.  
 
The seed floss from milkweed seed pods was used in life 
jackets  for the U.S. Navy during World War II and as a  substitute for down in pillows
 and  comforters  (Knudsen 
and Sayler , 1992) . 
 
Wildlife : The plant is closely associated with Monarch 
butterflies ( Danaus plexippus ) as the larvae have an 
obligate feeding relationship with milkweed  (Borders and 
Mader , 2011) . Monarch butterflies only  lay their eggs on 
the underside of milkweed leaves and  no other plant 
sp ecies.  Caterpillar larvae mature  and emerge from eg gs 
after three to five days. The  caterpillars f eed on milkweed 
leaves , which provide them with a chemical defense.   T he 
larvae ingest and sequester  toxins  from milkweeds  
including  cardenolides and alkaloids exuded fr om stems 
and leaves.  Th ese toxins protect  Monarch  butterflies 
from predation as the caterpillar becomes toxic to 
potential predators.    
Milkweed bug s, beetles , and aphids  also use the plant  and 
feed on leaves, flowers,  and seeds . 
 
Pollinators : Many species of  bees and wasps, flies, 
butterflies and  moths, and are attracted to the floral 
resources in  milkweed flowers (Mader et al,. 2011).  The 
plant is promoted in gardens to attract pollinators.   
Status  
Please consult th e PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Woolly milkweed is a herbaceous  perennial in 
the  Asclepiadaceae  (Milkweed) family  (Rosetti and 
Hoffman, 2012) . Stems are clustered from the root stalk 
and  ascending or  decumbent up to 2 feet long .  Leaves are 
persistent, opposite, elliptic or ovate, 2 to 6 inches long, 
and have short petioles.  Th e leaves are a grayish-green 
color and hairy. Woolly milkweed is named for its dense 
hair cover on stems and leaves, although the plant can 
become glabrous and less hairy with age (Borders, 2012).   
The inflorescence is terminal and sessile with no 
peduncl e.  The flowers are radial with 5 petals and 5 
sepals that are reflexed , and either yellow, cream, or 
purple in color.  The filaments are fused together in a 
column with appendages called hoods.  The hood serves 
as a reservoir of nectar, which flows from n ectaries 
located in the stigmatic chambers (Wyatt and Broyles, 
1994).  The hoods are yellow -white with a vertical brown 
stripe and are generally elevated above the corolla base.  
An elongate projection called a horn attaches to the hood 
and curves back tow ard the filament column.  Pollen is 
contained within sacs called pollinia .  Milkweed plants 
are largely self -incompatible and must be cross -pollinated 
to produce seed.  Pollination occurs when pollinia  hook