Plant Guide 

FOURWING 
SALTBUSH 

Atriplex canescens 
(Pursh) Nutt. 
plant symbol = ATCA2 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
Loren St. John 
USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC 
Alternate Names 
Chamise, chamize, cham iso, white greasewood, 
saltsage, fourwing shads cale, bushy atriplex 
Uses 
Rangeland/Grazing: fourwing saltbush is highly 
palatable browse for most livestock and big game. It 
is used primarily in the winter at which time it is high 
in carotene and averages about four percent digestible 
protein. The leaves may be as high as 18 percent total 
protein. It is grazed by a ll classes of livestock except 
horses. 
Wildlife:  fourwing saltbush provides excellent 
browse for deer season long. It is a good browse plant 
for bighorn sheep, antelope, and elk in fall and 
winter. It is also a food so urce and excellent cover for 
sharptail grouse, gray partridge (Huns), sage grouse, 
and other upland birds, rabbits, songbirds, and small 
mammals. 
Erosion Control:  fourwing saltbush makes excellent 
screens, hedges, and barriers.  It is especially useful 
on saline-sodic soils. It has excellent drought 
tolerance. It has been planted in highway medians 
and on road shoulders, slopes, and other disturbed 
areas near roadways. Beca use it is a good wildlife 
browse species, caution is recommended in using it in 
plantings along roadways. Its extensive root system 
provides excellent erosion control. 
Reclamation: fourwing saltbush is used extensively 
for reclamation of disturbed sites (mine lands, drill 
pads, exploration holes, etc,). It provides excellent 
species diversity for mine land reclamation projects. 
Ethnobotanical:  American Indians boiled fresh roots 
with a little salt and drank half-cupful doses for 
stomach pain and as a laxative. Roots were also 
ground and applied as a toothache remedy. Leaf or 
root tea was taken as an emetic for stomach pain and 
bad coughs.  Soapy lather from leaves was used for 
itching and rashes from chickenpox or measles. Fresh 
leaf or a poultice of fresh or dried flowers was 
applied to ant bites. Leaves were used as a snuff for 
nasal problems. Smoke from burning leaves was used 
to revive someone who was injured, weak, or feeling 
faint. Hispanics use the plant for colds and flu. 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description 
Fourwing saltbush is a polymorphic species varying 
from deciduous to evergreen, depending on climate. 
Its much-branched stems are  stout with whitish bark. 
Mature plants range from 1 to over 8 feet in height, 
depending on ecotype and the soil and climate. Its 
leaves are simple, alternate, entire, linear-spatulate to 
narrowly oblong, canescent (covered with fine 
whitish hairs) and ½ to 2 inches long. Its root system 
is branched and commonly very deep (to 20 feet) 
when soil depth allows. 
Fourwing saltbush is mostly dioecious, with male and 
female flowers on separate  plants. Male flowers are 
red to yellow and form dense  spikes at the ends of the 
branches. The female flowers are axillary and 
nondescript. However, some monecious plants may 
be found within a population. Fourwing saltbush 
plants can exhibit hermaphroditic characteristics 
(male and female parts in one flower). The seed is 
contained in utricles that  turn a dull yellow when ripe 
and may remain attached to the plant throughout 
winter.  
Fourwing saltbush derives its name from the four 
membranous ‘winged’ capsules, which encompass

the seed. It is most commonly called fourwing 
saltbush, but is also known as chamise, chamize, 
chamiso, white greasewoo d, saltsage, fourwing 
shadscale, and bushy atriplex. 
Distribution 
Fourwing saltbush ( Atriplex canescens (Pursh) Nutt. 
is one of the most widely distributed and important 
native shrubs on rangelands in the western United 
States including the Intermountain, Great Basin, and 
Great Plains regions. Its natural range extends from 
below sea level to above 8,000 feet elevation.  For 
current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Adaptation 
Fourwing saltbush is adapted to most soils but is best 
suited to deep, well drained; loamy to sandy to 
gravely soils. It is sometimes found growing in dense 
clay soils. It is very tolerant of saline soil conditions 
and somewhat tolerant of sodic soil conditions. 
Under saline conditions plants take up salts and 
accumulate it in the plants scurfy leaf coverings.  
Fourwing saltbush has high tolerance to boron. It 
does not tolerate high water tables or late winter 
inundation. It is extremely drought tolerant and has 
fair shade tolerance. It is not very tolerant of fire, but 
may resprout to some degree if fire intensity is not 
too severe. Its ability to tolerate extreme cold 
conditions varies with ecotype.  
Fourwing saltbush most commonly grows in areas 
that receive 8 to 14 inches  annual precipitation. It can 
be found from sea level to 8,000 feet elevation. 
Depending on ecotype, fourwing saltbush grows in 
association with bluebunch wheatgrass, basin 
wildrye, bottlebrush squirrelt ail, Indian ricegrass, 
Sandberg bluegrass, sand dropseed, blue grama, 
galleta, black grama, alkali sacaton, inland saltgrass, 
globemallow, greasewood, rabbitbrush, shadscale, 
Nuttall or Gardner saltbush, winterfat, bud sagebrush, 
black sagebrush, low sagebrush, Wyoming big 
sagebrush, and basin big sagebrush. 
Establishment 
Planting:  Fourwing saltbush begins growth in mid to 
late spring. Seed matures 3 to 4 months after 
flowering. It typically spreads via seed distribution, 
but may also root sprout following wildfire or layer if 
covered with sand. Stands typically take three to four 
years to establish, but once established the plants are 
fairly competitive with other species. Fourwing 
saltbush can be established by transplanting in early 
spring, direct seeding in late fall, early winter or very 
early spring. 
An adapted cultivar/releas e or local seed source 
should be used to ensure the ecotype is compatible 
with the site. Seed should be after-ripened for ten 
months and dewinged prior to planting.  On moist 
fine soils, seed should be planted ½ inch deep. On 
sandy to coarse gravely soils, plant up to ¾ inch 
deep. Seeding rates of 0.25 to 0.50 pounds per acre is 
recommended for rangeland seeding mixtures (3 to 7 
percent of the seeding mix). Dewinged seed is 
preferred because seed flow through a drill and 
planting depth can be controlled more easily. There is 
no prechilling requirement for fourwing saltbush 
seed. See Seed Production section for additional 
planting recommendations 
Seedling vigor is generally outstanding and 
depending on ecotype, young plants may reach 
heights of 18 inches by the end of the first growing 
season. 
Management 
Fourwing saltbush is palatable to cattle, sheep and 
deer season long. It provides nutritious winter browse 
on many areas and is a good fall and winter browse 
plant for bighorn sheep, antelope, and elk. 
In new plantings, utilizing good seedbed and weed 
control techniques should enhance establishment and 
reduce competition with other plants. In interseedings 
plant competition should be reduced by chemical, 
scalping, furrowing or other techniques that help 
control existing vegetation and weeds. Animals 
utilizing the area should be removed from new 
plantings for at least two growing seasons or until 
plants are well established and reproducing. Irrigation 
may be needed for transplants on harsh sites to ensure 
establishment. Young seedi ngs are not tolerant of 
excessive insect, rabbit, and rodent damage and 
plantings may require control measures if severe 
damage appears. 
In established plantings, deferred rotation grazing 
systems are recommended for fourwing saltbush 
management. Plants can be grazed from late spring 
through winter, but plant health is best maintained if 
used primarily as a winter browse.   Fourwing 
saltbush tolerates browsing very well, but will 
decrease in abundance under continuous close 
browsing. Proper use of fourwing saltbush as browse 
is approximately 40 - 50 percent of current year’s 
growth. 
Excessive use results in damage or loss of plants 
from breakage of brittle branches. During dry 
periods, branches and stems may be brittle and 
trampling by livestock may damage plants. Damaged

plants generally recover if rested, but production will 
be reduced until fully recovered. No injury to 
livestock results from grazing this plant. However, it 
can cause bloat and scours in spring if it is the 
primary dietary source. Rabbits, rodents, and 
grasshoppers utilize fourwing saltbush and may 
damage stands under severe conditions requiring pest 
control measures.  
Environmental Concerns 
Fourwing saltbush is native, long-lived, and spreads 
primarily by seed distribution. It is not considered 
&#34;weedy&#34;, but could slowly spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions. This species is well 
documented as having beneficial qualities and no 
negative impacts on wild or domestic animals. 
Seed Production 
Establishing plants in a greenhouse and transplanting 
to the field will result in the most satisfactory stands 
for seed production. (Note: studies are underway to 
determine the feasibility or  success of propagating 
fourwing saltbush from stem cuttings) 
Plant spacing should be 6 to 8 feet within row and 8 
to 10 feet between rows.  Planting one male plant for 
every 5 female plants is recommended. Transplanting 
into weed barrier fabric  can also improve plant 
establishment, seed production, weed control, and 
moisture conservation. Transplanting is 
recommended in the spring  prior to summer heat. 
Full seed production is usually reached the third year 
following transplanting. 
Plantings can also be established with seed. A 
minimum of 15 to 20 Pure Live seeds per linear foot 
of drill row should be planted.  Hand seeding in late 
fall or very early spring may also be an option.  Plant 
5 to 10 seeds in a close group at desired spacing.  
Thin plants to desired spacing and ratio of male to 
female plants when fruiting starts (about 3 years). 
Full seed production may be reached the fourth year 
following direct seeding. 
Fourwing saltbush requires an equivalent of 10 to 14 
inches annual precipitation for seed production. 
Irrigation may only be needed for establishment and 
during drought years to  ensure a seed crop.  If 
irrigation is available, irrigate to promote vegetative 
growth.  Make sure soil moisture is adequate at early 
flowering, during seed set and early maturation.  
Irrigate to field capacity prior to fall freeze-up. 
Expected seed yields may range from 200 to 400 
pounds per acre.  Fertilization is not generally 
recommended unless soil tests indicate severe 
nutrient deficiencies.  Rabbits and rodents can 
damage stands and may destroy seedlings.  Insects 
such as grasshoppers and Mormon crickets 
infrequently damage stands beyond recovery. 
Seed generally ripens in late August and September 
and can be harvested from mid September through 
December.  Harvesting seed is best accomplished for 
woody ecotypes by hand stripping. Mechanized 
harvesting has been used on Wytana, but seed 
requires additional conditioning to properly dry and 
clean out excessive trash (leaves, stems, other inert 
matter). Harvested seed is usually threshed 
(dewinged) by processing seed through a hammermill 
(1500 rpm) equipped with  a ¼ inch screen and then 
running seed through a fanmill to the desired grade. 
Dewinging may hasten after-ripening of seed 
resulting in shorter viability of seed.  Seed can be 
stored and remain viable for 6 to 10 years. The 
dewinging process greatly enhances the ability of the 
seed to flow through planting equipment.  Removing 
the hull that surrounds the embryo can injure the seed 
resulting in reduced viability, seedling vigor, and 
stand establishment.  One  must be extremely careful 
when threshing to limit the amount of mechanical 
action on the seed to minimize damage.  
Fourwing saltbush seed requires about 10 month&#39;s 
after-ripening following harvest before accurate 
percent germination can be determined. Seeds per 
pound will vary by accession or ecotype, but 
averages 38,000 seeds per pound winged and 78,000 
seeds per pound dewinged. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
&#39;Marana&#39; fourwing saltbush was released in 1979 by 
the NRCS Plant Materials Center in Lockford, 
California. It originated from plants near El Cajon, 
California and was selected  for ease of establishment 
and drought resistance. It is  best adapted to areas in 
the southwest including southern New Mexico, 
southern Arizona and southern to central California. 
‘Rincon’  fourwing saltbush was selected by the 
Forest Service, Shrub Scie nce Laboratory in Provo, 
Utah and cooperatively releas ed with the NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Meeker,  Colorado in 1983. The 
original seed was collected at Rincon Blanco near 
Canjilon, Rio Arriba County, New Mexico at 7,800 
feet elevation. Rincon is  an erect, leafy form with

early season green-up. It is best adapted to the 
southwest areas of central Utah, central Nevada, 
western Colorado, to central New Mexico and central 
Arizona.  
‘Santa Rita’ fourwing saltbush was cooperatively 
released by the NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Tucson, Arizona, ARS, and  University of Arizona in 
1987. It is best adapted to areas in the southwest 
including southern New Mexico, southern Arizona 
and southern to central California. 
Snake River Plains Germplasm  fourwing saltbush 
was selected by the NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho and cooperatively released by the 
Aberdeen PMC, Pullman, Washington PMC and 
University of Idaho in 2001. Snake River Plains 
Germplasm is a composite of 4 accessions of 
fourwing saltbush collected from the Snake River 
Plains of southern Idaho. It  was selected for superior 
establishment and cold hardiness. It is better adapted 
to the northern range of fourwing saltbush including 
southern Idaho, eastern Oregon, western Wyoming, 
northern Utah and northern Nevada than other 
fourwing saltbush releases. 
‘Wytana’ fourwing saltbush was released by the 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana in 
1976. Wytana is a natural cross between fourwing 
saltbush and Gardner or Nuttall  saltbush. It is a short, 
herbaceous type that is best adapted to the Great 
Plains and mountain foothills of Idaho, Montana and 
Wyoming.  
Prepared By 
Daniel G.  Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
Boise, Idaho 
Loren St. John 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G.  Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
Boise, Idaho 
Edited: 05dec00jsp; 23sept02lsj; 20sept02dgo; 13feb03jsp; 14Mar05rln 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local 
NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov > and Plant Materials Program Web sites 
<
http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all 
its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and 
marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) 
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication 
of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil 
Rights, Room 326W, Whitte n Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, 
Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.