Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TARRAGON 
Artemisia dracunculus  L. 
Plant Symbol = ARDR4  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
False tarragon, dragon sagewort 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Tarragon had a wide array of medicinal 
uses among the Chippewa.  The root was used as a 
gynecological aid to reduce excessive flowing during 
the menstrual cycle and to aid in difficult labor.  The 
leaves of tarragon were chewed for heart palpitations.  
The root was also used to make a bath for strengthening 
children and a steam for strengthening elders.  The 
Shuswap used the plant as a gynecological aid during 
childbirth.  The Shuswap also burned tarragon to keep 
away mosquitoes.  The Ramah Navaho made a lotion 
from the plant to aid in healing cuts. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species,  state noxious status, and wetlan
d indicator values).  It is 
endangered in Illinois as of 2006. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site.  
@ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Tarragon is a 
native perennial herb (5-15 dm tall).  The stems form 
clusters and are reddish in color.  They can be smooth 
or covered with short hairs.   The leaves are linear to 
linear-lanceolate.  The leaves range in size from 2-8 cm 
long and up to 6 mm wide.  The inflorescences are 
branched and elongated with pedicellate flowers that 
mature from the bottom up.  Both the whorl of bracts 
subtending the flower and the stalk of the inflorescence 
are hairless.  The outer fl orets are fertile but lack 
stamens.  The center florets are sterile. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this  species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Tarragon is found in dry open places.  
Common in areas of disturbance, tarragon, increases in 
frequency where disturbance results in decreased 
competition. 
 
Adaptation 
Tarragon is a fire-adapted species.  It is top-killed by 
low-intensity fire, however, it is able to reestablish 
quickly from surviving rhizomes.   
 
Establishment 
Tarragon is drought tolerant species.  Tarragon grows 
best in well-drained fertile soil and in full sunlight.  
Division can achieve propagation.  Tarragon also 
produces numerous wind-dispe rsed achenes in the fall.  
Each individual plant should be lifted and divided in 
early spring every two years.   The divisions should be 
planted 24 inches apart and the roots should be place 2-
3 inches deep.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Tarragon may suffer from root rot or mildew if not 
planted in well-drained soil. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from commercial 
plant sources. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works 
best in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA, 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
References 
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas . Texas Research Foundation, 
Renner, Texas. 1881 pp. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.  How indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts . Dover Publications Inc., 
New York, New York. 397pp. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of the great 
plains.  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
1392 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native North 
American peoples . The University of Michigan-
Dearborn. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb. 
 
Palmer, P.A. 1978.  Shuswap indian ethnobotany . Syesis 
8:29-51. 
 
Sanders, T.W. 1895.  Sanders’ encyclopedia of 
gardening. A.G.L. Hellyer 1958. Revised. W.H. and L. 
Collingridge Limited. New York, New York. 526 pp. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory. 
2001.  Fire effects information system . 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/forb/artdra
 
Vestal, R.A. 1952. The ethnobotany of the Ramah 
Navaho. Papers of the Peabody Museaum of American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 40(4):1-94. 
 
Prepared By:   
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California  
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 20nov01 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.