Plant Guide

AMERICAN 

HOGPEANUT

Amphicarpaea bracteata F ern.

Plant Symbol = AMBR2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
@ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
Wild peanut 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The hogpeanut was used by many 
tribes of the Plains as a food source.  The Pawnee are 
reported to have gathered hogpeanut from rat’s nests.  
The Chippewa used the hogpeanut for a food source, 
eating the fruit and roots. They also used it as a 
digestive aid.  The Cherokee would spit a tea made 
from the root of hogpeanut on snakebites and 
consume the root tea to aid in diarrhea. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Bean Family (Fabaceae). American 
hogpeanut is a taprooted, native, annual.  The stems 
can be smooth or covered with short hairs and coil 
around a support for climbing (2-20 dm tall).  The 
leaves are alternate, compound and with 3 leaflets.  
Leaflets are broadly lanceolate to ovate.  The leaf 
stalks (petioles) are 2-10 cm long.  The hogpeanut 
produces two sorts of flowers.  The first is an 
unbranched, elongated inflorescence with pedicellate 
flowers maturing from the bottom up.  These flowers 
open before fertilization and are usually cross-
pollinated (chasmogamous).  The other flowers are 
self-fertilized without opening (cleistogamous) and 
are produced on creeping branches near the ground. 
The fruit is a sickle-shaped, thin-walled legume, 4-6 
mm long. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: American hogpeanut is found in dry or 
moist woodlands, along roadsides, and in prairie 
ravines. 
Establishment 
American hogpeanut, as a member of the bean 
family, will fix nitrogen that will benefit plants 
growing around it. American hogpeanut requires a 
moist, humus-rich soil.  To germinate the seeds, pre-
soak them for 12 hours in warm water and sow them 
in the spring in a semi-shaded area. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using a local seed 
stock the American hogpeanut should not be prone to 
debilitating pests.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.   
References 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970. Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas. Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas. 1881 pp. 
Densmore, F. 1974. How indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts. Dover Publications Inc., 
New York, New York. 397pp. 
Plants for a Future 2001.  Amphicarpaea bracteata. 
Devon, England. <http://www.ibiblio.org/pfaf/cgi-
bin/arr_html?Amphicarpaea+bracteata >.  Accessed 
20NOV01. 
Gilmore, M. 1977. Uses of plants by the indians of 
the Missouri river region. University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 109 pp. 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Great Plains Flora Association 1986. Flora of the 
great plains. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975. Cherokee 
plants their uses-a 400 year history. Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina. 65 pp. 
Kindscher, K. 1987. Edible wild plants of the prairie. 
University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 276 
pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999. Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.