Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIG SAGEBRUSH 
Artemisia tridentata Nuttall 
Plant Symbol = ARTR2 
Including: 
ssp. parishii  (Gray) Hall & Clements   
Plant Symbol = ARTRP2 
ssp. spiciformis  (Ousterhout) Kartesz & 
Gandhi 
Plant Symbol = ARTRS2 
ssp. tridentata  
Plant Symbol = ARTRT 
ssp. vaseyana  (Rydb.) Beetle 
Plant Symbol = ARTRV 
ssp. wyomingensis  Beetle & Young 
Plant Symbol = ARTRW8 
ssp. xericensis  Winward ex R. 
Rosentreter & R. Kelsey  Plant Symbol = ARTRX 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 
Figure 1 . Basin big sagebrush  (Artemisia tridentata 
ssp . tridentata).  Photo courtesy of the PLANTS 
database. 
 
Alternate Names  
A. tridentata  ssp. parishii  = Parish’s big sagebrush  A. tridentata
 ssp. spiciformis  = subalpine or spicate 
big sagebrush 
A. tridentata  ssp. tridentata  = basin big sagebrush 
A. tridentata  ssp. vaseyana  = mountain big sagebrush 
A. tridentata  ssp. wyomingensis  = Wyoming big 
sagebrush  
A. tridentata  ssp. xericensis  = xeric or foothills big 
sagebrush 
 
Uses 
Forage/Wildlife : Big sagebrush is perhaps the most 
important shrub on western rangelands. Evergreen 
leaves and abundant seed production provide an 
excellent winter food source to numerous species of 
large mammals including mule deer, black-tailed 
deer, white-tailed deer, elk, pronghorn antelope, 
bighorn sheep and jack rabbits. Nearly 100 bird 
species depend on sagebrush ecosystems for their 
habitat needs. Additionally, there are several animal 
species having an obligate relationship with big 
sagebrush including sage grouse, sharp tailed grouse, 
pygmy rabbits, sage thrashers, sage sparrows and 
Brewer’s sparrow. Sagebrush also provide habitat 
and food for hosts of invertebrates which in turn 
support birds, reptiles and small mammals. In 
addition to the numerous species of animals that 
depend on sagebrush for food and cover, there are 
several plant species having close relationships with 
sagebrush as well.   
 
Sagebrush plants maintain high levels of most 
nutrients including crude protein (see table 1). This 
high forage value makes it especially useful for 
wildlife, and in some areas  livestock, winter grazing. 
Separate studies indicated that sagebrush made up 
78% of the annual diet for antelope in Wyoming and 
59% of the winter diet of deer and elk near Gardiner, 
Montana. Sagebrush also makes up close to 100% of 
the winter diet of sage grouse and over 60% of their 
total annual diet. Use of sagebrush by livestock is 
limited and variable.  
 
Animal preference of sagebrush varies with 
subspecies, populations and even individual plants 
due to chemical variation found in the foliage. Deer 
and elk tend to prefer mountain big sagebrush 
followed by Wyoming big sagebrush and finally 
basin big sagebrush. Although many range managers 
believe that deer and other large mammals prefer to 
browse shrubby members of the  Rosaceae such as 
mountain mahogany ( Cercocarpus), bitterbrush 
( Purshia ) and cliffrose ( Cowania) over big

sagebrush, studies show sagebrush significantly more 
readily browsed.  
 
Sagebrush’s value as thermal or security cover is also 
very high for wildlife. This includes nesting cover 
and escape cover for sage grouse, sharp tailed grouse, 
pheasants, chukar and other upland birds.  
 
 
Revegetation/reclamation: Because of its wide range 
of adaptation and ease of establishment, big 
sagebrush can be a very important species for use in 
revegetation efforts. Seedlings are able to compete 
with grasses and forbs as well as other shrubs 
allowing it to be used as a component of a wide range 
of seed mixes. Seedlings are very easy to establish 
when planted correctly (see “Establishment” section) 
and can be drill seeded or  broadcast with near equal 
levels of success. Because sagebrush plants spread 
readily by seed, it can be  seeded at relatively low 
rates and allowed to spread by natural recruitment. 
 
Big sagebrush plants provide many additional 
benefits to the plant community.  The dense canopy 
protects understory herbaceous plants from grazing. 
Healthy sagebrush communities provide a multi- 
tiered ecosystem with high levels of biodiversity. Big 
sagebrush plants also have a two-part root system 
with a deep tap root and a shallow, diffuse root 
system. Numerous studies have shown sagebrush 
plants create “hydraulic  lift” where deep soil 
moisture is brought to ne ar the soil surface by the tap 
root system during the day and then released into the 
upper soil at night. This water is then available to the 
diffuse root system of big sagebrush as well as to the 
roots of other understory plants. Sagebrush plants 
also increase water retention by trapping and holding 
windblown snow.  
 
Big sagebrush subspecies are often useful indicators 
of soil characteristics. Generally, a subspecies 
indicates the soils at a site, thus proper identification 
of big sagebrush at a subspecific level can provide 
useful information on soils and ecological site 
characteristics. In some areas, however, such as those 
with glacial deposits, a separation based on soil 
characteristics is considerably more complex. 
  Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Although big sagebrush plants generally 
have a similar growth form, the species does have 
considerable morphological variation with several 
subspecies and ecotypes. Bi g sagebrush are evergreen 
shrubs ranging in size from less than 0.6 m (2 ft) tall 
to as large as 4 m (13 ft) ta ll. Branches are spreading, 
arising from numerous main stems in the lower 
growing subspecies or from one main trunk in the 
larger forms. Leaves are blue-gray to blue-green in 
color due to dense gray hairs. They are typically 
cuneate (wedge-shaped, triangular and gradually 
tapering to the base) or flabelliform (bell shaped) 
depending on subspecies, and have three lobes at the 
apex on the majority of the persistent foliage. Leaves 
vary in length from 0.5 to 5 cm (0.2 to 2.0 in), and 
can be 0.2 to 2.0 cm (0.08 to 0.8 in) wide. Leaves are 
spirally arranged with internodes short in young 
vegetative stems making the leaves very dense. 
Panicles overtop plants of mountain and spicate big 
sagebrush, or can grow throughout the crown in basin 
and Wyoming big sagebrush. Floral heads contain 
from three to 18 perfect (both male and female parts 
present) flowers per head. Achenes are typically 
glabrous but are hairy in the California endemic 
Parish’s big sagebrush. Big sagebrush plants are very 
aromatic with the smell being described as bitter 
pungent to pleasant, the odor varying by subspecies. 
Ploidy levels often differ among subspecies and may 
differ among populations.  
 
Taxonomy 
Currently there are six subspecies of  Artemisia 
tridentata  recognized by the National Plant Data 
Center: basin (ssp.  tridentata), Wyoming (ssp. 
wyomingensis  Beetle & Young), mountain (ssp. 
vaseyana  [Rydb.] Beetle), subalpine (ssp. spiciformis  
[Ousterhout] Kartesz & Gandhi), xeric (ssp. 
xericensis Winward ex R. Rosentreter & R. Kelsey) 
and Parish’s (ssp.  parishii [Gray] Hall & Clements).  
Each is highly variable with multiple ecotypes, but 
can generally be separated using a number of 
morphological, geographical and topographical 
characters.  
 
All chromosome number information was obtained 
from McArthur and Sanderson (1999) as updated in 
McArthur (2005). Appendix 1 contains a general 
summary of characteristics useful to separate 
subspecies. See McArthur and Stevens (2004) for a 
Table 1. Nutritive values as percent dry matter and 
percent in-vitro dry matter digestibility (IVDMD).
 
 Crude  Protein IVDMD 
Spring 12.6  58.1 
Summer 13.2  - 
Winter 11.7  57.8 
(Adapted from Welch, 2005)

detailed review of the characters for the subspecies 
occurring in the Intermountain West.  
 
Figure 2. Leafy stem of basin big sagebrush. Photo 
courtesy of the PLANTS database. 
 
Basin big sagebrush usually occurs at the lowest 
elevational range of the species, being most abundant 
in the valley bottoms to  mountain foothills. Plants 
typically have a single main trunk and may grow to a 
height of 4 m (13 ft) under proper conditions, making 
basin the largest subspecies. Basin big sagebrush 
plants are generally uneven-topped with loosely 
branching flowering stems distributed throughout the 
crown (see figure 1). Floral  heads typically contain 3 
to 6 small flowers per head. Leaves of the vegetative 
stems are narrowly cuneate  averaging 2 cm (0.8 in) 
or more and can be as long as 5 cm (2 in) being many 
times longer than wide (see figure 2). Ultraviolet 
visible coumarins in leaf extracts are minimal; leaf 
UV color is none to light blue in water and a rusty 
red-brown color in alcohol. 2n = 18 or sometimes 36. 
 
Figure 3 . Wyoming big sagebrush.   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
  Wyoming big sagebrush overlaps in range and 
elevation with basin big sagebrush. Plants are 
considerably smaller than those of basin big 
sagebrush, usually less than 0.9 m (3 ft) tall, and have 
main stems branching from the ground (see figure 3). 
Flowering stems are not as widely branching as those 
of basin, but otherwise closely resemble that 
subspecies. Leaves are typically shorter, from 1 to 1.5 
cm (0.4 to 0.6 in) long, and flabelliform. UV extract 
color in water is none to light blue and rusty in 
alcohol. 2n = 36.  
 
The vegetative stems of mountain big sagebrush 
create a characteristic even topped crown with the 
panicles rising distinctly and relatively uniformly 
above the foliage (see figure 3). Plants are normally 
smaller than those of basin big sagebrush, averaging 
about 0.9 m (3 ft) tall. In
florescences are narrow and 
spicate bearing flower heads containing 4 to 8 
flowers per head. Leaves are characteristically wider 
than those of basin or Wyoming big sagebrush. In 
extracts, ultraviolet visible coumarins are abundant. 
Leaf extracts fluoresce blue  in water and blue-cream 
in alcohol. 2n = 18 or sometimes 36. 
 
Figure 4 . Even topped mountain big sagebrush .  
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Originally considered a xeric form of mountain big 
sagebrush, xeric big sagebrush shares similarities 
with both basin and mountain big sagebrush and may 
be the result of hybridization between the two 
subspecies. Xeric big sagebrush plants are large and

have an uneven topped crown like those of basin big 
sagebrush, but in leaf UV color and cytological 
characters it resembles mountain big sagebrush. 
Ultraviolet visible coumarins are blue in water, blue-
cream in alcohol. 2n = 36. 
 
A new variation of big sagebrush being recognized 
by some is Bonneville big sagebrush. This as yet 
undescribed taxon may represent hybridization 
between Wyoming and mountain big sagebrush. It is 
reported to have the general growth form of 
Wyoming plants but bears the leaves and fluorescing 
characteristics of the mountain subspecies. It has 
been reported from the bench areas of Lake 
Bonneville and other ancient lakes of the 
Intermountain West in Utah and Nevada. Reports of 
Bonneville big sagebrush have also come from 
western Wyoming and western Colorado.  Of 
particular importance is this sagebrush’s reported 
high palatability to wild ungulates and sage grouse.  
 
Subalpine, or spicate big sagebrush, is believed to be 
a stabilized hybrid between mountain big sagebrush 
and silver sagebrush (Artemisia cana Pursh  ssp. 
viscidula  [Osterhout] Beetle). Plants are similar to 
those of mountain big sagebrush except that leaves 
and floral heads are larger, the floral heads having 10 
to 18 flowers per head. Ultraviolet visible coumarins 
in leaf extracts fluoresce blue in water and blue-
cream in alcohol. 2n = 18 or 36. 
 
Parish’s big sagebrush is an uncommon taxon 
restricted to dry, sandy soils in the hills of southern 
California. It is nearest in appearance and 
relationship to basin big sagebrush, but differs from 
basin in having drooping flowering branches and the 
achenes are hairy. 2n = 36. 
 
One additional taxon that should be mentioned is 
Lahontan sagebrush ( Artemisia arbuscula ssp. 
longicaulis  Winward and McArthur). It is thought to 
be a stable hybrid between low sagebrush ( A. 
arbuscula ) and Wyoming big sagebrush. It bears the 
flowers of low sagebrush but has the vegetative 
characteristics of its big sagebrush parent. This 
subspecies forms dominant communities in 
northwestern Nevada and adjacent portions of 
California and Oregon in shallow or clayey soils 
above and around the shore line of the Pleistocene 
Lake Lahontan.  
 
The following key should provide some assistance in 
separating the subspecies of big sagebrush. 
 
1. plants larger, usually >0.9 m (3 ft) tall, with a 
    single main trunk; crown uneven with floral stems      throughout 
     2. achenes hairy; floral stems drooping; plants 
         endemic to sandy soils in southern   
         California……………………......ssp. 
parishii 
     2. achenes glabrous; floral stems erect; plants 
         widely distributed throughout western U.S, 
         including southern California 
          3. plants occurring in valley bottoms and low 
              foothills, oc cupying deep fertile soils; leaves 
              narrowly cuneate, 2-5 cm (0.8-2.0 in) long, 
              UV leaf color in water=none, in alcohol=red 
              to brown ……...................…...ssp.  tridentata  
          3. UV in water=blue, in alcohol=blue-cream;  plants restricted to well-drained basaltic 
soils in western Idaho….........ssp.  xericensis 
1. plants smaller, averaging 0.9 m (3 ft) or less, with  
    trunks branching at or near ground level; crowns  
    various 
     4. crowns uneven-topped, plants of low 
         valleys and foothills; 
          5. UV color in  water=none, in alcohol=rust   
              …………………………..ssp. wyomingensis 
          5. UV color in water=blue, in alcohol=blue- 
               cream………………………….. (Bonneville) 
     4. crowns even-topped, floral stems rising 
         uniformly above the vegetative stems; plants of  
         higher elevations  
          6. flowers 4 to 8; leaf tips lobed 
           ………………………………….ssp.  vaseyana 
          6. flowers 10 to 18; leaf tips often pointed              
           ……….…………...…………..ssp.  spiciformis 
 
Additional taxonomic information can be found in 
the Flora of North Amer ica, Volume 19 (FNA 
Editorial Committee 2006) and the Intermountain 
Flora, Volume 5 (Cronquist et al. 1994). 
 
Distribution 
Fossil records and records from early pioneers 
indicate that sagebrush was widespread and existed in 
nearly the same general distribution for the past 
several thousand years as it does in the present day. 
Densities of sagebrush communities, however, have 
been reduced historically due to range management 
practices. Big sagebrush presently covers a vast 
ecological range from British Columbia to Baja 
California eastward to the Dakotas. Mahalovich and 
McArthur (2004) provide distribution as well as seed 
and plant transfer guidelines for  Artemisia subgenus 
Tridentatae . For current distribution for each 
subspecies, please consult th e Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat 
The big sagebrush complex is adapted to a wide 
range of precipitation zones and soil conditions.

Plants are well adapted to the arid plains, valleys, 
foothills and mountains of the West where annual 
precipitation ranges from as little as 200 to as much 
as 750 or more mm (8 to 30 in). It is often found 
growing in loamy to sandy loam soils, but plants are 
found on all 12 soil textural classes in five soil 
orders: Alfisols, Aridisols, Entisols, Inceptisols and 
Mollisols. Tolerance to alkalinity or acidity varies by 
subspecies. In general big sagebrush will grow in 
soils with a pH of 5.9 to 10.0 and with organic matter 
content of 0.62 to 4.14 percent. 
 
Basin big sagebrush is commonly found at low to 
mid elevations from 600 to 2,100 m (1,900 to 6,900 
ft) in valleys and mountain foothills, occupying sites 
with deep fertile loamy to sandy soil, 0.9 m (3 ft) or 
deeper. It is often the dominant shrub species of the 
plant community, but is also found in association 
with juniper, piñon pine and rabbitbrush 
communities. Basin big sagebrush has a deep 
penetrating root system that allows it to occupy 
deeper soils in areas r eceiving little precipitation. 
Plants are often found growing in valleys, plains, 
alluvial fans and in seasonal or perennial stream 
channels. Basin big sagebrush prefers soils which are 
non-alkaline, non-saline  and non-calcareous. The 
deep root system does not allow plants to grow in 
soils with a soil depth limiting hardpan or caliche 
layer. Depending on soil infiltration and water 
storage capacity, plants w ill grow in areas receiving 
less than 200 to more than 400 mm (8 to 16 in) 
annual precipitation. This  subspecies also does not 
tolerate soils saturated for more than a few weeks in a 
season. 
 
Wyoming big sagebrush grows at low to intermediate 
elevations between basin and mountain big 
sagebrush, but also commonly overlaps in range with 
the other two subspecies. When found in proximity 
with basin big sagebrush, Wyoming sagebrush will 
occupy the shallower, better-drained soils. Like basin 
big sagebrush, Wyoming is typically found in large 
stands covering many acres. Plants are also found in 
juniper, rabbitbrush, b itterbrush and mountain 
mahogany communities. At lower precipitation areas 
it is sometimes intermixed with shadscale and other 
Atriplex  species. Wyoming big sagebrush commonly 
occurs from 800 to 2,200 m (2600 to 7,200 ft) in 
elevation. Wyoming big sagebrush is the most 
drought tolerant of the big sagebrush subspecies and 
is commonly found growing on low valley slopes and 
foothills receiving between 200  and 300 mm (8 to 12 
in) annual precipitation. It occupies loamy soils with 
high clay content and a depth of 25 to 75 cm (10 to 
30 in). Soils may be quite rocky or gravelly, but in 
these cases plants will be smaller. Wyoming big  sagebrush will be found growing in soils underlain by 
a caliche or silica layer if the available soil is deep 
enough. Plants are typically found in soils with a low 
water holding capacity where excess water may run 
off into channels more suitable to basin big 
sagebrush. 
 
Mountain big sagebrush grows in mountain and 
mountain foothill plant communities such as 
rabbitbrush, piñon pine, juniper, mountain shrub, 
aspen, Douglas fir, ponderosa pine and spruce-fir 
habitats from 800 to 3,100 m (2,600 to 10,000 ft). 
Plants prefer moderately deep to deep, well-drained 
soils providing summer moisture. Mountain big 
sagebrush occurs at higher 
elevations and in higher 
annual precipitation zones than either Wyoming big 
sagebrush or basin big sagebrush. Soils are typically 
45 to 90 centimeters (18 to 36 in) deep or more, and 
are most often loamy to gravelly but can contain 
greater amounts of clay. Plants commonly grow in 
areas receiving over 350 mm (14 in) annual 
precipitation, but may be found in lower elevations 
and precipitation zones under certain conditions such 
as snow drift accumulation areas and shaded north 
facing slopes. 
 
Xeric big sagebrush is limited to basaltic and granitic 
soils of western and west central Idaho and is often 
associated with bluebunch wh eatgrass. Plants grow in 
the foothills from 800 to 1,500 meters (2,600 to 4,900 
ft). Precipitation ranges from 300 to 400 mm (12 to 
16 in) annually. 
 
Spicate big sagebrush grows at high elevation ridge 
lines and snow accumulation areas from 2,000 to 
3,300 m (6,500 to 10,800 ft) in annual precipitation 
zones of over 750 mm (30 in). It is normally found 
near Douglas fir, spruce-fir, and aspen communities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spicate 
mountain 
Elevation 
Figure 5 . Adaptation of Intermountain big sagebrush 
subspecies based on elevational and moisture 
gradients (Mahalovich and McArthur, 2004). 
Moisture 
Wyoming 
basin

Parish’s big sagebrush is adapted to the dry sandy 
soils of California’s Inner South Coast Ranges, South 
Coast, Western Transverse Ranges, White and Inyo 
Mountains and the desert mountains of the Mojave 
Desert. 
 
Establishment 
Seed of big sagebrush are best adapted to germinate 
in habitats with ecological conditions approximating 
those of the seed collection site. Seed source and 
subspecies should always be seriously considered 
prior to seeding. It may be necessary to use seed from 
more than one subspecies in a given revegetation 
project to ensure adequate establishment in all 
habitats. 
 
Seed should be sown in the late fall or early winter 
and allowed to naturally stratify. It should be noted 
that big sagebrush seed has special seed storage 
requirements (See “Seed  and Plant Production” 
section). If stored in conditions with relative 
humidity above 30 percent, seeds lose vigor and 
germinability after two or th ree years. To ensure a 
greater chance of establishment success, check the 
viability of seed lots before planting.  
 
Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-free 
seedbed at a depth of no more than 1/8 inch. Seed 
covered too deeply with soil will generally fail to 
establish. Best results come from surface broadcast 
seed that has been pressed into the soil to provide for 
good seed-soil contact.  Seed can also be broadcast 
directly onto snow with  good results. Pressing 
broadcast seed into the  soil surface with a land 
imprinter has provided very good establishment 
success. Land imprinters create good contact between 
the seed and soil as well as provide microhabitats that 
optimize temperature and water requirements. 
Broadcast seeding has also yielded good results when 
followed by a cultipacker or drag chain. 
 
Drill seeding can be successful, but strict attention 
must be paid to seeding depth. Optimal drilling depth 
is 0 to 1/8 inch.  
 
Sagebrush seed lots range in purity from 
approximately 8 to 30 per cent or greater pure seed. 
Seed lots with high purity levels (20 percent or 
greater) can be difficult to seed due to limitations of 
the seeding equipment. Because sagebrush seed is 
very small and is metered through seeding equipment 
with difficulty, seed can be diluted with rice hulls or 
another inert carrier to improve flow. 
  Post-fire aerial seeding of big sagebrush has been 
done with limited success. Studies suggest that best 
results come from aerial seeding followed by land 
imprinting, cultipacking or chaining, or after 
allowing native perennial grasses to establish for a 
season following fire. It is believed that native 
grasses would suppress exotic annual grass species 
while allowing the establishment of sagebrush. 
Further study of this option is indicated. 
  
Big sagebrush is not recommended for pure seedings. 
Seed should be a small component of a seed mix. 
Drill seeding 0.025 lbs PLS per acre (approximately 
1 viable seed/ft²) provides approximately 400 plants 
per acre for optimal wildlife habitat. For broadcast 
seeding increase to 0.
05 to 0.075 lbs PLS 
(approximately 2-3 viable seeds/ft²). With adequate 
soil moisture seedlings develop quickly and compete 
well with other shrubs and most herbaceous plants. 
However, to enhance establishment, sagebrush 
should not be sown in the same drill row with more 
aggressive forbs and grasses.  
 
Sagebrush seedlings require sufficient soil moisture 
to germinate and survive.  Young plants do not do 
well in open, unprotected locations. Best 
establishment results occur in sites where soil 
moisture is at or near field capacity, or in areas where 
snow accumulates. Existing shrubs, downed trees and 
litter can create microhabitats which also provide 
very good germination conditions. 
 
Containerized stock or bareroot seedlings can also be 
used with high establishment success (50% or 
greater). This method, however, is quite costly, and is 
rarely used except in small critical area plantings. 
Plants can be taken from nursery stock or field 
harvested wildings. Wildings should be collected and 
transplanted during dorman cy in fall or very early 
spring when soil moisture conditions are best. For 
best cost efficiency, “mot her plants” should be placed 
in key locations throughout the revegetation site to 
allow for natural seed dispersal and recruitment over 
time. 
 
Management  
Historically, sagebrush communities have been 
poorly managed, mostly in attempts to reduce or 
eliminate sagebrush stands to increase forage 
production for livestock.  Recently, however, the 
value of sagebrush to the western rangelands is being 
recognized, and practices are evolving to better 
manage healthy and productive sagebrush 
communities.

Contrary to long standing beliefs, studies show that 
complete sagebrush removal negatively affects 
biodiversity and has little long term affect on 
perennial grass production. Indeed, several studies 
indicate that forage production may actually decline 
when sagebrush is completely removed or controlled. 
 
Overgrazing of the understory decreases plant 
biodiversity, especially the forb component of the 
plant community and increases the density of weeds. 
Annual weeds, such as cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum 
L.) and medusahead ( Taeniatherum caput-medusae 
[L.] Nevski) often out-compete young sagebrush 
seedlings and create undesirable monocultures. 
Annual weed infestations also increase the frequency 
of wildfires which result in eliminating sagebrush 
stands therefore not allowi ng stand re-establishment. 
 
Despite the many valuable benefits of sagebrush to 
rangelands, there may be cases when it is desirable to 
thin and rejuvenate sagebrush stands. In these 
instances it is not necessary to remove the entire 
stand, and control treatments in mosaic patterns are 
recommended. Several methods exist for partial 
removal of the shrubby over story.  
 
Herbicide use is an eff ective means of thinning 
sagebrush stands. Contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to 
determine what works best in your area and how to 
use it safely.   
 
Probably the simplest and most cost effective means 
of stand reduction is through prescribed burning. If 
there is sufficient fuel,  a burn can completely 
eliminate a sagebrush comm unity. For this reason 
niche burning is recommended when possible. In 
situations where cheatgrass is  a dominant part of the 
understory, burning shoul d take place when ripe 
cheatgrass seeds are still on the plants and will be 
consumed in the fire. 
 
Methods of mechanical removal for sagebrush 
include anchor chaining, pipe harrowing, land 
imprinting offset disking and brush beating with 
brush hogs or mowers. Of these, chaining and land 
imprinting are the least expe nsive and do an excellent 
job of reducing sagebrush stands while still leaving 
enough plants for diversity and browsing. Brush 
beating does a good job, but it is expensive. Disking 
and harrowing also do a good job of shrub removal, 
but are more expensive and more destructive to 
under-story plant populations. 
  Pests and Potential Problems 
Perhaps the greatest danger to sagebrush stands 
comes from fire. Big sagebrush plants have no fire 
resistance and many acres are destroyed annually 
because of increased fire
 frequency resulting from 
infestations of exotic  annual weeds such as 
cheatgrass and medusahead.  
 
Another minor cause of sage brush mortality is winter 
injury. This occurs when temperatures drop quickly 
below freezing before plants have entered dormancy, 
or when a warm spell promotes winter growth 
followed by a return to typical winter temperatures. 
Extended periods of winter and summer drought 
(normally more than 2 years) can also cause 
dehydration and death.  
 
Big sagebrush is occasionally susceptible to limited 
outbreaks of the sagebrush defoliator moth, or 
webworm, ( Aroga websteri ). Although the moths can 
cause extensive damage, they too are subject to insect 
predators, and it is rare that  entire stands will be lost.  
 
Additionally, there are a number of other microbial 
and fungal pathogens known to attack big sagebrush. 
Although these may inflict serious damage locally, 
they have not been viewed as a great threat to 
sagebrush populations.  
 
Seed and Plant Production 
The vast majority of big sagebrush seed used in 
revegetation is wildland collected material. Seed 
collection occurs in late fall to early winter (early 
October through the end of December) depending on 
the subspecies. Collections are commonly made by 
hand stripping, beating or clipping seed heads into 
containers or by using a reel type harvester. Seed can 
be cleaned with a hammermi ll, debearder, air-screen 
or gravity table with varying results. Most sagebrush 
seed lots used for rangeland seeding are only cleaned 
to a purity of 15 to 20 percent due to the small nature 
of the seeds (achenes). This practice requires less 
time for cleaning and also allows for easier seed flow 
and metering in seeding equipment. Pure seed yields 
approximately 1.7 to 2.5 million seeds per pound. 
The NRCS Plant Materials Center in Bridger, MT 
reported four hours collecting time and 5.5 hours 
cleaning yielded 200g (0.45 lb) cleaned material, or 
21g (0.04 lb) per hour. 
 
Sagebrush seed that has been dried to a minimum of 
9 percent moisture content will remain viable for 
many years when stored under cool, dry conditions. 
Welch et al (1996) reported seed viabilities above 
90% for seed stored at 10 ºC (50 ºF) and relative 
humidity (RH) of 20 percent after nine years of

storage. Seed stored at higher RH levels are 
susceptible to germination or damage by insects or 
microorganisms.  
 
Because sagebrush seed can readily be collected from 
wild stands, sagebrush is rarely grown in commercial 
production fields. However, in very droughty periods, 
very little sagebrush seed can be collected from wild 
stands. Increasing seed demands and decreasing 
sagebrush stands lost to weeds and fire are growing 
concerns. Recent studies suggest protecting wildland 
seed-producing stands for optimum harvesting. The 
greatest factor in seed production for sagebrush is 
protection against grazing animals. Surrounding 
plants with a wire fence has shown an increase in 
seed stalk number of as  much as 3 to 5 times the 
amount of unprotected plants. Studies also show 
significantly higher seed yields from plants grown on 
reclaimed mine lands when compared with those on 
adjacent non-mined areas . The reason for this 
correlation is unclear, but it may be a result of 
increased available soil moisture due to lower 
competing plant frequencies on the mined lands.  
 
Seed production varies greatly between years and 
between stands due to differences in climate, stand 
density and maturity, soil and genetics. It has been 
estimated that an average stand of big sagebrush 
could potentially produce 100 to 300 lbs PLS per acre 
annually. Seed production declines as plants and 
stands mature creating larger amounts of woody 
biomass. Greater seed yields can be achieved by 
thinning decadent stands to encourage new flower 
stalk production 
 
For nursery plantings, pre-stratified seed can be 
planted in greenhouse conditions, or seed can be 
allowed to naturally stratify after being planted in 
containers outdoors. Keep soil medium slightly moist 
during germination. Greenhouse sprayers or misters 
are commonly used during daylight hours at a rate of 
10 seconds every 15 minutes. Uniform germination 
occurs after two weeks of temperatures over 20º C 
(70º F). Seedlings are ready for field transplanting 
approximately 5 months after germination. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘ Hobble Creek ’ mountain big sagebrush was 
released by the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Utah State University and  the USDA Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Research Station in 1987. Seed was 
originally collected in 1968 by A. Perry Plummer at 
the Hobble Creek drainage east of Springville, UT. 
‘Hobble Creek’ was chosen for its high vegetative 
production and for its high palatability to mule deer  and wintering domestic sheep. It is adapted to sites 
with deep, well-drained soils
 receiving more than 350 
mm (14 in) of annual precipitation and having a 
growing season of 90 days or longer. Soils should be 
no finer than a clay loam,  containing 40% or less clay 
and have a pH between 6.6 and 8.6. Breeder seed is 
maintained at a breeder bl ock at the USDA Forest 
Service Rocky Mountain Re search Station, Shrub 
Sciences Laboratory, Provo, UT. 
 
‘ Gordon Creek ’ Wyoming big sagebrush was 
originally collected near Helper, Carbon County, UT. 
It was released in 1992 by the USDA Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Research Station to fill the need for 
a low precipitation ecotype of big sagebrush to 
improve winter diets of mule deer and sage grouse 
and for rangeland restoration.  Gordon Creek was 
chosen for its high growth rate, nutrient levels and 
mule deer preference. It  is widely adapted to dry 
regions of the west receiving 250 or more mm (10 in) 
mean annual precipitation. It prefers deep to shallow, 
well-drained soils with up to 55% clay content with a 
pH of 6.6 to 8.8.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Booth, D.T. 2005. Wyoming big sagebrush seed 
orchards on reclaimed mined land. Native Plants 
Journal.  6(3): 247-253. 
 
Booth, D.T., Y. Bai and E.E. Roos. 2004. Cultural 
methods for enhancing Wyoming big sagebrush seed 
production. USDA Forest Service Proceedings 
RMRS-P-31: 95-99. 
 
Butler, J, C. Frieswyk. 2002. Propagation protocol 
for production of  Artemisia tridentata  seeds; Rocky 
Mountain National Park. In: Native Plant Network. 
URL:  http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org
 (accessed 
25 March 2005). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 
 
Cronquist, A. et al. 1994. Intermountain flora: 
Vascular plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A., 
Volume Five: Asterales. The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York.  Pages: 146-160. 
 
Flora of North America Editorial Committee. 2006. 
Flora of North America North of Mexico. Volume

19: Magnoliophyta: Asteridae, part 6: Asteraceae, 
part 1. Oxford University Press, New York, New 
York. Pages: 503-518. 
 
Francis, John K. ed. 2004. Wildland shrubs of the 
United States and its Territories: thamnic 
descriptions: volume 1. Gen. Tech. Rep. IITF-GTR-
26. San Juan, PR: USDA, Forest Service, 
International Institute of Tropical Forestry, and Fort 
Collins, CO: USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 830 p. 
 
Hickman, J.C., ed. 1993. The Jepson manual: higher 
plants of California. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 1400 p. 
 
Jensen, K. H. Horton, R. Reed, R. Whitesides and 
USDA-ARS-FRRL. 2001. Intermountain planting 
guide. Utah State University. AG 510. 
 
Luna, T., J. Evans and D. Wick. 2004. Propagation 
protocol for production of container  Artemisia 
tridentata ; Glacier National Park. In: Native Plant 
Network. URL:  http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org
 
(accessed 25 March 2005). Mo scow (ID): University 
of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery. 
 
Lysne, C.R. and M. Pellant. 2004. Establishment of 
aerially seeded big sagebrush following southern 
Idaho wildfires. USDI, BLM. Technical Bulletin no. 
2004-01. 
 
Mahalovich, M.F. and E.D. McArthur. 2004. 
Sagebrush ( Artemisia spp.) Seed and Plant Transfer 
Guidelines. Native Plants. Fall 2004: 141-148. 
 
McArthur, E.D. 2005. Sagebrush, common and 
uncommon, palatable and unpalatable. Rangelands. 
27(4): 47-51. 
 
McArthur, E.D. and S.C. Sanderson. 1999. 
Cytogeography and chromosome evolution of 
subgenus  Tridentatae  of Artemisia . American Journal 
of Botany 86: 1754-1775. 
 
McArthur, E.D. and R. Stevens. 2004. Composite 
shrubs. In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 493-537. 
 
Ogle, D.G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2003. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legum e, and woody species for the  intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 
24. 41p. 
 
Peterson, J.G.1995. Sagebrush: ecological 
implications of sagebrush manipulation. Wildlife 
Management Division, Montana Fish, Wildlife and 
Parks. 50p. 
 
Rosentreter, R. and R.G. Kelsey. 1991. Xeric big 
sagebrush, a new subspecies in the 
Artemisia 
tridentata  complex. Journal of Range Management 
44(4): 330-335. 
 
Schultz, B. and K. McAdoo. 2002. Common 
sagebrush in Nevada. University of Nevada, Reno. 
Special Publication SP-02-02. 9p. 
 
Stevens, R. K.R. Jorgense n, S.A. Young and S.B. 
Monsen. 1996. Forb and shrub seed production guide 
for Utah. Utah State University Extension. 51p. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2004. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5  (http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant 
Data Center (accessed 28 March, 2005), Baton 
Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA.  
 
Van Dersal, W.R. 1938. Native Woody Plants of the 
United States: Their Erosion-Control and Wildlife 
Values. USDA Miscellaneous Publication No. 303. 
 
Wambolt, C.L. 1996. Mule deer and elk foraging 
preference for 4 sagebrush taxa. Journal of Range 
Management 49(6): 499-503. 
 
Welch, B.L. 2005. Big sagebrush: a sea fragmented 
into lakes, ponds, and puddles. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-144. US DA, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
210 p. 
 
Welch, B.L., S.F. Briggs and J.H. Johansen. 1996. 
Big sagebrush seed storage. Res. Note INT-RN-430. 
Ogden, UT: US Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain  Research Station. 3p. 
 
Welch, B.L. and C. Criddle. 2003. Countering 
Misinformation Concerning Big Sagebrush. Research 
Paper RMRS-RP-40. Ogden, UT: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 28 p. 
 
Welch, B.L., E. D. McArthur, D.L. Nelson, J.C. 
Pederson and J.N. Davis. 1986. 'Hobble Creek'- a 
superior selection of low elevation mountain big

sagebrush. Research Paper INT-370. USDA, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, UT. 
 
Welch, B.L., Nelson, E.E., Young, S.A., Sands, A.R., 
Wagstaff, F.J., and D.L. Nelson. 1992. 'Gordon 
Creek'- a superior, tested germplasm of Wyoming big 
sagebrush. Research Paper INT-461. USDA Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, UT. 
 
Welch, B.L. and F.J. Wagstaff. ‘Hobble Creek’ big 
sagebrush vs. antelope bitterbrush as a winter forage. 
Journal of Range Management. 45(2): 140-142. 
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 1993. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press, Provo, Utah. 
 
Winward, A.H. 2004. Sagebrush of Colorado: 
taxonomy, distribution, ecology and management. 
Colorado Division of Wildlife. Denver, CO. 46 p. 
 
Winward, A.H. and E.D. McArthur. 1995. Lahontan 
sagebrush ( Artemisia arbuscula  ssp. longicaulis ): a 
new taxon. Great Basin Naturalist 55(2): 151-157. 
 
Prepared By:  
Derek J. Tilley , Range Conservationist, USDA NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John , Manager, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Brock Benson , Area Range Conservationist, USDA 
NRCS, Ogden, Utah 
 
Acknowledgements: 
The authors would like to thank the following people 
for reviewing this manuscript and providing their 
thoughtful input: 
 
Stephen C. Bunting , Professor of Rangeland Ecology, 
University of Idah o. Moscow, Idaho. 
 
Jim Cornwell,  State Range Conservationist, USDA 
NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Dave Franzen , Intermountain Rangeland 
Consultants, LLC. Wilder, Idaho 
 
Jacy Gibbs , Intermountain Rangeland Consultants, 
LLC. Wilder, Idaho 
  E. Durant McArthur
, Project Leader, Shrub Sciences 
Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
USDA Forest Service. Provo, Utah  
 
Carl L. Wambolt , Professor of Range Science, 
Montana State University. Bozeman, Montana. 
 
Bruce L. Welch , Plant Physiologist, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. USDA Fore st Service. Provo, Utah. 
(Retired) 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited: dgo010406; lsj052005; edm060105; scb060105; df061805; 
jg061805; blw070105; clw071505; djt122105; 061214 jsp; 081008 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.

Appendix 1. Summary of characteristics of big sagebrush subspecies.  
 
 Basin Wyoming Mountain Xeric Subalpine Parish’s 
Height  3 to 6’ (13) 2 to 3’ 2 to 3’  3 to 6’ 2 to 5’ See basin 
Stem  Single main trunk Branching at 
or slightly 
above ground 
Branching at or 
slightly above 
ground 
Branching 
at or slightly 
above 
ground 
Branching at 
or slightly 
above ground 
See basin 
Evergreen 
Leaves on 
vegetative 
stems 
Narrowly cuneate,  
up to 5 cm long, 
many times longer 
than wide 
 
  Flabelliform, 
1-1.5 cm long, 
ca. 3X longer 
than wide 
Cuneate, 1-2.5 cm 
long; usually wider 
than basin or 
Wyoming 
 
 
 
 
 Cuneate, 1-2.5 
cm long; lobes 
often pointed 
See basin 
Crown shape Uneven-topped, 
floral stems growing 
throughout crown 
Uneven-
topped, floral 
stems growing 
throughout 
crown 
Even-topped, floral 
stems rising above 
crown 
Uneven-
topped, 
floral stems 
growing 
throughout 
crown 
Even-topped, 
floral stems 
rising above 
crown 
Uneven-
topped, floral 
stems growing 
throughout 
and 
drooping  
Flrs/head 3 to 6 3 to 8 4 to 8  10 to 18 3-6; achenes 
hairy 
UV color: 
water/alcohol 
None to light blue/ 
rust 
None to light 
blue/rust 
Intense blue/ blue-
cream 
Blue/ blue-
cream 
Blue/blue-
cream 
 
Elevational 
range 
600-2100m 800-2200m 800-3000m 800-1500m 2000-3000+m 300-?m 
Soil  Sandy to loamy; 
deep & fertile (36”+) 
Loamy to silt 
loam; often 
very gravelly; 
dry & shallow 
(10 to 30”), 
caliche 
possible 
Loamy to clay 
loam; often 
gravelly (18 to 36”) 
Basalt or 
granite 
derived (12 
to 22”) 
 Sandy, well 
drained 
Soil 
chemistry 
Non-alkaline, non-
saline and non-
calcareous 
Can be mildly 
alkaline 
Non-alkaline, non-
saline and non-
calcareous 
   
Precipitation 
range 
8 to 16”+ 8 to 12” 14”+ 12 to 16” 30”+  
Topography Valleys, low 
foothills, seasonal 
stream channels 
Mid-elevation 
valleys, 
foothills 
Foothills and 
mountains, 
plateaus and ridges 
Basalt flows 
and granite 
outcrops 
High mountain 
ridges and 
plateaus 
Deep soils in 
Southern 
California