Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE SAGEWORT
Artemisia frigida Willd. 
Plant Symbol = ARFR4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Pasture sage, fringed sage, sweet sage, northern 
wormwood 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: The Cheyenne used prairie sagewort 
ceremonially as a smudge for purification in the Sun 
Dance (Hart 1976; Kinscher 1992).  The Delaware-
Okl chewed the leaves as a ceremonial medicine.  
The Blackfeet chewed the leaves of prairie sagewort 
for heartburn (McClintock 1923, Hellson 1974) and 
applied the leaves to wounds to reduce swelling.  
Prairie sagewort was also us ed to treat nosebleed by 
stuffing the nose with the soft leaves.  The roots and 
tops were boiled and drank as a tea for “mountain 
fever.”  Other tribes, who used this species of sage 
include the Arapaho, Comanche, Gros Ventre, Cree, 
Navaho, Tewa, and Ute (Nickerson 1966, Carlson 
and Jones 1939, Hart 1976, Thwaites 1905, Denig 
1855, Elmore 1944, Robbins et al. 1916, Chamberlin 
1909). 
 
Cheyenne women used prairie sagewort  to correct 
menstrual irregularity (Hart 1976).  During the time 
of the month when women left their lodges and went 
to the menstrual hut, they drank tea made from the 
root of Artemisia  frigida  or the leaves of the white 
sage ( Artemisia ludoviciana ).  The Dakota, Omaha, 
Pawnee, and Ponca women used a decoction of the 
plant for irregular menstrual periods. 
 
The Blackfeet used the leaves  of prairie sandwort as a 
preservative for stored meat (Hellson  
 
and Gadd 1974).  It was known by the Chilcotin as 
horse food (Myers et al. Unpubl. Notes 1988). 
 
According to Moerman (1986)  Artemisia frigida was 
used in the following ways: 
•   The Chippewa used it as an anti-convulsive, a 
cure for “fits,” burned leaves to disinfect a 
contagious patient, inhaled a moxa for 
biliousness, put it on wounds to stop bleeding, 
made a decoction of the roots for a stimulant or 
tonic, and placed fresh leaves in nostrils and 
mouth as protection when “working with the 
dead.” 
 USDI, GS, NPWRC 
•  Montana Indians used a decoction as a remedy 
for lung troubles. 
•  The Navaho-Ramah used a decoction of leaves 
to alleviate coughing, made a hot poultice of 
leaves for toothaches, and used the root for “life 
medicine.” 
•  The Potawatomi placed l eaves and flowers on 
live coals to revive comatose patients. 
•   The Shuswap burned the plant to keep away 
mosquitoes. 
•  The Tewa chewed leaves for indigestion or 
flatulence. 
•  The Zuni used an infusion  of the whole plant as a 
cold remedy. 
 
The lactone glycosides, sant onin and artemisin, are 
probably found in all  Artemisia species and account 
for their anthelmintic properties (Moore 1979).  
Thujone, a terpene-like ketone and essential oil, is 
also found in the plant and may be responsible for 
some of its medicinal effects (Kinscher 1992).  
However, it is poisonous in large doses.  The Food 
and Drug Administration classifies  Artemisia as an 
unsafe herb containing “a volatile oil which is an 
active narcotic poison” (Duke 1985).  Although the 
native species of  Artemisia have never been listed as 
official drugs in the  
U.S. Pharmacopoeia, A. frigida is 
listed as a source of camphor (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Wildlife : Sagebrush furnishes essential cover for 
many of the smaller desert animals (Martin et al. 
1951).  Its foliage and flower clusters constitute most 
of the diet of the sage grouse, and these parts together 
with the twigs are the primary source of food for 
antelope and mule deer.  Range cattle also make good

use of sagebrush as forage.  Other mammals, which 
browse the foliage and stems, include jackrabbits, 
black-tailed rabbits, white-tailed rabbits, cottontails, 
chipmunks, gophers, ground squirrels, and various 
species of mice, prairie dogs, kangaroo rats, and 
white-throated wood rats.  Elk and mountain sheep 
also browse on the foliage and twigs. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Prairie 
sagewort is a spreading shrublet 1-4 dm (3.9-15.7 in) 
tall, pleasantly fragrant, whitish or grayish tomentose, 
and arising from a tough, woody crown.  Tomentose 
means having dense, velvety,  fuzzy hairs.  The leaves 
are also tomentose and abundant, clustered toward 
the base and scattered along the stem.  The lower 
leaves are petiolate, 12 mm (0.5 in) long, with the 
upper leaves becoming sessile.  The inflorescence is a 
panicle with small, greenish flower heads.  Prairie 
sagewort flowers from July  to August.  The fruits are 
dry, smooth, broadly cylindrical achenes. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The range is from western Minnesota, 
southwest to eastern Colorado and from Wisconsin, 
north to British Columbia, Alaska, and Siberia and 
south to Arizona and northern New Mexico.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Prairie sagewort grows in the open high 
plains, prairies, and semi-distu rbed sites.  Most of the 
wild sages are abundant in their natural habitats.  
Artemisia  species can be propagated by seeds, by 
division of the rootstock, or by cuttings taken in the 
early summer (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings : Artemisia  species can 
easily be divided and replanted. 
•   In greenhouse conditions, it is best to dig up and 
separate plants in late fall or winter.  This is the 
“quiescent” period that follows seed maturation, 
and leaves are senescent (dried up and brown 
colored).  
•  Split the plant clump into pieces by hand, then 
cut the plant into sections, each with one or more 
buds. 
•  For dividing the whole plant, gently loosen the 
soil around the plant, taking care to not damage  the roots, and then lift the plant gently with a 
pitchfork.  Shake off as much soil from the roots 
as possible. 
•
  Divide the plant into smaller pieces by hand, 
retaining only healthy, vigorous sections, each 
with new buds.  
•  Replant the divisions as soon as possible.  It is 
important the plants don’t dry out, so if 
replanting is delayed a couple of hours, dip the 
plants briefly in water and keep them in a sealed 
plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you are 
ready to plant them. 
•  Cut back the old top-growth and replant the 
divided plant sections to the same depth as 
before. 
•  When replanting, ensure that the roots are well 
spread out in the planting hole and the plant 
firmed in.  Water newly planted divisions 
thoroughly; take care not to expose the roots by 
washing away soil when watering. 
•  Plants should be planted in the full sun in a light, 
loose soil.  Plants should be planted on 12-18” 
centers. 
•  As plants are becoming established, the rooting 
zone needs to be kept moist.  
 
Propagation by seed : When the soil has warmed up 
to at least 45ºF (7ºC) in the spring, sow hardy 
Artemisia  species where they are to flowers.  
•  Seeds can also be sown in  pots or seed trays and 
either planted out in their final positions in late 
fall or over-wintered in a cold frame to be 
planted in spring.  This technique is particularly 
useful in gardens with clay soil that is slow to 
warm up in spring. 
•   The two main methods of sowing seeds outdoors 
are broadcast and in drills.  For both, prepare the 
seedbed by digging over the soil to one spade 
depth, then rake over and firm. 
•  Broadcast Sowing: Sprinkle seeds thinly and 
evenly on the surface of  the prepared seedbed 
and rake them in lightly.  Label the seedbeds, 
then water the area gently but thoroughly with a 
fine spray. 
•   Sowing in Drills: Use either a trowel tip or the 
corner of a hoe, mark out shallow drill holes 3-6” 
(8-15 cm) apart, depending on the ultimate size 
of the plant.  Sow seeds thinly and evenly by 
sprinkling or placing them along each drill at the 
appropriate depth.  Carefully cover with soil and 
firm.  Label each row and water gently but 
thoroughly with a fine spray. 
•  The seedlings usually need to be thinned to 
prevent overcrowding.  To minimize disturbance

to a seedling being retained, press the soil around 
it after thinning the adjacent seedlings. 
•  Water the newly establishing seedlings fairly 
frequently until the roots have developed. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.  ARFR is 
available through your local native plant nursery 
within its range.   
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883.   The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1:116-118. 
 
Beichel, C., E. McDonald, & T. Cole (eds.) 1993.  
Encyclopedia of gardening .  Dorling Kindersley, 
London, New York, Stuttgart.  648 pp. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939.   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche  Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25: 517-543. 
 
Chamberlin, R.V. 1909.   Some plant names of the Ute 
Indians .  American Anthropologist 11: 27-40. 
 
Denig, E.T. 1855 .   An account of medicine and 
surgery as it exists among the Cree Indians.  St. 
Louis Medicinal and Surgical Journal 13: 312-318. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  97 pp. 
 
Elmore, F.H. 1944.   Ethnobotany of the Navajo . 
University of New Mexico, Monographs of the 
School of American Research. Number 8. 
 
Grinnell, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 Vols.  
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Hart, J. A. 1976.   Montana mative plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 
 
Hellson, J.C. 1974.   Ethnobotany of the Blackfeet 
Indians .  National Museum of Man, Mercury Series, 
Canadian Ethnology Service.  Paper No. 19. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1908.   The ethnology of the Gros 
Ventre .  American Museum of Natural History, 
Anthropological Papers 1:145-281. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie . An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press of 
Kansas. 340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie.   University Press of Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts a guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.).   Flora of the Great Plains .  Great 
Plains Flora Association, Un iversity Press of Kansas. 
1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2, University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology Technical Reports, Number 19.  534 
pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New 
Mexico. 
 
Nickerson, G.S. 1966.   Some data on plains and 
great basin Indian uses of certain native plants .  
Tebiwa 9.1: 45-47. 
 
Robbins, W., J.P. Harrington, & B. Freire-Marreco 
1916.   Ethnobotany of the Tewa .  Smithsonian 
Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 
5, Washington, D.C. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Ojibwa Indians.  Bulletin of 
the Public Musum of the City of Milwaukee 4(3): 
327-325. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 000316.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
USDI, Geological Survey 2000.   Native wildflowers 
of the North Dakota grasslands .  Version: 000316.  
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.go v/resource/literatr/wildfl

wr/species/artefrig.htm>.  Northern Prairies Wildlife 
Research Center, Jamestown, North Dakota. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised: 04dec00 jsp; 17 mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.