HAIRY MANZANITA
Arctostaphylos columbiana
Piper
plant symbol = ARCO3
Contributed By: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden &
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center
Uses
The fruits of hairy manzanita are utilized by bear,
deer, coyote, foxes and other small mammals and a
wide array of birds.  A tea made from the bark was
used by some native Americans to treat diarrhea.
The crooked wood of central stems and lower
branches are used in several cottage industries,
including lamp stands and other decorative wood
crafts.  Although somewhat difficult to grow, several
selections of hairy manzanita and hybrids with
kinnikinnik are occasionally cultivated.
Status
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’scurrent status, such as, state noxious status and
wetland indicator values.
Description
General: Heath Family (Ericaceae).  Hairy manzanita
is an erect much-branched evergreen shrub or small
tree 1-3 m high, with a broad, rounded, dense canopy.
It does not have a basal burl and consequently does
not crown sprout after fire.  The bark of young twigs
is densely white-hirsute, but the mature bark is
smooth and dark red-brown.  Leaves have short
petioles and oblong to broadly elliptic blades that are
2.5-6 cm long, 1.5-3 cm wide, pale gray-green, and
tomentose on both sides.  The flowers, which open
from March to May, are arranged in short, dense
panicles with leaf-like bracts that are lanceolate, 5-15
mm long, and hirsute.  The urn-shaped corollas are
white, sometimes tinged with pink, and 6-7 mm long.
The fruit is strongly depressed-globose, 7-11 mm in
diameter, hairy when young, but becoming smooth
and reddish brown, with a mealy pulp that encloses
several, hard-walled seeds.
Hybrids between hairy manzanita and the prostrate
kinnikinnick (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) are called
Arctostaphylos x media.  This hybrid and various
back-crosses, especially to kinnikinnick, have a
spreading form, dense foliage, and pink flowers.
Distribution
Hairy manzanita inhabits well-drained, rocky slopes
below 2500 feet from southern British Columbia
south to northwestern California.  For current
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for
this species on the PLANTS Web site.
Establishment
Adaptation: It is a common associate in successional
coastal shrub communities, but also occurs as an
understory shrub in coniferous forests ranging from
the coast to the western slopes of the Cascade Range.
Its general geographic range is characterized by cool,
relatively dry summers and wet winters with
precipitation ranging from 50 to 120 inches per year.
Hairy manzanita prefers well-drained, acidic soils in
open sunny sites.  It has a mild frost tolerance, but a
low tolerance for frozen soils.  Fire may be important
to successful seed germination and establishment,
especially in coastal shrub communities and
relatively open forest communities.
Natural Establishment: Arctostaphylos columbiana,
like most manzanita species, requires insect visitation
Brother Alfred Brousseau
© Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College
@ CalPhotos

to ensure seed-set.  The flowers are pollinated by
bees that grasp the flower and shake it by actively
beating their wings.  This process, like shaking a salt
and pepper container, permits efficient collection of
the pollen, which is used for food.  Fruits are
dispersed primarily by animals, which presumably
aid germination by digesting the fruit and softening
the outer seed coat.  However, natural germination is
sporadic except after fire, which cracks the hard coat
of seeds that have accumulated in the litter layer.
Hairy manzanita prefers loose, well-drained soils
and, like other members of the heath family
(Ericaceae), has an obligate relationship with
mycorrhizal fungi.
Seed Propagation: Propagation from seed is difficult,
because of the thick, bony seed walls and low rates of
germination (less than 10%) without treatment.
However, if propagation from seed is desired,
treatment must ensure that the seed coat is broken
without damaging the embryo.  Individual seeds may
be filed with a steel file, but larger quantities can be
treated by placing them into a container of boiling
water that is removed from the source of heat after 1-
2 minutes.  Seeds also respond well to burning, which
is accomplished by firing a 4-inch deep layer of
combustible leaves and twigs over a flat planted with
seeds.  These treatments crack the seed coats but may
reduce viability.  Treated seeds should be stratified in
a moist mix of milled sphagnum and beach sand for
2-8 months until they germinate.  Other techniques,
including use of sulfuric acid to soften the seed coat,
may enhance germination, but also requires special
precautions against spillage and contamination.
Vegetative Propagation: Vegetative propagation is
preferred over seeds.  Hairy manzanita is most easily
propagated by cutting terminal shoots that include 1-
2 inches of the woody stem from the previous year.
Cuttings work best if taken between January and
March and should be dipped in a rooting hormone
before being placed in a moist sand-peat mixture.
Cuttings need to be kept moist by regular watering or
misting until roots appear.  Once rooted, they should
be transplanted into small containers using potting
soil, to allow for proper root development.
Manzanitas generally do not transplant well, so they
should be grown to vigorous conditions in one-gallon
containers and then moved to a permanent position in
the late fall or early winter.  Relatively slow growth
rates during the first few years can be expected.  If
plants are used in an urban landscape, the use of
organic-rich soils and acidified fertilizers is
recommended.Management
Under natural conditions, no special management is
required to maintain established manzanitas.  Either
scarified seeds or well-rooted container plants may be
used to re-vegetate cleared sites.  In the urban
landscape, several horticultural techniques should be
used to ensure healthy plants.  All manzanitas should
be planted higher than the surrounding soil to prevent
crown rot, which can result from excessive water and
soil moisture, especially during the summer.
Overhead watering should also be avoided because it
tends to encourage fungal diseases (e.g.,
Botryosphaeria) that cause branch die-back and leaf
spot.
Manzanitas are also susceptible to gall-producing
aphids (Tamalia), which cause young leaves to curl
and cease growth.  Periodic watering every 4-6 weeks
will keep foliage healthy without weakening plants.
Mulching is desirable to control weeds, retain soil
moisture, and reduce the need for irrigation.  Rock
mulches have proven more successful than organic
mulches.  Pruning should be avoided and used only
to remove dead wood and diseased branches.
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and
area of origin)
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by
clicking on Plant Materials.  This species is available
from native species nursery.
References
CalPhotos 2000.  Arctostaphylos columbiana.
Version: 000509.  CalFlora, Inc., Berkeley,
California.  < http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/photos/>.
Emery, D. 1988.  Seed propagation of native
California plants.  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden
Publishing, Santa Barbara, California.  115 p.
Franklin, J. & C. Dyrness 1988.  Natural vegetation
of Oregon and Washington.  Oregon State University
Press, Corvallis, Oregon.  452 p.
Holland, K. & D. Keil 1995.  California vegetation.
Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, Iowa.  516 p.
Keaton, G. 1994.  Complete garden guide to the
natural shrubs of California.  Chronicle Books, San
Francisco, California.  314 p.
Kruckeberg, A. 1982.  Gardening with native plants
of the Pacific Northwest.  University of Washington
Press, Seattle, Washington.  252 p.

Lenz, L. & J. Dourley 1981.  California native trees
and shrubs.  Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden,
Claremont, California.  231 p.
Munz, P.A. & D. Keck 1959.  A California flora.
University of California, Berkeley, California.  1681
p.
Roach, A. 1952.  Phytosociology of the Nash Crater
lava flows, Linn County, Oregon.  Ecological
Monographs 22:169-193.
Smith, N. 1995.  Manzanitas: A gardener’s guide.
Pacific Horticulture 56(1):18-33.
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database.
Version: 000509.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Wiedemann, A. 1966.  Contributions to the plant
ecology of the Oregon coastal sand dunes.  Ph.D.
dissertation, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon.  255 p.
Wiedemann, A. L. Dennis, & F. Smith 1969.  Plants
of the Oregon coastal dunes.  Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon.  117 p.
Prepared By
Dieter Wilken and Julie Burgher
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara,
California
Species Coordinator
Dieter Wilken
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara,
California
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org
Edited 30nov00 jsp
For more information about this and other plants, please contact
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the
PLANTS <http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program
Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of
race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability,
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status.
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of
program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and
TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer.