Plant Guide

RED MAPLE

Acer rubrum L.

Plant Symbol = ACRU 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Britton & Brown. 1913 Illustrated flora of the northern states and Canada @ PLANTS 
Alternate common names 
Carolina red maple, Drummond red maple, scarlet 
maple, soft maple, swamp maple, water maple 
Uses 
Red maple has long been valued as an ornamental 
tree (shade, specimen, autumn accent, or wet site) 
because of its ease of establishment, rapid growth, 
brightly colored flowers and fruit, and fall leaf colors 
(ranging from clear yellow to orange to vivid red) 
displaying coloring during different seasons of the 
year. This tree is preferred over silver maple or 
boxelder when a fast growing maple is needed. Red 
maple can be planted onto many types of disturbed 
sites in rehabilitation projects.  
The white, fine-grained wood is used for furniture, 
flooring, cabinetry, paneling, veneer, musical 
instruments, tool handles, cutting boards, butcher 
blocks, wooden bowls, boxes and crates, and many 
other uses.  Red maple is an excellent wood for fuel 
and is also used for saw timber and pulpwood.  But 
because of susceptibility to defects and disease and 
poor form of individuals of sprout-clump origin, the 
timber is often low in quality. 
The sap of red maple is sometimes used for 
producing maple syrup.  Although its sap has only 
about half the sugar content as sugar maple (A. 
saccharum), the syrup tastes good.  Saponins in 
the sap may cause excessive frothing of the 
concentrate.   
Native Americans used red maple bark as an 
analgesic, wash for inflamed eyes and cataracts, and 
as a remedy for hives and muscular aches. Tea 
brewed from the inner bark has been used for treating 
coughs and diarrhea.  Pioneers made cinnamon-
brown and black dyes from a bark extract.  Iron 
sulphate was added to the tannin from red maple bark 
to make ink.  
Because of the abundance and wide distribution red 
maple, its early-produced pollen may be important to 
the biology of bees and other pollen-dependent 
insects. Most references describe red maple as wind 
pollinated, but insect pollination may be important, as 
many insects, especially bees, visit the flowers.  The 
seeds, buds and flowers are eaten by various wildlife 
species.  Squirrels and chipmunks store the seeds. 
White-tailed deer, moose, elk browse red maple, and 
rabbits, which find the stump sprouts especially 
palatable, especially in fall and winter.  Cavities in 
red maples in river floodplain communities are often 
well suited for cavity nesters such as the wood duck 
and others.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.  This species has been 
introduced in many areas of the U.S., outside of its 
native range. 
Description 
General: Maple Family (Aceraceae).  A native tree 
growing to 20 m tall, usually with a narrow compact 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

crown, single-boled, or often in clumps of stems from 
one stump due to prolific sprouting; bark gray and 
thin, becoming furrowed into long narrow scaly 
ridges on older trunks and branches. The leaves are 
deciduous, opposite, long-petioled, blades 6-10 cm 
long and usually about as wide, with 3 shallow short-
pointed lobes, sometimes with two smaller lobes near 
the base, dull green and smooth above, lighter green 
or silvery beneath and more or less hairy. The 
flowers are pink to dark red, about 3 mm long, the 
male (staminate) flowers fascicled and the female 
(pistillate) flowers in drooping racemes.  The flowers 
appear to be bisexual but they are functionally male 
or female, and individual trees may be all male or all 
female or some trees may have both types, each type 
on a separate branch (the species technically 
polygamo-dioecious), or the flowers may be 
functionally bisexual.  Fruits: winged nutlets 
(samaras) in a pair, 2-2.5 cm long, clustered on long 
stalks, red to red-brown. The common name is in 
reference to the red twigs, buds, flowers, and fall 
leaves. 
Variation within the species: Red maple is highly 
variable and many varieties and forms have been 
identified.  The following varieties are commonly 
recognized: 
 Var. drummondii (Hook. & Arn. ex Nutt.) Sarg. 
 Var. trilobum Torr. & Gray ex K. Koch 
Red maple forms natural hybrids with silver maple 
(A. saccharinum): Acer X freemanii E. Murray.  
Distribution: Red maple is one of the most widely 
distributed trees in eastern North America, extending 
from Newfoundland and Nova Scotia west to 
southern Ontario, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Illinois, 
then south through Missouri, eastern Oklahoma, and 
southern Texas, and east to southern Florida.  Its 
distribution has been increased past its native range 
through broad cultivation and naturalization of the 
cultivated forms.   
Adaptation 
Red maple is also one of the most successful and 
abundant species in the Eastern Deciduous Forest, 
arguably the most abundant, reproducing 
aggressively by seeds and sprouts after fire, logging, 
and abandonment of farmland. It is most abundant 
on bottomlands and is tolerant of waterlogged soils 
and flooding, but it is a “supergeneralist,” growing on 
the widest variety of sites and in the greatest range of 
conditions (sunny or shady, high or low nutrients, dry 
or moist) of any North American species, from 0-900 
meters. Because red maple grows well in shade, is a 
key late-successional species, but it also is a 
successful early successional invader of disturbed 
sites. “It will probably continue to increase in 
dominance in the overstory during the next century, 
causing widespread replacement of the historically 
dominant trees of the forests of the eastern United 
States”  (Abrams 1998, p. 355). Fire suppression has 
contributed greatly to the spread of red maple (the 
thin bark makes it highly susceptible to fire damage) 
but no single trait is responsible for its success.   
Flowering: (February-)March-April, before the 
vegetative buds, one of the first trees to flower in the 
spring; fruiting: April-June, before leaf development 
is complete.   
Establishment 
Red maple is a prolific seed producer and trees as 
young as four years may begin to bear seeds.  Good 
seed crops are usually produced in alternate years.  
Seedbed requirements are minimal and up to 95% of 
viable seeds germinate in the first 10 days; some 
survive in the duff and germinate the following year. 
Because the mature seeds are dispersed in spring and 
can germinate immediately, seedlings can become 
established with a 3-4 month advantage over most 
associated woody species.  A bank of persistent 
seedlings often accumulates beneath a forest canopy. 
Seedlings can survive 3-5 years of moderate shade, 
but establishment and early growth are best after 
disturbance. Male (staminate) trees may grow faster 
than female ones.  Average longevity for red maple is 
about 80-100 years, but trees are known to reach 200 
years of age.   
Vegetative reproduction under natural conditions is 
common from sprouts from the stump or root crown 
or root suckers after fire or mechanical damage.  
Buds located at the base of stems commonly sprout 
2-6 weeks after the stem is cut.   
Management 
Red maple is easily transplanted and is one of the 
easiest trees to grow.  It is abundantly available in 
commerce, in ball-and-burlap and in container, but 
where other fertile trees grow in the area, volunteers 
usually are common.  Propagation of cultivars is by 
budding onto seedling understock or rooted stem 
cuttings – the species form (although rarely 
propagated) by rooted stem cuttings or by seeds. 
Softwood cuttings are propagated under mist, using 
1000-3000 ppm IBA, in about four weeks. 
Despite its value and wide use (even to the point of 
over-planting in some areas), red maple has some

drawbacks as a lawn and street tree.  As a street tree, 
it often becomes too large, and it does not respond 
well to some urban stresses, particularly protracted 
drought because of the planting site or long spells of 
hot dry weather.  One of the &#34;soft maples,&#34; red maple 
branches are weak and somewhat brittle and are 
subject to storm damage.  The bark is thin and easily 
damaged by mechanical impact (including lawn 
mowers, weed eaters, and even increment boring) as 
well as fire, allowing entry of various damaging fungi 
and insects – butt rot, trunk rot fungi, heart rot, and 
stem diseases are common in damaged trees, 
although pests and pathogens otherwise are relatively 
few. As in some other maples, feeder roots develop 
close to the surface and turf and other shallow-rooted 
plants must compete directly with the tree for water. 
Turf beneath the canopy often is stunted and mowing 
may be difficult because of the protruding roots. 
Growth in alkaline soils may lead to leaf chlorosis 
and a weakly growing tree, especially among the 
cultivars.  Fertilization in spring can help overcome 
this.  Graft incompatibilities have appeared between 
some cultivars of red maple and their rootstock, the 
trees often breaking off at the union between scion 
and rootstock, but propagation by softwood cutting 
has circumvented this problem. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Many cultivars of red maple have been developed. 
Selections have been made for color tints and 
brightness, timing of onset of coloration, crown shape 
and branching pattern, cold hardiness, leaf size, only 
male flowers (no seeds or seedlings), and leafhopper 
resistance. 
References  
Abrams, M. 1998.  The red maple paradox. What 
explains the widespread expansion of red maple in 
eastern forests? Bioscience (May), 355-364.    
Anonymous 2000.  Why is swamp thing (red maple) 
taking over the forests? Univ. of Connecticut 
Cooperative Extension Forestry.  AUG00.  
<www.canr.uconn.edu/ces/forest/redmaple.htm> 
Koelling, M.R. & R.B. Heiligmann (eds.) 1996.  
North American maple syrup producers manual. 
Ohio State Univ. Extension Bull. 856. AUG00. 
<http://www.ag.ohio-
state.edu/~ohioline/b856/index.html> 
Li, H.-L. 1960. The cultivated maples. Morris 
Arbor. Bull. 11:41-47. 
Tirmenstein, D.A. 1991.  Acer rubrum. IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler). The fire effects information 
system [data base].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
Walters, R.S. & H.W. Yawney 1990. Acer rubrum 
L. Red maple.  Pp. 60-69, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala (tech. coords.).  Silvics of North America. 
Volume 2. Hardwoods.  USDA, Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C. 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom, BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp;07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.