Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
UTAH 
SERVICEBERRY  
Amelanchier utahensis  Koehne
Plant Symbol = AMUT 
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado 
 
 Steve Parr, Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Serviceberry, Juneberry, shadbush, and sarvis . 
 
Uses 
Utah serviceberry can be used for food and cover to 
improve wildlife habitat. Le aves and small branches 
are used by big game and livestock and berries are 
consumed by birds and small animals. It also 
provides nesting and cover for birds. Utah 
serviceberry can be used for reseeding big sagebrush 
and pinyon-juniper sites and is also beneficial for 
conservation plantings on rangelands and mined land. 
The plant can be used for landscaping and as a 
component of windbreaks and shelterbelts. It also can 
be used for roadside beautification. Native Americans 
used the berries as a source of food that was prepared 
in several ways (Dunmire and Tierney, 1997). Berries 
persist longer on the bush than on Saskatoon 
serviceberry and provide a  food source over a longer 
period of time, especially  when the ground may be 
covered with snow. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicat values).   
Description 
General
: Considerable variation occurs in the native 
shrubs or small trees that are generally 2 to 4 meters 
tall. Deciduous leaves are  simple, alternate generally 
serrate-dentate from the middle to the tip. Flowers 
form clusters in early May with five showy white 
petals and the ovary is 2 to 5 celled. The persistent 
purplish – black pome can remain dry and pulpy. 
Considerable variation occurs when it is found on 
sites with Saskatoon serviceberry where natural 
hybrids are sometimes found. It generally occupies 
drier sites than Saskatoon serviceberry. 
  
Distribution : Utah serviceberry is generally found at 
elevations of 5000 to 9 000 feet from Montana to 
Oregon, south to New Mexico, and California 
(Harrington, 1954). 
 
Habitat:   The plant is found on dry ridges and slopes 
in big sagebrush, pinyon-juniper, and aspen 
communities. It is abundant in the southern portion of 
the Great Basin (Wasser, 1982). 
 
Adaptation       
The plant is found on rocky slopes, canyons and 
stream banks with 12 to 20 inches of annual 
precipitation. It has a deep spreading root system and 
occupies soils that are coarse to medium textured and 
well drained. It is not tolerant of high water tables or 
saline soils. It is adapted to drier sites than Saskatoon 
serviceberry. Utah serviceb erry grows with a variety 
of other plants but grows slowly and seedlings can be 
suppressed by dense stands of grasses and forbs. 
  
Establishment   
Utah serviceberry can be established with seed 
planted about ¼ of an inch deep in fall months or 
container grown plants set in the ground in early 
spring when soil moisture is present. Sprouting does 
occur but is not as common  as the occurrence in the 
more northern ecotypes of Saskatoon serviceberry. 
Establishment can be slow, especially if soil moisture 
is low, but the plant can survive on drier sites than 
Saskatoon serviceberry. New plantings can require 
several years (8 to 10) for flowering and seed 
production.  Protection from browsing and plant 
competition along with the use of mulch will reduce 
the time required for establishment. Shade also will 
be beneficial for establishing live plants. 
 
Management

After seeding or planting live plants, controlled 
browsing will be important for maintaining vigorous 
growth. Reducing plant competition is also necessary 
for rapid plant growth. Controlled browsing will be 
important for berry production. After the plant is 
established, it can withstand moderate to heavy 
browsing in years with average to above average 
precipitation.  Browsing should not exceed more than 
50 percent of the current season’s growth to maintain 
good plant vigor and growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The plant is host of Apple-cedar rust when growing 
in close proximity to Junipers. The rust affects leaves 
and berries. No other serious diseases or pests are 
known (Wasser, 1982). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
The plant is not known to be aggressive, invasive, or 
difficult to control when used  in areas where adapted. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Utah serviceberry has about 25,800 seeds per pound.  
In years with good moisture, large quantities of 
berries are produced and can be hand harvested. 
Controlled browsing is also important for berry 
production. Seedlings can exhibit good vigor but 
slow growth. Fresh seed may require cold 
stratification. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Long Ridge Germplasm Utah serviceberry is the only 
release of the species. Seed and plants of Long Ridge 
Germplasm are available  form Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center (UCEPC) Meeker, 
Colorado. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Baldridge, D.E. and R. G. Lohmiller Editors 1990. 
Montana interagency plant materials handbook for 
forage production, conservation, reclamation and 
wildlife . Montana State University, EB 69, June 
1990. 337 p. 
 
Dunmire, W. W. and G. D. Tierney. 1997.  Wild 
plants and native peoples of the Four Corners . 
Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New 
Mexico. 313 p.   
Harrington, H. D. 1954. 
Manual of plants of 
Colorado . 2
nd Edition. Sage Books, Swallow Press 
Incorporated. 666 p. 
 
Horton, H. 1989. Editor and compiler.  Interagency 
forage and conservation planting guide for Utah . 
Utah State University, EC 433, August 1989. 67 p. 
 
Plummer, A. Perry, D.R. Christensen, and S. B. 
Monsen. 1968.  Restoring big-game range in Utah . 
Utah Div of Fish and Game, Pub. No. 68-3. 183 p. 
 
Soil Conservation Service, Plant Materials Centers. 
1988.  Plant Materials Handbook . (For Arizona, 
Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, North and South 
Dakota, Utah and Wyoming) US Dept. of The 
Interior, Office of Surface Mining-Reclamation and 
Enforcement. May 1988. 
 
Thornberg, Ashley A. 1982.  Plant Materials for use 
on surface mined lands in arid and semiarid regions . 
USDA Soil Conservation Service, SCS-TP-157.  
EPA-600/7-79-134. 88 p. 
 
Wasser, C.H. 1982. Ecology and culture of selected 
species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
west . US Fish and Wildlife Service, FWS/OBS-
82/56, Sept. 1982. 347 p. 
 
  Prepared By  
Gary L. Noller , Upper Colorado Environmental  Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado  
 
Species Coordinator 
Gary L. Noller , Upper Colorado Environmental  Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado  
 
Edited: 080826 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or

(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer." 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.