Plant Guide

SUGAR MAPLE

Acer saccharum Marsh.

Plant Symbol = ACSA3 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
A.E. Hoyle U.S. Forest Service @ Hunt Institute 
Alternate common names 
Hard maple, head maple, sugartree, bird’s-eye maple 
Uses 
Sugar maple is the only tree today used for 
commercial syrup production, as its sap has twice the 
sugar content of other maple species.  The sap, 
mostly collected in the spring, is concentrated by 
boiling or reverse osmosis, with about 35-40 liters of 
sap making 1 liter of syrup. A single tree may 
produce 5-60 liters of sap per year.  Nights below 
freezing and days at higher than 5°C are needed to 
ensure good sap flow.  Sugar maple was the premier 
source of sweetener, along with honey, to Native 
Americans and early European settlers.  Native 
Americans also used sugar maple sap for sugar and 
candies, as a beverage, fresh or fermented into beer, 
and soured into vinegar and used to cook meat.  
Sugar maple is widely planted as an ornamental or 
shade tree and many cultivars have been selected, 
based on variation in growth habit/crown shape, 
mature height, fall color, leaf shape, and temperature 
tolerance.  The leaves go from green to brilliant 
yellow, orange, and red in autumn, although there is 
much variation in fall color within the species.  
Orange and reds seem to be more intense in New 
England types, while yellows are more pronounced 
further west.  Interior leaves may be yellow, while 
outer exposed leaves turn orange-red.  The species is  
best suited to larger sites where soil compaction is 
not a concern.  It also is sometimes used in shelterbelt 
plantings and has potential value for rehabilitation of 
disturbed sites. 
Sugar maple is an important timber tree valued for its 
hard, heavy, and strong wood, commonly used to 
make furniture, paneling, flooring, and veneer.  It is 
also used for gunstocks, tool handles, plywood dies, 
cutting blocks, woodenware, novelty products, 
sporting goods, bowling pins, and musical 
instruments.  
White-tailed deer, moose, and snowshoe hare 
commonly browse sugar maple.  Red squirrel, gray 
squirrel, and flying squirrels feed on the seeds, buds, 
twigs, and leaves.  Porcupines consume the bark and 
can girdle the upper stem.  Songbirds, woodpeckers, 
and cavity nesters nest in sugar maple.  Although the 
flowers appear to be wind-pollinated, the early-
produced pollen may be important to the biology of 
bees and other pollen-dependent insects because 
many insects, especially bees, visit the flowers.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description  
General: Maple Family (Aceraceae).  A native tree 
with a dense, spreading crown, to 25-37(-40) m in 
height; bark light gray to gray-brown, rough, deeply 
furrowed, and darker with age.  The leaves are 
deciduous, opposite, long-petioled, blades 5-11 cm 
long and about as wide, with 5 shallow, blunt or 
short-pointed lobes, edges coarsely toothed, dark 
green and glabrous above, whitish and more or less 
hairy below, turning intensely red, orange, or yellow 
in fall.  The flowers are small, greenish-yellow, in 
long-stalked, drooping clusters or racemes, each 
cluster with 8 to 14 flowers.  Most trees are either 
male or female (the species is essentially dioecious), 
but both kinds of flowers occur on some trees 
(technically monoecious), sometimes segregated on 
different branches.  The fruits are winged nutlets 
(samaras) in a pair, 2-2.5 cm long, clustered on long 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

stalks, red to red-brown. The common name refers to 
the use of the species for making sugar and syrup. 
Variation within the species: Closely similar forms of 
sugar maple have been recognized at various 
taxonomic ranks – from varieties to subspecies and 
species.  Three of them are now generally recognized 
as species, but the differences are technical and it is 
difficult to be sure of the correct identifications of 
trees sold as “sugar maple” in the southeastern US.  
Duncan and Duncan (1988) gives a good summary of 
the distribution and morphology of these species.   
•	Florida maple (A. barbatum, including A. 
floridanum): primarily a species of the Gulf and 
southeast Atlantic coastal plain, from Texas to 
North Carolina and Virginia, and up the 
Mississippi valley as far as Missouri and Illinois. 
•	chalk maple (A. leucoderme): similar in 
distribution to Florida maple, but not extending 
into Virginia or up the Mississippi valley. 
•	black maple (A. nigrum): similar in distribution 
to ‘true’ sugar maple, but somewhat more 
restricted. 
Norway maple (Acer platanoides), an introduced 
European species, is often planted and looks similar 
to sugar maple, but Norway maple has broader leaves 
with drooping lobes, and sap from a broken petiole is 
milky.   
Distribution: Sugar maple is widespread in mixed 
hardwood forests of the eastern United States.  It 
grows from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 
westward to Ontario and Manitoba, North Dakota 
and South Dakota, southward into eastern Kansas 
into Oklahoma, and southward in the east through 
New England to Georgia.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
Adaptation 
Sugar maple most commonly occurs in rich, mesic 
woods but also grows in drier upland woods.  It often 
grows in canyons, ravines, valleys, stream terraces, 
and streambanks, but it is occasionally found on dry 
rocky hillsides, at 500-1700 meters elevation. It is a 
dominant or codominant in many northern hardwood 
and mixed mesophytic forests.  Common 
codominants include beech (Fagus grandifolia), 
birch (Betula spp.), American basswood (Tilia 
americana), northern red oak (Quercus rubra), white 
oak (Quercus alba), and yellow poplar (Liriodendron 
tulifera), but it also grows with various other 
hardwood species as well as conifers such as pine, 
spruce, fir, and eastern hemlock. 
In the absence of disturbance, forests of jack pine, 
eastern white pine, eastern hemlock, yellow birch, or 
red pine are replaced by sugar maple and American 
basswood.  Because repeated disturbance by fire was 
common in eastern deciduous forests in pre-
settlement times, succession to sugar maple-
American basswood stands may have taken as long 
as 650 years in some locations.  Increases in sugar 
maple during the past 50 years in central and Great 
Lakes hardwood forests have been attributed to fire 
suppression. 
This species flowers in April-June, with fruiting 
occurring in June-October.  Fruits ripen about 12-16 
weeks after flowering and begin to fall about 2 weeks 
after ripening.  Leaves generally drop just after seeds 
have fallen. At the southern edge of the species&#39; 
range, dead leaves tend to remain on the trees 
through much of the winter. 
Establishment 
Minimum seed-bearing age for sugar maple is 30-40 
years; maximum seed production is reached after 
about 60 years of age. Seed is abundantly produced 
each year but peaks occur mostly from 2-5 years. 
Seeds are dispersed in fall and germinate in spring. 
Germination occurs on moist mineral soil or in the 
litter layer, at an optimal temperature of about 1° C. 
Seeds can remain viable for up to 5 years but few 
persist in the seed bank for more than one year. 
Sugar maple seeds require moist stratification at 
temperatures slightly above freezing for 35-90 days. 
Sugar maple is shade-tolerant but seedlings in dense 
young stands may survive for only 5 years; those in 
older stands commonly persist for many years.  Such 
a bank of abundant seedlings and saplings can remain 
suppressed until gaps are created by windfall or other 
disturbances, where they typically respond 
vigorously and rapidly to release.  Sugar maples can 
live for up to 500 years.   
Stump sprouting and root sprouting are moderately 
common means of vegetative reproduction after 
mechanical disturbance in natural conditions, 
especially in the northern part of its range, and 
layering occasionally occurs.   
Management 
Sugar maples are not particularly good street trees, 
because they are intolerant of compacted soil, high 
heat, air pollution, and road salt commonly found in 
urban environments.  They are susceptible to stem

and root injury, and verticillum wilt may occur when 
grown in heavy, poorly drained soils.  “Maple 
decline,” periodic die-backs of relatively large trees 
in the Northeast, has been attributed to acid rain and 
other air pollutants, particularly in the last two 
decades, but its exact causes are not understood. 
Even light ground fires may damage the thin bark of 
sugar maple.  Hot fires can kill an entire stand and 
existing regeneration.  The trees sprout poorly after 
fire.  Although communities with sugar maple are 
relatively resistant to ground fires, a fire hazard may 
occur in dry years during October, after the leaves 
have fallen. 
Seed can propagate sugar maple; early spring 
plantings generally produce the best results.  
Nurserymen usually rely on budding or grafting or 
sometimes use air layering or rooting of stem 
cuttings.  Use stem tips 35-55 centimeters long taken 
in mid June with fully elongated bottom leaves; 
rooting occurs in 4-6 weeks under mist in a 2:1:1 
mixture of sandy loam, vermiculite, and peat moss.   
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily available through local 
nursuries. 
References 
Duncan, W.H. & M.B. Duncan 1988.  Trees of the 
southeastern United States. Univ. of Georgia Press, 
Athens, Georgia.   
Godman, R.M., H.W. Yawney, & C.H. Tubbs 1990. 
Acer saccharum Marsh.  Sugar Maple.  Pp. 78-91, 
IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala (tech. coords.). 
Silvics of North America. Volume 2. Hardwoods. 
USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, 
Washington, D.C. 
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/volume 
_2/acer/saccharum.htm>  
Koelling, M.R. & R.B. Heiligmann (eds.) 1996.  
North American maple syrup producers manual. 
Ohio State Univ. Extension Bull. 856. 
<http://www.ag.ohio­
state.edu/~ohioline/b856/index.html>  Accessed 
August 2000.   
Li, H.-L. 1960. The cultivated maples. Morris 
Arbor. Bull. 11:41-47. 
Tirmenstein, D.A. 1991.  Acer saccharum. IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).  The Fire Effects Information 
System [Data base]. USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/acesac 
/> 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom, BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp; 07feb03ahv; 24may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.