Plant Guide
 
PACKARD’S 
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus cusickii A. Gray 
var . packardiae  Barneby  
Plant Symbol = ASCUP  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho  and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
Seed pods and flowers of Packard’s  milkvetch  ( Astragalus 
cusickii  var. packardiae ). Photo  by Mark Lowry, USDI -BLM
 
Alternate Names  
None  
 
Uses  
There are no known human uses of Packard’s 
milkvetch. Grazing by livestock has been observed 
(Mancuso,  1999). 
Status  
Packard’s milkvetch was designated a candidate for 
listing as en dangered or threatened in 2010 with a 
Listing Priority Number (LPN) of 3, a subspecies 
facing high -magnitude, imminent threat (USDI -FWS, 
2010).  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and  your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Legume  family ( Fabaceae).  Packard’s 
milkvetch is an erect , multi-s temmed, perennial forb. 
Mature plants are 25 to 50 cm ( 9.8 to 19.7 in) tall. 
The leaves are pinnately compound with 2 to 9 
broadly spaced leaflets. The upper leaves are often    
reduced to a naked rachis, a stem with no leaflets
. 
The leaflets are approximat ely 7 mm (0.3 in) long 
and 1 mm ( 0.04 in) wide. The inflorescence is a loose 
raceme  with up to 20 creamy white, purple tinged 
fl owers reaching approximately 1 cm ( 0.4 in) in 
length.  The fruit is an inflated, narrowly elliptic, 
yellow -green pod with reddish  mottling, 
approximately 4 cm ( 1.6 in) long and 1 cm ( 0.4 in) 
wide  (Cronquist et al., 1989) .  
 
Distribution : 
Packard’s milkvetch is endemic to the northeastern 
corner of Payette County, Idaho. The known range of 
the species covers an area approximately 9.7  km (6 
mi) long by 3.2  km (2 mi) wide.  
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Packard’s milkvetch occurs in an area of rolling 
uplands in the sagebrush steppe in what was 
historically a  Wyoming big sagebrush ( Artemisia 
tridentata  ssp.  wyomingensis ) and bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata)  plant 
community. Much of the surrounding habitat 
occupied by Packard’s milkvetch has been altered by 
wildfire and grazing and has subsequentl y been 
invaded by introduced annual grasses (Mancuso, 
1999). Packard’s milkvetch is restricted to small 
islands of undisturbed habitat.  Associated plant 
species include Blue Mountain buckwheat 
( Eriogonum strictum ), bottlebrush squirreltail 
( Elymus elymoide s), Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa 
secunda), bluebunch wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria 
spicata ), basin wildrye ( Leymus cinereus), and 
fernleaf biscuitroot ( Lomatium dissectum ). 
 
Adaptation  
Packard’s milkvetch appears to be limited to a series 
of visually distinct sed imentary outcrops exposed 
between Big Willow Creek, Little Willow Creek, Dry 
Creek and Stone Quarry Gulch (Mancuso, 1999). The 
exposed substrates are whitish in color, with 
relatively sparse vegetation and a high percentage of 
bare ground.  Populations have  been found from 823 
to  975  m (2,700 to 3,200 ft) elevation in an area 
receiving approximately 40  cm (16 in) mean annual 
precipitation.

Management  
Packard’s milkvetch habitat is threatened by wildfire, 
non -native invasive plant species including 
cheatgrass  (Bromus  tectorum ) and medusahead 
( Taeniatherum caput -medusae ) and off road vehicle 
use (USDI -FWS, 2010). Heavy weed encroachment 
by cheatgrass and medusahead  has been observed in 
the surrounding habitat, but appears to not be 
entering  the specific edaphic substrates occupied by 
Packard’s milkvetch  (Mancuso, 1999) .  However, 
higher densities of annual grasses are known to 
contribute to increased frequency of wildfires.  
 
ORV use is  a widespread activity in Packard’s 
milkvetch habitat resulting in crushed plants and 
accelerated erosion of the fine loose soils.  
 
Although grazing by cattle and sheep has been 
observed, it is unknown if grazing is beneficial or 
deleterious to plant recru itment (Mancuso, 1999). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests associated with Packard’s 
milkvetch.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns 
regarding Packard’s milkvetch.  
 
Seed and Plant  Production  
Flowers bloom in  late  May with fruit ripening in 
June . Pollination vectors are unknown (Mancuso, 
1999).  
 
References  
Cronquist,  A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Reveal, and P.K. Holmgren.  198 9.  
Intermountain flora,  Vol. 3.  New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York.
 
Mancuso, M. 1999. The status of Astragalus cusickii 
var. packardiae (Packard’s milkvetch). Idaho 
Department of Fish and Game. Boise, Idaho. 
26p.  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2010. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; review of 
native spe cies that are candidates for listing as 
endangered or threatened; annual notice of 
findings on resubmitted petitions; annual 
description of progress on listing actions. In: 
Federal Register. 75(217): 69222- 69294. 
 
Prepared By : 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant  Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho.  
Citation  
Tilley, D., L.  St. John and D. Ogle. 2011. Plant guide 
for  Packard’s  milkvetch  ( Astragalus  cusickii var. 
packardiae ). USDA- Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID.  
Published  Feb 2011  
Edited:  03Feb2011djt;  03feb2011dgo;  03feb2011ls 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of  other Web sites.  
 
   
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER