Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIAN HEMP 
Apocynum cannabinum  L. 
Plant Symbol = APCA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Dogbane, milkweed, honeybloom, bitter root, black 
hemp, hemp dogbane, lechuguilla, westernwall 
 
Uses 
Warning - Indian hemp can be toxic if ingested 
without proper preparation. 
 
Ethnobotanic : Indian hemp is harvested for fiber.  
The stems are cut in the fall; they are then split open 
and the long, silky fibers removed.  The fibers are 
then twisted into string, which provides cordage.  
String, thread, rope, baskets, snares, netting, and 
clothing were made from the bast fibers of the Indian 
hemp plant because they are so silky yet strong.  
Cordage was then used to make tump straps, belts, 
netted bags, hairnets, and ceremonial regalia (capes, 
skirts, and head-dresses). 
 
The fiber was particularly useful in making fishing 
and carrying nets, for string and for ropes, and to 
some extent for weaving rough cloth.  In California, 
Indian hemp and milkweed are used somewhat 
interchangeably for cordage.  The Luiseño of 
southern California for their dance regalia used 
Indian hemp; the golden eagle or other feathers are 
tied to netting for the dance skirt for men (Merriam 
1955).  The wild hemp was also used by the 
Chemeweve for snares for ot ter and rabbits (Ibid.)  
Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College  @ CalPhotos 
 
Dogbane is very important to tribes in the Columbia 
Plateau in Washington, Oregon, and Idaho for 
basketry.  The Quinalt, Kalispel, Nez Perce, Spokane, 
Umatilla, Wasco, Wishram, Yakima, and Klikitat 
used dogbane for cordage and basketry. 
 
Families use the native twine to tie together the 
frames for their winter lodges.  They used it to sew 
cattails and tules into sturdy mats to cover these 
frames and to serve as carpeting, furniture, beds, and 
utensils.  Dip nets, set nets, and seines were made of 
dogbane.  The nets were strong enough to hold the 
giant sturgeon caught in the Columbia River. 
 
Of all the important uses for Indian hemp, the 
itatamat  , or "counting the days" ball, was perhaps 
the most significant for the people themselves.  From 
the time of her marriage, a woman would record a 
calendar of her life's events by tying knots on a 
length of hemp as important events occurred.  She 
marked births, deaths, and other extraordinary days 
with beads, shells or other talismans.  When the ball 
got too large to handle easily, she started a new ball.  
 
Flat twined bags ("sally bags"), round twined bags 
and basketry caps were made with dogbane.  Soft 
bags were made using twine from Indian hemp or 
milkweed decorated with cornhusk imbrication. 
Basket bottoms and top margins were of woven cedar 
bark. These soft bags conform to the shape of a load 
of roots of camas or other plants.   
 
Later explorers reported that the Nez Perce and other 
tribes stored berries, roots, and nuts in bags about one 
by two feet, and used larger bags up to three feet long 
for clothing and other personal effects.  Early visitor 
to the Mid-Columbia also described piles of filled 
bags in the corners or hung along the wall in native 
homes.  One weaver estimated that it took two to 
three months to twine a large root-storage bag.

As a medium of trade, barter, or wager, the bags in 
the early days were considered only the wrapping or 
container for the dried roots they held.  The largest of 
the bags would hold just under a half-bushel or nearly 
four dry gallons of camas or bitterroot bulbs.  Now, 
the bags themselves are highly valued as trade items.  
The flat twined bags have been widely traded to other 
tribes, such as the Crow and Blackfeet of Montana.  
 
Today, the wapanii sapk'ukt , or "twined handbag," is 
the most popular form of flat twined bags.  It is 
carried with great pride as  part of ceremonial regalia, 
the twined handbag emphasizing the distinct cultural 
heritage of the person who carries it.  Today, cotton 
twine usually replaces Indian hemp in basketry; 
however, very special ceremonial bags are still made 
with Indian hemp.  
 
The biochemical constituents in Indian hemp are 
apocynin, apocynamarin, cymarin, and and rosin. 
Indian hemp could be dried, crushed, and then 
snuffed for coughs in head colds.  The root was made 
into a tea and was used to help a baby’s cold, 
earache, headache, nervousness, dizziness, worms 
and insanity.  This tea was also taken for heart 
palpitations, but care should be observed if using it 
for cardiac disorders.  It  acts as a vaso-constrictor, 
slows and strengthens the heartbeat, and raises blood 
pressure.  The root could also be used as an emetic, 
diaphoretic, antispasmodic, cathartic, anodyne, 
hypnotic, laxative, treats vomiting, diarrhea, 
hydrocephalus, urinary diff iculties, dropsy, jaundice, 
liver problems, and stimulates the digestive system. It 
has been successfully employed for alcoholism.  A 
wash made of crushed root can be shampooed into 
the hair to stimulate growth, remove dandruff and 
head lice.  The milky juice can remove warts. A 
poultice of the leaves redu ces tumors, hemorrhoids, 
and inflammation of the testicles.  The poultice 
placed over the eyelids wo rks on opthalmia and eye 
diseases.  The leaves grou nd into powder can dress 
wounds, sores and ulcers. 
 
Erosion Control : The extensive root system on Indian 
hemp provides good slope and streambank 
stabilization and erosion control functions.  The 
flowers are attractive to b ees, butterflies, and other 
insects.  The plant itself is toxic; so many forms of 
wildlife do not eat it. Indian hemp is considered a 
noxious weed because of its invasive nature and its 
toxicity to domestic livestock. 
 
Invasive Potential : This plant can be invasive in 
orchards and cultivated areas, so is not a garden  plant.  The small, inconspicuous flowers and weedy 
growth form doesn't have horticultural appeal.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Dogbane Family (Apocynaceae).  The plant 
stem can be 0.61-1.83 m (2-6 feet) tall, and contains 
milky juice.  The elliptical leaves are small, about 
5.0-7.6 cm (2-3 inches) long, and opposite.  The 
flowers are small and incons picuous, cylindric to urn-
shaped, and greenish pink.  The fruit is 6 - 9 cm (2.4-
3.5 cm) long and pendant, slender and cylindric.  
When the fruit matures and splits open, the seeds are 
wind dispersed with long tufts of silky hairs.  
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Indian hemp or dogbane proliferates in moist 
places near riparian areas along streams, springs, 
levees, roadsides, and waste places.  This well-known 
source of fibers is found in damp places, below 5,000 
feet altitude through most of California, even here 
and there in the deserts.  Indian hemp grows 
throughout California north to British Colombia and 
east across the United States. 
 
Indian hemp is found near the borders of woods, 
along paths, in clearings, or  in disturbed, waste places 
like ditches.  It is no longer very common in 
California, and many traditional gathering sites are 
gone. 
 
Establishment 
Indian hemp plants are  not widely available.  
Transplanting bare rootstock or collecting seed for 
direct reseeding into the ground will be necessary in 
most areas.  Use of plants which have been 
traditionally used by the ances tors of that place, and 
which are adapted to the climate, soils, and site 
conditions of that place, is optimum.   
 
Seed Collections : Collect seeds after pods have 
ripened, but before they have split open.  This usually 
occurs in late summer, from August to September.  
The seeds are wind dispersed, so be careful when 
gathering to place them in a paper or burlap bag to 
avoid losing them.  
 
Seeds can be directly sown into the ground in the fall.  
The seed is very viable. Planting seed the first fall

after collecting seeds maximizes revegetation 
success.  It is not certain how long you can store the 
seeds.  Irrigation the first summer after planting will 
improve plant survival.  On ce root are established, 
extra watering will be unnecessary.  Indian hemp is 
fairly aggressive, and will usually out-compete other 
plant species on its own.  The latex in stems and 
leaves protects the plant  from most herbivores. 
 
Live Plant Collections: Plants can be divided almost 
any time of year, but revegetation is most successful 
in fall after the plants senesce.  Harvest and planting 
of Indian hemp is optimum in October, or just after 
the first fall rains.  Stalks should be cut to a 
conveniently manageable length before digging up 
plants (approximately 25 to 35 cm).  
 
No more than 1/4 of the plants in an area should be 
collected; a depth of 15 cm  (6 in) is sufficiently deep 
for digging plugs. This will leave enough plants and 
roots to grow back during the following growing 
season.  
 
Live transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible.  Plants should be transported and stored in a 
cool location prior to planting.  Plugs may be split 
into smaller units, generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm 
(2.4 x 2.4 in) with healthy roots and tops.  Weeds in 
the plugs should be removed by hand.  For ease in 
transport, soil may be washed  gently from roots.  The 
roots should always remain moist or in water until 
planted.  Roots should be kept moist after the plants 
have been dug up.  Planting should occur at a spacing 
of approximately one-foot centers.  Plants should be 
watered in. Irrigation may be necessary through the 
first dry season.  By the second year, roots should 
have extended to the water table and irrigation should 
no longer be necessary.  
 
Management 
When used for fiber, Indian hemp is collected in the 
autumn after the leaves have begun to senesce or dry 
up and the stalks turn a deep reddish brown color.  
Plants are cut at the base of the stem.  Cutting the 
plants appears to stimulate new growth in the spring; 
so as many stalks as possibl e are cut.  Plants are then 
split open and the fibers removed and processed into 
cordage.  After winter, the fibers have disintegrated 
and the stems are still standing, but full of mush or 
empty.  The fibers can't be removed after one winter.  
 
There are only two known large sites for traditional 
harvest of Indian hemp for fiber in California; one at 
Yosemite and one near Santa Rosa.  In the Columbia 
Basin, though Indian hemp might be found in many  low-lying areas, certain sta
nds of hemp grew higher 
and straighter, and the long strands produced were 
prized for the strength of the twine made from them.  
So special was this resour ce area that violent conflict 
(otherwise uncommon) occurred between Wanapam 
Sahaptins and Columbia Salish over access to the 
hemp (Relander 1956) 
 
Vast quantities of fiber plants are required for nets, 
regalia, and cordage.  Blackburn and Anderson 
(1993) quote Craig Bates of the Yosemite Museum 
that it takes approximately five stalks of milkweed or 
Indian hemp to manufacture one foot of cordage.  A 
Sierra Miwok feather skirt or cape contain about 100 
feet of cordage made from approximately 500 plant 
stalks, while a deer net 40 feet in length (Barrett and 
Gifford 1933:178) contained some 7,000 feet of 
cordage, which would have required the harvesting of 
a staggering 35,000 plant stalks.  Therefore, 
propagation and conservation of this species for fiber 
is very important for production of traditionally 
manufactured cordage, which is still used today.  
 
Both milkweed and dogbane are burned in the fall to 
eliminate dead stalks an d stimulate new growth.  
Burning causes new growth to have taller, straighter 
stems (with longer fibers). It  also stimulates flower 
and seed production.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
APCA is available from native plant nurseries within 
its range. 
 
References 
Ackerman, L.A. 1995.   A song to the creator.  
Traditional Arts of Native American Women of the 
Plateau. University of Ok lahoma Press, Norman and 
London.  
 
Balls, E.K. 1962.  Early uses of California plants .  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
103 pp. 
 
Blackburn, T.C. & K. Anderson 1993.   Before the 
wilderness. Environmental management by Native 
Californians .  A Ballena Press Publication. Menlo 
Park, California. 476 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.  Wild plants 
and native peoples of the Four Corners .  Museum of 
New Mexico Press.  312 pp. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region . University of Nebraska 
Press. 125 pp.

Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.  Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California . University of California 
Press. 1399 pp. 
 
Hunn, E.S. 1990.   Nch'i-Wana. "The Big River."   
Mid-Columbia Indians and Their Land. University of 
Washington Press, Seattle and London.  378 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie .  An Ethnobotanical Guide. University Press 
of Kansas. 340 pp. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, botany and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
 
Merriam, C.H. 1955.   Studies of California Indians . 
University of California Press, Berkeley and Los 
Angeles. 227 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
Southern California . Riverside Museum Press, 
Riverside, California. 155 pp. 
 
Relander, C. 1956.   Drummers and dreamers . Caxton 
Printers, Caldwell, Idaho. 
 
Schlick, M.D. 1994.   Columbia River basketry.  Gift 
of the ancestors, gift of the earth .  A Samual and 
Althea Stroum Book. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London. 232 pp. 
 
Snyder, G. June 1996.   Sonoma County supervisors 
act to preserve dogbane .  California Indian 
Basketweavers Association Newsletter #15: page 7. 
 
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffer Publishing Ltd. West Chester, 
Pennsylvania. 260 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J., R.Bouchard, & D.I.D. Kennedy 1980.  
Ethnobotany of the Okanagan-Colville Indians of 
British Columbia .  British Columbia Provincial 
Museum, Victoria, B.C. Occasional Paper No. 21. 
 
Prepared By: 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.