Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NARROW-LEAVED MILKWEED  
Asclepias fascicularis Decne.  
Plant Symbol = ASFA 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Uses 
Warning: Milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally, without sufficient preparation. 
 
Ethnobotanic : People have used milkweed for fiber, 
food, and medicine all over the United States and 
southern Canada.  Fibers from the stems of milkweed 
have been identified in prehistoric textiles in the 
Pueblo region.  Tewa-speaking people of the Rio 
Grande still make string and rope from these fibers.   
 
Zuni people utilize the silky seed fibers, which are 
spun on a hand-held wooden spindle, made into yarn, 
and woven into fabric (especially for dancers).  
Pueblo people eat green milkweed pods and 
uncooked roots from one of the species that forms 
fleshy tubers underground. 
 
Milkweeds supply tough fibers for making cords and 
ropes, and for weaving a  coarse cloth. Milkweeds 
stems are collected after the stalks dry in late fall to 
early winter.  The dried stalks are split open to 
release the fibers.  Milkweed fibers are sometimes 
mixed with fibers of Indian hemp,  Apocynum 
cannabinum . 
 Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College  @ CalPhotos 
 
The Yokia Indians of Mendocino County, California, 
ate the young blossoms of  Asclepias fascicularis raw 
but not in large amounts (Balls 1962).  The most 
common use for these plants, recorded among almost 
all the tribes throughout California, was to obtain a 
kind of chewing gum from the sap of  Asclepias 
fascicularis  and other milkweed species .  The sticky 
white sap was heated sli ghtly until it became solid, 
then added to salmon fat or deer grease. 
 
Wildlife : Milkweed species are attractive to 
butterflies, bees, and other insects.  Accordingly, this 
is a wonderful horticultural plant for beautiful floral 
landscaping that attracts butterflies (particularly 
Monarchs) and other insects.  Monarch butterflies are 
specific to milkweed plants.  This is the only type of 
plant on which the eggs are laid and the larvae will 
feed and mature into a chrysalis.  Eggs are laid on the 
underside of young healthy l eaves.  It is important to 
have large clumps of milkweeds for the young 
caterpillars; their response to predation is to drop to 
the ground and "play possum."  They cannot find 
their way back to the milkweed stems, which they 
need to survive, unless they are fairly densely spaced. 
 
Monarch, Queen and Viceroy butterflies are 
Müllerian mimics; all are toxic, and have co-evolved 
similar warning patterns to avoid predation.  Other 
insects, which utilize milkweed, are the large 
milkweed bug, common milkweed bug, red 
milkweed beetle, blue m ilkweed beetle, and bees. 
 
Toxicity: Milkweed sap contains a lethal brew of 
cardenolides (heart poison), which produces vomiting 
in low doses and death in higher doses.  Chemicals 
from the milkweed plant make the monarch

caterpillar's flesh distasteful to most animals.  At one 
time, milkweed was classified as a noxious weed due 
to reported toxic effects on livestock, and efforts 
were made to eradicate it.  Milkweeds are thought to 
be poisonous to cows and sheep. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Milkweed Family (Asclepiadaceae).  
Asclepias  flowers look like crowns, with the corolla 
reflexed and hoods elevated  above the corolla.  In 
narrow-leaf milkweed, the corolla is reflexed, 
greenish white, sometimes tinged purple. The hoods 
are also greenish white.  The horns are longer than 
the hoods.  Narrow-leaf milkweed is a glabrous 
perennial with glabrous to ascending stems.  Leaves 
are in whorls of 3-5, ofte n with axillary clusters of 
small leaves.  The leaf blad es are narrowly lanceolate 
with a tapered base.  
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Milkweed grows in clumps beside roadways 
and on abandoned farmlands and other open areas, 
reaching heights of 120 to 150 cm (4 to 5 ft) during 
the summer.  Milkweed species grow throughout the 
United States.  Narrow-leaf  milkweed occurs on dry 
ground and sunny spots in valleys and foothills at 
elevations from 50 to 220 m.  The range extends 
through California to Washington, Utah and Baja 
California. 
 
Establishment 
Seed Collection : Collect seeds after pods have 
ripened, but before they have split open. The seeds 
are wind dispersed, so be careful when gathering to 
place in a paper or burlap bag to avoid losing them.  
 
Seeds can be directly sewn into the ground in the fall.  
The seed is very viable.  Planting seed the first fall 
after collecting seeds maximizes revegetation 
success.  It is not certain  how long you can store the 
seeds.  Cold treatment fo r three months improves 
seed germination in some  milkweed species from 
higher elevations or colder  climates (where it freezes 
in the winter).  
 
Revegetation success with milkweed seems to be 
improved by planting seeds directly in the ground.  
High mortality seems to occur with plants in pots; 
Asclepias  species don't over-winter well in pots.   Once young plants are potted, they often don't re-
emerge in the spring. Milkweed plants naturally die 
back in winter.  If you plant them in a pot, they don't 
come back the next year. If you plant in the ground, 
they do. 
 
Whole Plant Collection
: For milkweed species with 
rhizomes, propagation by cuttings of the tuberous 
rhizome is also easy and reliable.  The cuttings 
should be made when the plant is dormant.  Each 
piece of the rhizome should have at least one bud 
(they are about two inches apart).  
 
Timing of propagation is important.  Harvest or 
divide plants and move them in October at the 
beginning of the rainy season.  Get the plants in the 
ground by late fall so they can develop enough root 
growth to survive the winter.  Irrigation the first year 
will improve survival, and by the second year the 
root system should be well enough established so 
plants will survive on their own.    
 
Both seedlings and cuttings will usually bloom in 
their second year, although cuttings will occasionally 
bloom during their first year (Kindscher 1992). 
 
Management 
When used for fiber, milkweed is collected in the 
autumn after the leaves have begun to senesce or dry 
up.  Plants generally grow in places that have been 
disturbed, such as road grading and construction 
sites, logging landing fills, etc. Pete Bunting (pers. 
comm. 2-9-1999) says, "In the fall when the 
milkweed has dried, I check to see if they will break 
off at the ground line.  The plants are usually a 
yellow tan to gray depending on how long they have 
dried.  I like the gray for softer string but the fibers 
are shorter.  The tan stalks have longer fibers but are 
also stiff and hard to work but very long.  I break off 
many of the plants as I can gather as they are going to 
re-sprout in the spring.  I try and let them dry some 
more.  Then I process them.  I have used plants that 
have over-wintered under snow and they were fine 
but had soft, short fiber.  After 2 winters they are 
usually no good but you have another year's stalks to 
pick by then."  The dried stalks are then split open 
and the fibers are twisted into string. 
 
Vast quantities of fiber plants are required for the 
making of nets, regalia, and cordage by California 
Indians.  Blackburn and Anderson (1993) quote Craig 
Bates of the Yosemite Museum that it takes 
approximately five stalks of milkweed or Indian 
hemp to manufacture one foot of cordage.  A Sierra 
Miwok feather skirt or cape contain about 100 feet of 
cordage made from approximately 500 plant stalks,

while a deer net 40 feet in length (Barrett and Gifford 
1933:178) contained some 7,000 feet of cordage, 
which would have required the harvesting of 35,000 
plant stalks. 
 
Both milkweed and dogbane were burned in the fall 
by California Indian tribes to eliminate dead stalks 
and stimulate new growth.  Burning causes new 
growth to have taller, straighter stems (with longer 
fibers).  It also stimulates  flower and seed production.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Asclepias cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.  
 
References 
Balls, E. K. 1962.   Early uses of California plants .  
University of California Press.  102 pp. 
 
Blackburn, T. C. & K. Anderson 1993.   Before the 
wilderness.  Environmental management by Native 
Californians .  A Ballena Press Publication. 476 pp. 
 
Bouton, D. W. 1995.   The Monarch butterfly.  A 
fragile tissue in the wind .  Continuum Publishers. 
Harpersville, New York. 
 
Bunting, Pete. Pers comm 2-8-1999.   Forester and 
member of the Sierra Native American Tribal 
Council. 
 
Cooke, S. S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W. W. & G. D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo province .  Exploring Ancient and 
Enduring Uses  Museum of Mexico Press. Santa Fe, 
New Mexico.  289 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W. W. & G. D. Tierney 1997.   Wild plants 
and native peoples of the Four Corners .  Museum of 
New Mexico Press.  312 pp. 
 
Gilmore, M. R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians 
of the Missouri River region. University of Nebraska 
Press. 125 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1). University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant's edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, Inc. New York. 686 pp. 
 
Hickman, J. C. 1993 .  The Jepson manual.  Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press. 
1399 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide . University Press of 
Kansas. 340 pp. 
 
Kuhnlein, H. V. & N. J. Turner. 1991.  Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, botany and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 633 pp. 
 
Martin, A. C., H. S. Zim, &A. L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 500 pp. 
 
Mason, H. L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California . University of California Press. Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, California. 878 pp. 
 
Moser, C. L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
Southern California .  Riverside Museum Press. 155 
pp. 
 
Powell, J.A. & C.L. Hogue 1979.   California insects. 
University of California Press. 388 pp.  
 
Schmidt, M. G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press. 366 pp. 
 
Stewart, B. 1997.  Common butterflies of California .  
West Coast Lady Press. 255 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp; 17mar03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.