ARMED SALTBUSH 
Atriplex acanthocarpa (Torr.) 
S. Wats. 
plant symbol = ATAC 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names 
tubercled saltbush, huaha 
 
Uses 
Armed saltbush has wildlife value, providing shelter 
for birds and small animals.  It has also been 
documented as having nutritious browse for cattle 
and deer (Garza & Fulbright, 1988).  Garza and 
Fulbright note that armed saltbush has higher crude 
protein levels than four-wing saltbush (Atriplex 
canescens), a close relative of armed saltbush.  
Armed saltbush has been used for windbreaks, 
roadside cover, and as an ornamental (Correll & 
Johnston, 1996; Everitt & Drawe, 1993).  
 
 Four-wing saltbush has been used in the restoration 
of oil well reserve pits with high salinities (Mc 
Farland, et al, 1987).  Armed saltbush can also be 
useful for plantings on such sites that exhibit 
complex alkaline and saline soil problems, and can be 
more adapted than four-wing saltbush in some 
situations.  A 1988 study by Garza and Fulbright 
found armed saltbush to have higher concentrations 
of sodium in its leaves than four-wing saltbush.  In 
addition, studies conducted by Kika de la Garza PMC 
(1998) have found armed saltbush to be more adapted 
to the dry saline conditions of South Texas than four-
wing saltbush. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Armed saltbush (Atriplex acanthocarpa) is 
a native, saline tolerant, evergreen, perennial shrub 
with a woody root (Correll & Johnston, 1996).  It can 
grow from 3 to 10 dm in height (Everitt & Drawe, 
1993).  It is a member of the pigweed 
(Chenopdiaceae) family (Jones, 1982).    
Armed saltbush is also known by the common names 
huaha (Everitt & Drawe, 1993) and tubercled 
saltbush (USDA 2002) because the bracts of the fruit 
have many flattened tubercles (Everitt & Drawe, 
1993).   It is dioecious, having male and female 
flowers on separate plants (Correll & Johnston, 
1996). 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Armed saltbush occurs in parts of South Texas 
(Jones, 1982), and Correll & Johnston (1996) record 
its presence from West Texas to southern New 
Mexico, and south into Mexico.  Everitt and Drawe 
(1993) note that it is found predominately in the 
western half of Texas, and less frequently in 
Cameron, Starr, Webb, and Zapata counties.  Armed 
saltbush prefers well-drained, often alkaline soils.  
The Kika de la Garza Plant Material Center staff has 
found that it does not do as well on wetter sites, as it 
appears to be susceptible to cotton root rot.   
 
Establishment 
Armed saltbush can be difficult to grow from seed, as 
it is very particular about the conditions under which 
it will germinate.  Germination studies at the Plant 
Material Center using an 8 hour day temperature of 
70ºF and a 16 hour night temperature of 50ºF with 
various light conditions yielded a maximum of 16% 
germination.  Yet, a greenhouse planting in the 
winter of 1999 yielded much higher germination, 
indicating that the seed will germinate under the right 
conditions.  Testing conducted by the USDA 
National Seed Storage Laboratory in the year 2000 
confirmed good germination potential.  A seed 
sample of armed saltbush accession #9085310 sent to 
them in the fall of 1999 was found to have 67% 
viable seed, 10% non-viable seed, and 23% empty 
seed (personal communication with Loren Weisner, 
NSSL Curator, January 25, 2001).   
 
The Plant Material Center staff has had fairly good 
success growing new plants of armed saltbush from 
cuttings.  Cuttings are best made in the late spring, 
once new growth has started.  They should be treated 
with a rooting hormone to help facilitate root growth.  
Cuttings can be transplanted after 3 months, but we 
suggest fall planting to give plants a chance to get 
established before undergoing a hot, dry Texas 
summer.  The use of tree shelters to optimize soil

moisture and protect small plants from browsing 
animals is highly recommended (Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center, 1998). 
 
Management 
Once established, armed saltbush requires very little 
management.  Weed control is the only management 
we do at the Plant Material Center, and even that is 
optional.  Female plants produce abundant seed and 
tend to drop their leaves in the fall once seed has 
mostly matured.  Male plants will drop their flowers, 
but retain most of their leaves. 
 
References 
Correll, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1996.  Manual of the 
Vascular Plants of Texas.  The University of Texas at 
Dallas, Richardson, TX. 
 
Everitt, J.H. & D.L. Drawe 1993.  Trees, Shrubs, and 
Cacti of South Texas.  Texas Tech University Press, 
Lubbock, TX. 
 
Garza, A., Jr. & T.E. Fulbright 1998. 
“Comparative chemical composition of armed 
saltbush and four-wing saltbush.”  Journal of Range 
Management 41(5): 401-403. 
 
Jones, F.B. 1982.  Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend.  
Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton, TX. 
 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 1998.  “An 
evaluation of saltbushes (Atriplex spp.) for restoration 
of alkaline and saline sites in south Texas.”  
Technical Note 1(1)  
 
Mc Farland, M.L., D.N. Ueckert, & S. Hartman 1987.  
“Revegetation of oil well reserve pits in west Texas.”  
Journal of Range Management 40: 122-127. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2002. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 (http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 Edited 20nov2003 jlk 
 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.