COYOTEBRUSH 
Baccharis pilularis DC. 
Plant Symbol = BAPI  
Common Names:   
c oyote brush , coyotebush, coyote bush, chaparral -broom , dwarf 
baccharis,  dwarf chaparral false willow  
 
Scientific  Subspecies Names: Baccharis  pilularis  DC. ssp. 
consanguinea  (DC.) C.B. Wolf , Baccharis  pilularis  DC. ssp. 
pilularis  (DC.)   
Description  
General :  Coyotebrush is a  native, perennial, evergreen shrub in 
the Asteraceae family with either an erect, rounded or procumbent 
habit. It ranges  in height from 1 to  12 feet, depending upon the 
subspecie s and location  (Bogler, D. 2016, Robbins et al., 1970) . The stems are dark brown, hairless and shiny;  they may be 
scurfy and are usually resinous and sticky.  Leaves are alternate  and either lacking  or  with  a short petio le, they are broadly 
ovate or wedge shaped  from  ½ to 1  inch long.  The leaf  blades have 1 or 3 nerves , are hairless,  with glands and are resinous.  
Leaf margins are  variable, wavy margined  or coarsely toothed  with 3 to 8 teeth on each side  or entire . The  plants are 
generally dioecious.
 Female flower  heads are discoid and many flowered, without ray florets. They are 0.16 to 0.25 inch 
long, and clustered at branch tips or in leaf axils. Male flowe rs are slightly smaller. Seeds (cypselae, technically fruits) are 
0.039 to 0.079 inch long and 10 nerved,  with a white feathery pappus 0.24 to 0.39 inch-  long.  The bloom period is from 
August to December  and seed is produced in late fall through early spring.  Coyotebrush grows a strong taproot to 10 feet in 
depth wit h abundant lateral roots (Steinberg, 2002).  
 
Subspecies  
B.  pilularis  ssp.  consanguinea  has upright stems  and the branchlets are evenly distributed around the branches, producing 
shrubs that are erect and rounded, growing to about 12 feet, although more commonly 4 to 6 feet  in height . Leaves are 0.6  to  
1.8 inches  in length  (Bogler, D. 2016).  
 
B.  pilularis . ssp. pilularis  has a prostrate habit , stems are flexible and it forms a mat with branchlets mostly growing to one 
side.  It grows about 4  to 10 inches high and 3 to 12 feet wide. Leaves are 0.2 to  0.6 inches in length (Bogler, D. 2016). 
Distribution :  Coyotebrush has a West Coast distribution and occurs in the Coast Ranges from northern Baja California,  
Mexico, and San Diego County, California, north to Tillamook County, Oregon. The species also occurs in the Channel 
Islands and the Sacramento Valley and northern San Joaquin Valley, the Cascade Range foothills and the Sierra Nevada 
foothills  south to Tuolumne County.  B.  pilularis  ssp.  consanguinea  is found distributed throughout this range, while B.  
pilularis . ssp. pilularis  is found on sandy beaches and exposed coastal bluffs from Central California to southern Oregon.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile pa ge for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat :  Coyotebrush is found in several habitats including  Coastal Strand, Northern Coastal Scrub, Coastal Sage Scrub, 
Chaparral, Foothill Woodland, Mixed Evergreen Forest, Closed -cone Pine Forest  (Calflora, 19 97; Steinberg, 2002).  
Adaptation  
Coyotebrush will grow on a variety of soil types including, alkaline, sand , clay, and occasionally serpentine soils. They  are 
present at a variety of elevation s from sea level  up to 2,500 feet . The plants require  full sun an d seedling recruitment is poor 
in shaded situations . Recruitment of coyotebrush seedlings is reduced with high seed density of the annual grass, Bromus 
hordeaceus , especially under drought conditions  (DaSilva and Bartolome,  1984).  Coyotebrush is resistant to fire, sprouting 
from the base if the fire is not too intense. Due to prolific production of wind dispersed seeds by the coyotebrush and ease of 
germination of the seeds on a variety of soil typ es, coyotebrush can colonize burned areas  following fires  (Steinberg, 2002) . 
Once established the plants are extremely drought tolerant.    
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Figure 1. Coyotebrush, Baccharis pilularis ssp consanguinea, mature shrub. Lockeford Plant Materials Center, August 2016.

Coyotebrush's successional status varies with habitat type (Williams and Hobbs, 1989). I t invades and colonizes grassland 
replacing annual grasses ( DaSilva and Bartolome, 1984; Steinberg, 2002). This is correlated with the absence of fire or 
grazing and t he rate of invasion increases with precipitation , because wet springs maximize early root growth. The 
coyotebrush  provides cover for rabbits and othe r small mammals , and these reduce  the herbaceous  understory to favor  more 
shrub development  (Westman, 1981).  Coyotebrush is a common dominant in coastal sage scrub, but because seedling growth 
is poor in shade, coyotebrush does not regenera te under a closed shrub canopy. C oyotebrush dominated areas can be replaced 
by  shade tolerant species  such as oaks leading to development of the climax oak woodland communities , particularly when 
fire and grazing are excluded (Steinberg, 2002; Williams and Hobbs, 1989).   
Uses  
Erosion Control  and Habitat  Restoration: C oyotebrush has been successfully used for erosion control . For sloping areas, B.  
pilularis . ssp. pilularis , is a good choice due to its low growing and spreading habit  (Steinberg, 2002) . In areas adjacent to 
established coyotebrush stands recruitment can be spontaneous from wind dispersed seeds. C oyotebrush habitat can act as a 
nurse crop for tree species and is useful for restoration  of oak woodlands .  
 
Wildlife habitat:  Coyotebrush has  low palatability  and nutritional value for grazers and browsers, cattle will graze it  if 
nothing else is available but will more likely trample the plants. It is great  wildlife habitat providing cover for rabbits and 
other small mammals, who frequently gra ze out vegetation under the coyotebrush (Steinberg, 2002) . Coyotebrush is an 
extremely important plant for pollinators, due to its abundant production of pollen and nectar and the bloom period, which  
occurs during the fall and winter.  The plants maintain their green foliage year round providing  excellent habitat for beneficial 
insects  (Wilson, 2013) . In addition to European honey bees,  Steffan (1997) identified 54 insect species  visiting male and 
female flowers in lat e September and early October,  including several species of ants, bees and parasitic  wasps  
 
Ornamental:  Coyotebrush  is  used as an ornamental plant  in the Southwestern states  due to several attributes . It  is drought 
tolerant and  maintains bright green foliage throughout the year , is unp alatable  for deer, and  the leaves have fire resistant 
properties . B.  pilularis  ssp.  consanguinea, the upright c oyotebrush, is a reliable choice for hedgerows as it is easy to establish 
from transplants and to manage by pruning. For erosi on control on slopes and where low  growing vegetation is required, 
cultivars of B.  pilularis . ssp. pilularis , the prostrate form are preferred. I n the horticultural trade, these are all males and so 
will not form  a n expanding  population (Wilson, 2013).  
Ethnobotany  
T here is a report of an infusion of coyotebrush  used as a general remedy by the Costanoan Indians (Bocek, 1984) . A 
decoction prepared from the leaves was a remedy for poison oak rash used by the Chumash Indians on the Santa Ynez 
Reservation  in the late 1950 s (Timbrook, 2007) . They also reported using branchlets of coyotebrush to brush away the small 
spines when harvesting prickly pear cactus fruit.  Chestnut ( 1902) reported that  the Indians of Mendocino County  had 
formerly  used the brittle  stems  of coyotebrus h as arrows. 
Status  
Weedy or Invasive
:  Coyotebrush  can be weedy due to the prevalence of wind dispersed seeds of this common shrub. It can be 
a particular problem in range or pastures (Robbins et al., 1970).  T his  plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state agricult ure department regarding its status and use. 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/
) and your  state ’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
C oyotebrush is tolerant of a wide range of soil types including alkaline soils, clay and sandy soils, and some plants to lerate 
serpentine soils.  The seeds have no stratification or temperature requirement and will germinate on mineral soil  (Olsen, 
1974) . Seeds  mature in late fall through winter  and are wind dispersed, so this is the best time to establish a planting. Seed 
may be broadcast or plante d with a drop seeder to ensure good soil to seed contact. New plantings need adequate moisture 
either from precipitation o r weekly irrigation until the plants germinate and become established, monthly watering is 
recommended over the first  summer (Steinber g, 2002). Container stock should be transplanted in fall, winter or early spring, 
and receive water weekly until established and monthly for the first summer. When selecting transplants it is important to 
consider the sex ratio of the plants as this will d iffer depending on the purpose of the planting. For example, a planting of B.  
pilularis  ssp.  consanguinea  for erosion control will require one male to 5 female plants for optimal habitat restoration and 
recruitment ( Steinberg, 2002) . For a pollinator hedge row planting of B.  pilularis  ssp.  consanguinea  adjacent to an almond 
orchard, selection of all male plants to preclude weedy spread of coyotebrush is a good strategy. The named cultivars of  B. 
pilularis . ssp. pilularis  are all male cultivars and B.  pilular is ssp.  consanguinea  vegetatively propagated male  plants are also 
available in the nursery trade  (Gomes and Smither-Kopperl, 2012; Wilson, 2013).

Management 
Coyotebrush can be prun ed to a desired shape, or it can be coppiced, cut back to 6 inches in height and will sprout from the 
base. As a native California plant it is fire adapted and will re- sprout after fires (Steinberg, 2002 : Wilson, 2013). 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pest problems apart from t he host- specific midge  Rhopalomyia californica, which produces galls on 
coyotebrush (Miller and Weis, 1999) ,  
Control  
Please contact  your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely . Always read label and safety instructions for each control method  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed can be collected with a cloth  spread  around  and under the  coyotebrush. The seed  should be dried in a warm ventilated 
room or in the  sun without wind. Sometimes the tufts of hair on the seed ( known as the pappus) are  removed before planting. 
Seeds are very small and light with a pproximately 236,250 cleaned seeds per ounce (Olsen, 1974). In nurseries, seeds are 
sown in fall or early spring using sandy soil or a vermiculite, perlite, and sphagnum moss mix.  Most germination occurs 
within 15 to 30 days; germination rates within this time frame range from 40 to 92% in the greenhouse (Olsen, 1974) . 
Coyotebrush may also be readily propagated from cuttings, 2 node cuttings are set into a germination flat filled with a 1:1 
mixture of  vermiculite to perlite, maintained  in  a humidity tent set to mist  for 1 minute every 32 minutes with bottom heat to 
80 degrees . After 30 days, r ooted cuttings  are transplanted to produce container grown plants.  (Gomes and Smither -Kopperl, 
2012) . 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)   
The wide distribution, ease of vegetative propagation and successful production from seed results in locally adapted plant 
materials being available from local nurseries. There are also several named cultivars including  B. pilularis . ssp. pilularis ,
 
'Pigeon Point' ,  which  is a vigorous, long lasting cultivar with dark green  foliage that  grows 1 foot tall by 12 feet wide. It 
tolerates a range of soil types  including seaside conditions, alkaline soils, sand and clay. It originates from Pigeon Point on 
the California Coat between San Francisco and Santa Cruz ( Calflora, 1997; Theodore Paine, 2014; Wilson, 2013) . B.  
pilularis . ssp. pilularis  'Twin Peaks'  was collected along the coast from Sonoma to Monterey County. In these locations,  it is 
green in color and grows with the prostrate form I foot high by 10 feet wide, when grown further inland the color of the 
foliage becomes grayish and the growth fo rm assumes a more rounded shape  (Calflora, 1997;  Wilson, 2013). B.  pilularis . 
ssp.  pilularis  ‘Santa Anna’, has silvery foliage and grows in soft mounds, I foot high by 6 feet wide, will tolerate a variety of 
soil types including seaside conditions, alkaline soil s, sand and clay (Wilson, 2013).Cultivars should be selected based on the 
local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or  
local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cu ltivars for use in your area. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 . Male coyoteb rush  in bloom,  staminate male flowers, being pollinated by a honey bee. Lockeford Plant Materials Center. November 2012. 
Figure 2 . Female coyotebrush in bloom, developing female flowers, showing the maturing pappus on the fruiting heads. Lockeford Plant Materials Center. November 2012.

Literature Cited 
Bocek, B. 1982 . Ethnobotany of the Costanoan Indians, California, based on collections by John P. Harrington . Economic   
Botany. 38:240- 55. 
Bogler, D. 2016. Baccharis pilularis , in Jepson Flora Project (eds.) Jepson eFlora, http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi -
bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=1603, (accessed on August 27, 2016).  
Calflora, 1997: Consortium of California Herbaria, Berkeley CA. http://www.calflora.org/cgi -bin/species_query.cgi?where-
c alrecnum=1031 (Accessed on August 27, 2016).  
Chestnut, V.K. 1902 . Plants used by the Indians of Mendocino County, California. US National Herbarium Contributions.  
7:295- 408. 
DaSilva, P.G. and J.W. Bartolome . 1984. Interaction between a shrub, Baccharis pi lularis subsp.  consanguinea  (Asteraceae), 
and an annual grass, Bromus mollis  (Poaceae), in co astal California. Madrono. 31 : 93-101.  
Gomes, A. and M. Smither -Kopperl. 2012. Propagation protocol for vegetative production of container  Baccharis pilularis  
DC.  plants.  http://npn.rngr.net/npn/propagation/protocols/asteraceae -baccharis -3923/?searchterm=Baccharis 
pilularis  (Accessed August 29, 2016).  
Miller, W.B. and Weis, A.E. 1999. Adaptation of coyote brush to the abiotic environment and its effects on susceptibility to a  gall-making midge. Oikos. 84: 199- 208 
Olson, David F., Jr. 1974. Baccharis  L. baccharis. In: Schopmeyer, C. S., technical coordinator. Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States. Agric. Handb. 450. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service: 244 -246.  
Robbins, W.W., M.K. Bellue and W.S. Ball. 1970 Weeds of California. California State Dept. of Agriculture, Sacramento  CA. pp 547.  
Steffan, S. A. 1997. Flower -visitors of Baccharis pilularis  De Candolle subsp. consanguinea  (De Candolle) C.B. Wolf 
(Asteraceae) in Berkeley, California. Pan -Pacific Entomologist. 7: 52 -54.  
Steinberg, P. D. 2002. Baccharis pilularis . In: Fire Effects Information System . U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed August 5, 2016) . 
Sundberg, S.D, and Bogler, D.J.  2006. Baccharis . Flora of North America Vol 20. 
http://efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id= 103317 (Accessed August 5, 2016).  
Theodore Payne Foundation for Wild Flowers and Native Plants. 2014. Sun Valley, CA http://theodorepayne.org/  (accessed 
28 August. 2016).  
Timbrook, J. 2007.  Chumash ethnobotany: plant knowledge among the Chumash people of southern Califor nia. Heyday   
Books, Berkley, CA. Pp 37- 39. 
Westman, W. E. 1981. Diversity relations and succession in Californian c oastal sage scrub. Ecology. 62: 170-184.  
Williams, K. and Hobbs, R. J. 1989. Control of shrub establishment by springtime soil water availability in an an nual 
grassland. Oecologia. 81: 62- 66. 
Wilson, B. 2013. Las Pilitas Nursery, Santa Margarita, CA.  http://www.laspilitas.com/nature -of -california/plants/112 --
baccharis -pilularis -consanguinea  (accessed 29 August, 2016).  
 
Citation  
Smither -Kopperl, M. 2016. Plant Guide for coyotebrush  ( Baccharis pilularis ). USDA -Natural Resources C onservation 
Service, Lockeford Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, CA 95237.  
Published : September 2016.    
 
Edited:
 
For more information about this and other plants,  please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.  
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disabilit y, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual&#39;s income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected gene tic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)

If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency&#39;s EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.   
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the 
USDA Program Discrimination Co mplaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632 -
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Wa shington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program compla int 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877 -8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail dir ectly 
or by email. If  you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221 -5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers
.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER