Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE WILD INDIGO 
Baptisia australis (L.) R. Br. ex 
Ait. f.  
Plant Symbol = BAAU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant 
Materials Center 
 ©William S. Justice Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution 
Dept. of Systematic Biology-Botany 
Alternate Names 
blue false indigo, wild indigo, plains wild indigo, 
false indigo, baptisia, plains baptisia, rattlepod, 
rattlebush, rattlebush wild indigo. 
 
Uses 
Conservation:   It makes good ground cover in sunny 
locations because of its bushy habit, extensive root 
systems and perennial life form.  It is a native 
legume, fixes nitrogen in the soil, and can be part of a 
good wildlife seed mixtur e when native grasses and 
forbs are seeded. 
 
Cultural:   Presently,  Baptisia australis , is grown by 
many as an ornamental in outdoor flower gardens or 
as a decorative border.   It has become popular 
because it grows well in many areas outside its native 
range when planted, does well without watering, 
requires no fertilizer or pesticide treatments and 
needs no pruning.  The pods have been used in dried 
flower arrangements.  When in bloom the brightly 
colored blue flowers
 arranged in spikes make it very 
attractive.  However, a b ouquet of fresh cut flowers 
does not last very long.  The
 flowers and stems turn 
black as soon as they begin to dry.   
 
The Cherokees used the plant as a source of blue dye 
for their clothes.  Early pi oneer settlers copied this 
practice.  A common name, false indigo, indicates it 
is not the true indigo plant ( Indigofera tinctoria L.) 
which was introduced from the India subcontinent 
and cultivated for blue dye by many landowners 
during the early settlement of America.  Some Indian 
tribes used it for medicinal purposes.  The Osage 
made eyewash from the plant.  The Cherokees would 
make a tea from it.  A hot tea was taken as a 
purgative and a cold tea  to prevent vomiting.  A 
pulverized root or hot tea was held over a sore tooth 
to relieve the pain.   Indian children would use the 
dried
 pods with the loose seeds inside as rattles. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
This plant is considered threatened in several states. 
 
Description 
General : Blue wild indigo is a native, perennial, deep 
rooted warm season legume which reproduces by 
seed or rhizomes.  The leaves are alternate and 
trifoliate.  The plant is erect, rising from a branched 
root system which has root tubercles.  It branches at 
the top with the flowers in an erect short terminal 
raceme at the pinnacle.  The stems are stout and 
glabrous.  It may grow up to 5 feet tall and 3 feet 
wide.  Normally, it is about 3 feet tall and 2 feet 
wide.  The flowers are hermaphroditic, about 1 inch 
long and may range in color from light blue to deep 
purple.  The fruit is an inflated hardened pod from 1 
to 3 inches long and from 1/2 to 1 inch in diameter.  
When mature the pods contain a number of small 
seeds, which are loose.  Depending on the region it 
may flower from April (in the south) through August

(in the north).  It is in leaf approximately one month 
before flowering to one month after the pods have 
formed.  In the autumn when full maturity is reached 
the plant turns silvery-gray, and breaks off from the 
root system at ground level.  The pods stay with the 
plant for some time while the wind tumbles it around 
to a new location.  The leaves and pods turn black 
upon drying.  When it is growing if a leaf is crushed 
or stem is broken the sap turns a slate blue color 
when exposed to the air. 
 
Distribution : It occurs from Nebraska to Texas on the 
west to the eastern seaboard  states.  It reaches into 
Canada in its middle range and New Hampshire is the 
extreme northeast area it occu rs as a native.  It is 
rarely found near the Gulf or Atlantic coasts. For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat:  Larger populations can be found along tree 
lines, bordering forested ri parian areas and in open 
prairies or native hay meadows.  It does not grow 
well in shaded habitats.  It  prefers gravelly, sandy or 
well-drained loamy soils.  It withstands prolonged 
droughts. Like many legumes it can fix nitrogen in 
the soil. 
 
Adaptation 
Blue wild indigo adapts to many areas outside its 
native habitat.  It can w ithstand freezing temperature 
extremes of negative 30 degrees Fahrenheit for a 
short period without any ill effects.  It grows between 
USDA hardiness zones 3 to 10. 
 
Management  
Once it has become established blue wild indigo will 
remain healthy for several years.  It requires a 
minimum of maintenance in a garden or outside 
setting.  It is not shade tolerant, so does not make a 
good house plant.  Herbicides used to control broad-
leaf weeds will also kill this plant.  Care should be 
taken whenever a pesticide is used to ensure only the 
targeted pests are affected. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Parasitic weevils normally infest the seedpods in their 
native habitats.  Generally, it takes a large number of 
seeds when they are harvested from a natural 
ecosystem to have any success at finding viable 
seeds. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Toxicity:  Some older poisonous plant literature has 
blamed  Baptisia  species for killing cattle and horses.  
More modern literature documents this genus as more  likely to cause severe diarrhea and anorexia.  
Baptisia 
australis  contains several quinolizidine alkaloids 
including anagyrine, cystinine, lupaninne, N-
methylcystisine, rhombifoline, sparteine, and 
tinctorine.  Alkaloids have a bitter taste and make the 
plant unpalatable for grazing animals.  If other forage 
is available it is unlikely any detrimental effects from 
Baptisia  will be seen.  No poisonings of people or 
pets have been recorded.  Recent German research 
indicates some  Baptisia species may act as stimulants 
to the human immune system. 
 
Blue wild indigo is unlikely to become weedy or 
invasive in most regions or habitats and rarely 
displaces desirable vegetation.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Collected seeds from plants growing in a native 
setting have an extremely low germination rate due to 
predation by weevils.  The pods should be treated for 
insects before bringing them into a greenhouse or the 
seeds sorted prior to bringing them inside. If these 
precautions are not taken it is likely several dozen 
weevils will immediately escape when the pod is 
opened.  Like many other legumes it has a hard seed 
coat.  The seeds must be scarified if germination is to 
occur within an artificial setting.  Also, studies 
involving stratification and soaking the seeds a full 
day prior to planting show more success than 
scarification alone.  The seeds normally germinate 
when the soil temperature nears 50 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  After seedlings emerge they can be 
divided and further propagated. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
USDA lists no named cultivars, or genetically 
improved varieties.  There are three recognized 
naturally occurring varieties of  Baptisia australis (L.) 
R. Br. ex Ait. f.:  
variety aberrans  (Larisey) M. Mendenhall 
variety australis 
variety minor (Lehm.) Fern. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allen, O.N.; Allen, E.K.  1981.   The Leguminosae.  A 
Source Book of Characteristics, Uses, and 
Nodulation.   The University of Wisconsin Press, 
Madison, Wisconsin USA.  Pp. 89-90.

Bailey, L.H.  1939.  The Standard Cyclopedia of 
Horticulture.  The MacMillan Company, New York, 
New York USA.  Volume 1 of 2, Pp. 453.  
 
Baskin, C.C.; Baskin, J.M.  2002.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container Baptisia 
australis (L.) R. Br. ex Ait. F. plants :  University of 
Kentucky, Lexington Lancaster Press, Inc., 
Lancaster, Pennsylvania USA.  Pp. 344.  
 
Coffey, T.  1993.  The History and Folklore of North 
American Wildflowers .  Houghton Mifflin Company, 
New York, New York USA.  Pp. 124., Kentucky.  In:  
Native Plant Network.  URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 15 July 
2003).  Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery. 
 
Britton, N.; Brown, A.  1936.   An Illustrated Flora of 
the Northern United States, Canada and the British 
Possessions.   New York Botanical Garden.    
 
Denison, E.  1978.  Missouri Wildflowers.   Missouri 
Department of Conservation.  Jefferson City, 
Missouri 65101 USA.  Pp. 158. 
 
Gates, F.C.  1941.   Weeds in Kansas.  Report of the 
Kansas State Board of Agri culture.  Volume LX No. 
243.  Topeka, Kansas USA.  Pp. 223-224. 
 
Freeman, C.C.; Schofield, E.K.  1991.   Roadside 
Flowers of the Southern Great Plains .  University 
Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas USA.  Pp. 147.  
 
Gleason, H. A.  1952.  Illustrated Flora of the 
Northeastern United States and Adjacent Canada .  
New York Botanical Garden.   Lancaster Press, Inc., 
Lancaster, Pennsylvania USA.  Volume 2 of 3,  Pp. 
391-392.  
 
Hamel, P. B.; Chiltoskey, M. U.  1975.   Cherokee 
Plants .  Pp. 40. 
 
Hardin, J. W.  1973.   Stock-Poisoning Plants of North 
Carolina.   North Carolina State University, 
Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 414 
(Revised).  Pp. 75. 
 
Integrated Taxonomic Info rmation System (ITIS). 
URL:  (
http://www.itis.usda.gov/) (accessed 28 July 
2003).  United States Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, D.C. USA. 
 
Iverson, L.R.; Ketzner, D,; Karnes J.  Illinois Plant 
Information Network Database.  URL at: 
(
http://www.fs.fed.us/ne/delaware/ilpin.html.) 
(accessed 15 July 2003).  Illinois Natural History 
Survey and USDA Forest Service. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie.   University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas USA.  Pp. 70-71. 
 
Kingsbury, J.M.  1964.   Poisonous Plants of the 
United States and Canada .  Prentice-Hall, Inc.  
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey USA.  Pp. 149. 
 
Ladd, D.  1995.   Tallgrass Prairie Wildflowers.   
Falcon Press, Helena, Montana USA.  Pp. 36.  
 
McGregor, R.L.; Barkley, T.M., et. al. 1977.   Atlas of 
the Flora of the Great Plains .  Iowa State University 
Press, Ames, Iowa USA.  Pp. 166.  
 
McGregor, R.L.; Barkley, T.M.; Brooks, R.E.; 
Schofield, E.K., et. al.  1986.   Flora of the Great 
Plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas USA.  Pp.  436-437.  
 
Mohlenbrock, R.H. ed.  1975.   Guide to the vascular 
Flora of Illinois .  Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale, Illinois USA.  Pp. 494. 
 
National Genetics Resources Program (GRIN).   URL 
at:  (
http://www.ars-grin.gov/ ) (accessed 28 July 
2003).  Database Management Unit of the National 
Germplasm Resources Laboratory, Plant Sciences 
Institute, Beltsville Agricultural research Center, 
Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Beltsville, 
Maryland USA.  
 
Native American Ethnobotany.  URL at:  
(
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/herb/search.pl) (accessed 
28 July 2003).  In:  University of Michigan-
Dearborn.  Dearborn, Michigan USA. 
 
Plants For A Future.  URL at:  
(
http://www.ibiblio.org/) (accessed 28 July 2003).  
Blagdon Cross, EX215DF, UK. 
 
Phillips Petroleum Company.  1963.  Pasture and 
range Plants .  Bartlesville, Oklahoma 74004 USA.  
Pp. 78.

Porter, C.L.  1967.  Taxonomy of Flowering Plants, 
2nd edition.   W.H. Freeman and Company, San 
Francisco, California USA. 
 
Steere, W.C. et. al. 1970.   Wild Flowers of the United 
States.  Texas .  New York Botanical Garden.  
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, New York 
USA.  Volume 3 of 3, Pp. 264-265.  
 
Steere, W.C. et. al. 1973.  Wild Flowers of the United 
States.  The Central Mountains and Plains .  New 
York Botanical Garden.  McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York, New York USA.  Volume 6 of 
6, Pp. 396-397. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1980.   Poisonous Plants of the 
Central United States .  The Regents Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas USA.  Pp. 149.  
 
Steyermark, J.A.  1963.  Flora of Missouri.  Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa USA.  Pp. 1725. 
 
Stubbendieck, J.; Conrad, E.C.  1989.   Common 
Legumes of the Great Plains.   University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska USA.  Pp. 111. 
 
USDA, NRCS, 2004.  The PLANTS database, 
version 3.5 (
http://plants.usda.gov).  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Wildflowers of the Southeastern United States.  In:  
2bnTheWild.  URL at:  (http.//2bnTheWIld.com) 
(accessed 15 July 2003).  
 
Prepared By:  
Patrick J. Broyles, Soil Conservationist 
USDA, NRCS, Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Patrick J. Broyles, Soil Conservationist 
USDA, NRCS, Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 
Edited: 14jan04 jsp; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.