Plant Guide       
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE GRAMA  
Bouteloua gracilis  (Willd. ex 
Kunth.) Lag. ex Griffiths 
Plant Symbol = BOGR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas. 
 
 Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center  
 
Uses  
Forage : A highly palatable grass for livestock on a 
year long basis. It is used sparingly by antelope and 
other wildlife species. Blue grama rates with 
buffalograss as one of the most important forage 
plants of the short-gra ss prairie (Weaver, 1926) 
 
Erosion control: Blue grama can be used in mixtures 
with other grasses for use in erosion control 
situations. It is commonly used as a low maintenance 
turf planting, such as rough  areas of a golf course or 
between rows in multiple row wind break plantings 
and in locations prone to drought. It is also used in 
surface mine re-vegetation plantings.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Blue grama is a major warm season grass 
found throughout the Great Plains. It is found on the 
plains, prairies, and foothills of most western states. 
It is short (6 to 24 inches) stature and perennial with a 
prolific root system. This species has some  phenotypic plasticity since in the southern states it 
grows normally as a bunch grass, but in the northern 
states and in the mountains, or in areas under heavy 
grazing pressure it is a sod former. Phenotypic 
plasticity is the ability of an organism to alter its 
physiology or morphology in response to changes in 
environmental conditions (Schlichting, 1986). Blue 
grama possesses the C-4 photosynthetic pathway for 
carbon fixation (Waller and Lewis, 1979).  
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Blue grama is a major species of 
the western Great Plains and southwestern United 
States. It is also found growing in Mexico and the 
Canadian Provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba. 
 
Habitat: Blue grama is most effective when grown in 
the dryer parts of the northern and southern Great 
Plains and southwestern region of the U.S. It 
naturally grows in mixed stands, primarily with 
buffalograss ( Bouteloua dactyloides ), needle-and-
thread (  Hesperostipa comata), western wheatgrass 
( Pascopyrum smithii ), and green needlegrass 
( Nassella viridula )in a short grass prairie setting. 
It will be associated with other species such as prairie 
sandreed and sand sagebrush in a sandier habitat. 
 
Adaptation   
 
Blue grama demonstrates good drought, fair salinity 
and moderate alkalinity tolerance. It grows well on 
soil types as varied as sandy  to clayey in texture; 
however its growth is not as vigorous on true sands 
or clays. Blue grama is not tolerant of frequent 
flooding or submergence. It is also intolerant of shade 
and acidic soils. It is variably  tolerant of fire and can 
be damaged if burned during active growth, 
especially under drought conditions. Blue grama 
grows at elevations of 3,500 feet up to 7,000 feet in 
New Mexico and has been reported growing at 
10,000 feet. Forage production is best where annual 
precipitation is 12 to 14 inches and occurs during the 
warmest part of summer.  
 
Establishment 
Proper seedbed preparation  is always necessary when 
trying to establish any na tive grass or wildflower 
species. For the best results seed of blue grama 
should be drilled on a firm and weed free seed bed 
with a depth band and packer wheel equipped native 
grass drill. Depth of seeding should be ¼ to ½ inch.

Broadcasting the seed is an alternative planting 
option. However, the seed should then be 
incorporated to provide seed to soil contact or at least 
pressed into the soil with a cultipacker. Seeding rate 
varies depending on the planting site and method. 
Drill planted seeding rates are 25 to 40 pure live 
seeds (PLS) per square foot or 1 to 3 pounds PLS per 
acre. The seeding rate should be increased by 50 to 
100 percent for broadcasting, harsh sites, south and 
west exposures, and where early or dense cover is 
required.  
 
Blue grama cultivars have a large number of seeds 
per pound somewhere between 700,000 and 800,000 
seeds/pound. Suitable planting dates are April to mid-
May in the central Great Plains, slightly earlier in the 
southern Great Plains and June 15 to July 15 in the 
southwestern U.S. Wilson et al. (1976) found that 
blue grama seedlings avoid drought in three ways: 1) 
by increasing water uptake, 2) by adjusting leaf area, 
and 3) by reducing transpiration. The relative 
importance of each depends on the morphological 
stages of the seedling deve lopment and severity of 
drought conditions.  
 
Briske and Wilson (1980) studied the extent and 
timing of adventitious (permanent) root development 
in blue grama seedlings. They discovered that if blue 
grama seedlings did not initiate and develop 
adventitious roots within 6 to 10 weeks after 
emergence they often died. Seedling death was 
caused by the expansion of leaf area beyond the 
ability of the seedlings seminal roots to provide 
adequate moisture. Without adventitious root 
development an increased transpiration stress was 
causing seedling and stand mortality. To develop 
adventitious roots the seedlings require a period 
during which the soil surface will continuously 
remain moist for 2 to 4 days.  This moisture 
requirement is caused by the growth form of blue 
grama seedlings (Hyder et.al. , 1971) that elevates the 
point of adventitious root growth to a point very near 
the soil surface. Weaver and Zink (1945) reported 
that blue grama seedlings grown without adventitious 
roots died after 8 weeks. Weaver (1926) explained 
that the root structure of established blue grama 
plants are exceedingly fine and spread widely in the 
surface soil, often to distance s of 12 to 18 inches.   
 
Management 
Once established this grass is palatable to livestock 
year around. Growing points  of this grass are low and 
near the grounds surface,  thus close grazing by 
livestock can be allowed. To obtain the best forage 
yields, grazing should be deferred once every two to 
three years. Blue grama cures well on the stem  making it a good grass for deferred grazing during its 
dormant period. Weed control can be accomplished 
by mowing, controlled grazing or herbicide 
applications. 
 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Grasshoppers damage blue grama stands and 
consume forage. The white grub larvae of the 
common green June beetle (Cotia nitida) feed on 
roots and can cause stand loss. Mankin (1969) 
detailed several leaf and tar spot and rust diseases 
common on blue grama found in South Dakota. 
Harlan et al. (1956) warned of thrip and gall midge 
infestations occurring in blue grama seed production 
fields. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
To consistently produce gras s seed of any species the 
most important first step is to obtain a uniform, clean 
stand of grass. Skips and thin spots in the row invite 
weeds and other competing species which will cause 
trouble later. Weeds must be controlled the year of 
seeding and in subsequent years. However, careful 
weed control the initial year of seeding will provide a 
more uniform stand in the seed field and less work in 
subsequent years.  
 
Cultivation and herbicide applications along with 
hand weeding in the row will  provide an even stand 
of grass that after the first year will provide reduced 
labor when harvesting, cleaning and processing the 
seed crop. The most important factor in producing 
blue grama seed is time of bloom. In Oklahoma, blue 
grama should bloom in September to fill completely 
(Harlan et al. 1956). If growth is promoted by early 
rain then seed field should be mowed several times or 
grazed heavily. The first inflorescences should be 
removed and the stand should be encouraged to 
remain vegetative until fall. 
 
The first irrigation should be applied in mid-August 
along with the first nitrogen fertilization.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (NRCS:formerly Soil Conservation Service) 
office for more information.  Look in the phone book 
under ”United States Government”.  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under 
the subheading “Departm ent of Agriculture.” 
 
‘Lovington’ was released as a cultivar in 1963 by 
New Mexico AES and the Los Lunas Plant Materials 
Center. The original source of the material was a 
field harvest in 1944 near Lovington, New Mexico. It

was bulk increased and tested as A-12424. It has 
uniform size, leafiness, excellent seedling vigor 
 and fast establishment characteristics. 
 
‘Hachita’ was a cooperative release between the Los 
Lunas PMC and Colorado and New Mexico AES’s in 
1980. Source material was originally collected in 
1957 south of Hachita, New Mexico in a 250mm 
precipitation zone at an altitude of 1220 meters. It is 
the most drought tolerant of blue grama materials 
tested in New Mexico.  
 
‘Alma’ was a cooperative cultivar release with 
USDA Agriculture Research Service, Los Lunas New 
Mexico PMC, and the Colorado and New Mexico 
AES’s in 1992. The cultivar was a composite of 270 
plants from Hachita, Lovington and PMK-1483. The 
material was screened initially for heavier caryopsis 
weights, increased seedling vigor and greater 
emergence from deeper soil depths. Its intended use 
was for rangeland improvement and go back cropland 
seeding in southern and central Great Plains. 
 
Bad River Ecotype blue grama was a selected release 
from the North Dakota PMC, North Dakota 
Association of Conservation Districts and the North 
and South Dakota AES in 1996. Its origin is Haakon 
County in central South Dakota on the floodplain of 
the Bad River. The intend ed use is the Northern 
Great Plains, USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 3.  Bad 
River establishes readily and has consistent plant 
performance compared to  native harvest materials.
 
 
References 
Briske,D.D. and A.M. Wilson. 1980. Drought effects 
on adventitious root development in blue grama 
seedlings. Journal of Range Management. 33(5): 323-
327. 
  
Harlan, J., R.M. Ahring and W.R. Kneebone. 1956. 
Grass Seed Production Under Irrigation in Oklahoma. 
Oklahoma A&M College. Bulletin No. B-481. 
 
Hyder, D.N., A.C. Everson, and R.E. Bement. 1971. 
Seedling morphology and seeding failures with blue 
grama.  Journal of Range Management . 24:287-292. 
 
Mankin, C.J. 1969. Diseases of Grasses and Cereals 
in South Dakota.  South Dakota State University 
Agricultural Experiment Station. Technical Bulletin 
35.  
 
Schlichting, C.D. 1986. The Evolution of Phenotypic 
Plasticity.  Annual Review of Ecology and  
Systematics.  17:667-693. 
  Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North American 
Grasses.
 Journal of Range Management.  32:12-82. 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1926.  Root development of field crops.  
McGraw Hill Book Company Inc. New York, New 
York. 
 
Weaver, J.E. and E. Zink. 1945. Extent and longevity 
of seminal roots of certain grasses.  Plant Physiol. 
20:359-379. 
 
Wilson, A.M., D.N. Hyder, and D.D. Briske. 1976. 
Drought Resistance Characteristics of Blue Grama 
Seedlings.  Agronomy Journal . 68:479-484. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia, USDA-NRCS, 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 29jun07 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.