Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW BIRCH 
Betula alleghaniensis  Britt. 
Plant Symbol = BEAL2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Gray birch, silver birch, swamp birch 
 
Uses 
The wood of yellow birch is heavy, strong, close-
grained, even-textured, and shows a wide color 
variation, from reddish brown to creamy white.  It is 
used for furniture, cabinetry, charcoal, pulp, interior 
finish, veneer, tool handles, boxes, woodenware, and 
interior doors.  The wood can be stained and takes a 
high polish.  Yellow birch is one of the principal 
hardwoods used in the distillation of wood alcohol, 
acetate of lime, charcoal, tar, and oils.   
 
Deer consume large numbers of yellow birch 
seedlings in summer and prefer green leaves and 
woody stems in fall.  Moose, white-tailed deer, and 
snowshoe hare also browse yellow birch.  The seeds 
are eaten by various songbird species, and ruffed 
grouse feed on seeds, catkins, and buds.  Red squirrel 
cut and store mature catkins and eat the seeds.  
Beaver and porcupine chew the bark.   
 
The sap of yellow birch can be tapped for use as 
edible syrup.  Tea is sometimes made from the twigs 
and/or inner bark.    
 
Yellow birch sees limited use in landscape plantings, 
partly because it may be relatively hard to locate at  local nurseries. It is a good lawn tree, providing 
relatively light shade, and it has showy bark and fall  
 
foliage colors.  It also is a good edge tree for 
naturalized areas.  Although yellow birch grows best 
in full sun, cherry birch is better suited to hotter or 
drier sites.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Description  
General
: Birch Family (Betulaceae).  These are 
native trees mostly 15-20(-30) m tall, with straight 
trunks and variable crowns; mature bark smooth and 
shiny, usually separating into thin layers, giving a 
shaggy appearance; lenticels dark, horizontally; twigs 
with odor and taste of wintergreen, usually with small 
resinous glands.  Leaves  are deciduous, alternate, 
simple, narrowly ovate to broadly oblong, 6-10 cm 
long, base rounded to cun eate or cordate, margins 
sharply doubly toothed, apex acuminate, usually 
softly hairy beneath along major veins and in vein 
axils, often with scattered, minute, resinous glands.  
Male (pollen) and female (seed) flowers are in 
catkins, borne separately, but on the same tree.  Seed 
catkins are erect, ovoid, 1.5-3 cm long, generally 
remaining intact after release of fruits in late fall, 
scales 3-lobed, sparsely to moderately hairy; pollen 
catkins elongate and hanging.  Seeds (nutlets) have 
wings narrower than body.  The common name 
pertains to the yellow color of the bark and fall 
leaves.    
 
Variation within the species .  Two varieties have 
been recognized (see Fernald 1950; Braun 1961); var. 
macrolepis  differs from typical variety  alleghaniensis 
in its larger fruiting catkin scales (8-13 mm long vs. 
5-8 mm), with more elongated basal portion.  
Erdmann (1990) and Furlow (1993) regard the 
species as variable but w ithout formally recognized 
varieties.   
 
Yellow birch is closely similar to cherry birch 
( Betula lenta ).  Cherry birch differs in its light 
grayish brown bark that remains close (vs. dark, 
freely exfoliating bark), leav es with fine, sharp teeth 
(vs. coarse teeth), and catki n scales without hairs (vs. 
hairy scales).  The twigs and inner bark of cherry

birch have a stronger wintergreen odor.  Yellow birch 
forms natural hybrids with paper birch (B. 
papyrifera ) and with bog birch ( B. pumila).   
 
Distribution 
Yellow birch ranges from Newfoundland, Nova 
Scotia, New Brunswick, and Anticosti Island west 
through southern Ontario to extreme southeastern 
Manitoba; south to Minnesota and northeastern Iowa; 
east to northern Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania to 
northern New Jersey and New England; and south in 
the Appalachian Mountains to eastern Tennessee and 
northeastern Georgia.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Adaptation : Yellow birch is a characteristic tree of 
the northern Appalachians and the hemlock 
hardwoods forest of the Great Lakes region, at 
elevations of mostly 0-500 meters but up to 1050 
meters.   In the Appalachians  and the Adirondacks, 
yellow birch reaches its maximum importance in the 
transition zone between low elevation deciduous 
forest and montane spruce-fir forests.  Yellow birch 
occurs on moist, well-drained soils of various types 
of uplands and mountain ravines and along stream 
banks and in swampy woods.  It may also grow 
where drainage is restricted, but growth may be 
correspondingly poor.  Flowering: April-May, 
beginning before leafing; fruiting: July-August.   
 
General : Yellow birch reproduces primarily by seed, 
normally first at about 40  years but optimally at about 
70 years – trees under 20 years sometimes produce 
seed.  Good seed crops are  produced at intervals of 1-
4 years, usually with little seed produced in 
intervening years.  Viability under natural conditions 
decreases around the second year.   
 
Seeds germinate and grow best on moist mineral soil 
enriched with humus, but those in undisturbed stands 
usually germinate on mossy logs, decayed wood, in 
cracks in boulders, and on wind thrown tree 
hummocks.  Seedlings cannot pierce compacted 
hardwood litter.  Scarification of seedbeds improves 
seedling establishment, but organic matter should be 
left mixed in with the mineral soil.  Seed dormancy is 
broken (under artificial conditions) by stratification 
or by exposure of wet seed to cool-white fluorescent 
light.  Seeds can be stored 2-4 years or longer without 
losing viability.   
 
Gap conditions are conducive to yellow birch 
seedling establishment, and seedling survival is better 
on disturbed microsites.  Mortality of seedlings is  usually very high.  Seedlings surviving their first year 
survive to sapling and larg
er stages only where there 
is sufficient light, although some shade improves 
seedling survival.   
 
Yellow birch has been termed “a persistent 
successional species.”  Its presence in mid- to late-
successional stands depends  on local disturbance; it 
cannot reproduce under a closed canopy and requires 
soil disturbance and light for seedling survival.  Older 
trees do not sprout.  In northern hardwood 
ecosystems, yellow birch reaches maximum 
importance levels within 15 years of disturbance, and 
those levels are maintained for at least 100 years.  In 
many old-growth stands, yellow birch usually 
decreases in importance as the stand ages, but the 
species is often a component of old growth types and 
sometimes occurs as a major component of climax 
stands, perhaps through a combination of longevity 
and micro-succession.  Yellow birch often reaches 
150 years; the average age in old growth woods may 
be 200-250 years.  Maximum age is over 300 years.   
 
Management 
Heavy or repeated browsing of yellow birch by deer 
and moose kills small yellow birch and may prevent 
regeneration.  Heavy feeding by porcupine and 
yellow-bellied sapsucker reduces growth, lowers 
wood quality, and is sometimes fatal.    
 
Heavy cuts in older stands may be followed by top 
dieback and mortality.  Recently isolated trees, in 
particular, are subject to wind throw on shallow soils 
and susceptible to winter sunscald.  All are sensitive 
to high soil temperatures.  Harvest of yellow birch 
timber should coincide with  good seed years, because 
the trees regenerate primarily by germination, and 
openings for regeneration should be provided.   
 
Yellow birch can be grown from seed relatively 
easily.  Artificial propagation can be done through 
greenwood cuttings and by grafting. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The species may be hard to locate in local nurseries, 
but it can be ordered. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Braun, E.L. 1961.  The woody plants of Ohio .  Ohio 
State Univ. Press, Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Erdmann, G.G. 1990.   Betula alleghaniensis Britton .  
Yellow Birch.  Pp. 133-147, IN: R.M. Burns and 
B.H. Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of North 
America . Volume 2 .  Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Fernald, M.L. 1950.   Gray’s manual of botany  (ed. 
8).  American Book Company. 
 
Furlow, J.J. 1993.   Betula.  Pp. 516-530, IN:   Flora of 
North America , north of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Betula alleghaniensis .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp;10feb03ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.