Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HARVEST BRODIAEA
Brodiaea coronaria (Salisb.) 
Engl.  
Plant Symbol = BRCO3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Indian potato, topoderos, walla 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Corms were gathered with a wooden 
digging stick and eaten by the Wiyot, Atsugewi, 
Miwok, Yana and other tribes of California.  The 
Miwok dug the bulbs about the first of May when the 
shoots were just appearing above the ground.  They 
cooked the corms in an earth oven.  The Atsugewi 
boiled the corms in water and sometimes cooked 
them in an earth oven.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliac eae).  This herbaceous 
perennial reproduces both by black seeds and brown 
fibrous-coated corms.  The umbel-shaped 
inflorescence has 3 to 11 flowers--each flower is bell-
shaped and the color varies from blue-purple, pink-
purple to rose.  The perianth lobes are ascending, 12-
25 mm, with tips recurved.  The fruit is an ovoid  capsule.  The 3-5 basal leaves are linear and the scape 
is 5-25 cm tall. 
 
Distribution 
This plant was a greater California Central Valley 
plant at one time extending in vast numbers across 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys.  Due to 
overgrazing, farming, and urban development this 
plant is becoming rare.  It is also found in 
northwestern California, the central and northern 
Sierra Nevada, the Cascade Range and British 
Columbia at an elevational range from 0 to 1600 m. 
The plant is found in multiple plant community types 
including valley grassland, foothill woodland, mixed 
conifer forests, and volcanic mesas. 
Alfred Brousseau ©
 Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @CalPhotos
 
Establishment 
If possible, obtain the s eed and corms from local 
sources near where they will  be planted, to maintain 
genetic diversity of harves t brodiaea and for the best 
adaptation to local conditions.  Some plant nurseries 
may label their corms and seeds according to 
geographic source.  If plan ting flowering-size corms, 
they can be directly planted outside.  Plant the corms 
in the fall in full sun.  The less crowded the more the 
corms will offset.  Plant them 2 to 4 inches apart and 
4 inches deep.  A well-drained soil that is light and 
loose will produce bigger corms.  Water and weed 
the patch regularly and protect it from small and large 
mammals, insects, and bi rds.  Keep the ground 
slightly damp.  If given too much water the corms 
will rot.  If it rains fairly regularly, don't water the 
area.  When the leaves on  the plants have turned 
yellow and dried up, stop watering.  Allow the corms 
to summer bake.  The plants should be well 
established after one year.   
 
If planting seeds of harvest brodiaea, store the seeds 
in a paper sack until autumn.  Plant the seeds before 
October 1st in a container and care for them for two 
years before out-planting.   Plant the seeds in six-inch 
pots because the corms will pull themselves down to 
the depth they require.  Plant about 100 seeds per pot.  
Place them on top of the soil  and sprinkle a little soil 
over them and put one-quarter inch gravel on top.  
Set the pots in partial shade so they won't dry out so 
fast.  They can be outside or in a hot house.  The seed 
does not need to be stratified.  Start watering the pots 
right away and keep them slightly damp.  Fertilize 
the pots in late winter and  early spring and protect the 
plants from birds and other animals.  If the pots are 
outside, let the rains naturally water the pots and in a

drought year, supplement with hand watering.  Stop 
watering as soon as the foliage of the plants turns 
yellow.  Resume watering the next fall, if rains are 
insufficient.  After the second year, separate the 
plants and transplant them two inches apart in the fall 
when the corms are dormant, and then water.  Grow 
them for one or two more years or to bloom, 
repeating this cycle and then out-plant them in the 
autumn. 
 
Management 
The area planted in harvest brodiaea will require 
regular weeding and the use of a very weak solution 
of fertilizer twice only during the active growth in the 
spring.  The corms can be kept from overcrowding by 
thinning them every three years.  This involves 
picking off the cormlets and replanting them 
elsewhere in the garden.   
 
There are five major types of indigenous 
management activities conducted in California that 
were designed to ensure future corm production at 
traditional gathering sites: 1) conscious breaking off 
cormlets from the harvested parent corms and 
replanting them; 2) sparing whole plants; 3) 
harvesting the corms after plants have gone to seed 
and dumping the seeds in the hole; 4) burning areas; 
and 5) irrigation.  Periodic digging and thinning of 
the corms, and popping off the cormlets and 
replanting them may enhance grass nut numbers and 
densities.  Digging corms may in fact be a form of 
tillage, which will increase the size of the gathering 
tract, aerate the soil, lower weed competition, and 
prepare the seedbed to increase seed germination 
rates.  If harvest br odiaea populations require 
periodic disturbance to maintain and increase their 
populations, then indigenous harvesting regimes if 
reenacted, may help maintain populations.  At the 
very least--populations that become overcrowded and 
show reduced vigor should be divided and separated. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
BRCO3 is somewhat available from native plant 
nurseries within its range. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. 1997.  From tillage to table: the 
indigenous cultivation of geophytes for food in 
California .  Journal of Ethnobiology 17(2):149-169. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford. 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Garth, T.R. 1953.   Atsugewi ethnography .  University 
of California Publications in American Archaeology 
and Ethnology 14(2):129-212. 
 
Keator, G. 1993.   Brodiaea.  pp. 1180-1183 IN: The 
Jepson manual: Higher plants of California . J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Loud, L.L. 1918.   Ethnogeography and archaeology 
of the Wiyot territory .  University of California Pub. 
in American Arch. and Ethnology. Vol. 14:3.  pp. 
221-436. 
 
Sapir, E. & L. Spier 1943.   Notes on the culture of the 
Yana .  Anthropological Records 3(3):239-298. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.