Plant Guide
CUTLEAF 
BALSAMROOT  
Balsamorhiza macrophylla Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = BAMA4 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Cutleaf balsamroot.  Photo by Tris Hoffman, USDA Forest Service.  
Alternate Names 
Cleft -leaf balsamroot, large -leaved balsamroot . 
Uses  
Livestock and big game utilize cutleaf  balsamroot.  It is 
moderately palatable to grazing animals  during the spring 
and early summer  but has low protein content ( Walter, 
2007) .  Leaves are grazed lightly and flowers are often 
eaten.   Horses are especially fond of the flowers (Plants of 
Utah, Online).   The plant becomes dry and worthless as 
forage by midsummer (Forest Service, 1937; Her man, 
1966).  It  attracts large numbers of native pollina tors .  It 
may have some value for restoration but is not a dominant 
or major species in its area of adaptation.   
Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Ethnobotany  
The  Cheyenne  tribe boiled the roots, stems and leaves and 
drank the decoction for stomach pains and headaches.  
They also steamed the plant and inhaled the vapors for the 
same conditions.  Ripe seeds were pounded into flour and 
the fleshy roots were often eaten raw or boiled (Plants of 
Utah, Online).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Cutleaf 
balsamroot is a native perennial forb with a large taproot 
from which several branches arise underground.  The 
leaves are large, 3 -6 dm  (12 -24 in)  long, pinnate -shape d 
with broad, generally entire or coarsely few -toothed 
segments mostly 5 -12 cm  (1.97- 4.72 in)  long.  The stems 
are lax , 3 -10 dm  (12 -39 in)  tall and leafless or often with 
a pair of much reduced, coarsely toothed or few -pinnate 
leaves tow ard the b ase with s parse, but long pubescence.  
The yellow colored flower heads are large  and resemble 
those of a sunflower  with long, leafy bracts that may 
surpass the disk.   The ray flowers are 3 -6 cm  (1.18- 2.36 
in)  long and the disk flowers are about 11 mm  (0.43 in)  
long.   The fruit is a  lance -shaped achene, 1 cm (0.39 in) 
long.  The achenes  are lance -shaped and about 1 cm  (0.39 
in)  long  (Montana Field Guide, Online; Cronquist et al., 
1994).   The plant has a  slight, unpleasant medical odor 
resembling turpentine  (Plants of  Utah, Online) .  
Chromosome number is 2n = 100+/ -2 and is highly  
polyploid.  It evidently arose from hybridization between 
Balsam orhiza sagit tata  and  B. hispidula.  Cutleaf 
balsamroot  has the  multi -branched caudices of B. 
sagittata  and the leaf dissection of B. hispidula  (Flora of 
North America, Online).  
 
Distribution :  Cutleaf balsamroot is found in Idaho, 
Montana, Utah and Wyoming.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Cutleaf balsamroot is a minor component of 
plant communities found in the Rocky Mountain 
subalpine and upper montane grasslands and on montane 
sagebrush steppe (Montana Field guide, Online).

Adaptation 
Cutleaf balsamroot is most abundant o n well-drained soils 
ranging from clay to g ravely in texture (Plants of Utah, 
Online).  It is found from 4 ,500 to 7,000 feet  (1372- 2133 
m)  elevation in areas receiving 14 -40 inches  (355- 1,016 
mm)  of annual precipitation .  It has minimal tolerance to 
drought and flooded conditions  (Walter, 2007).   Cutleaf 
balsamroot is adapted to soil pH ranges from 6.3  to 8.6; 
has low salinity tolerance and intermediate shade 
tolerance (PLANTS Database).  
Establishment  
There is no published information on the establishment o f 
cutleaf balsamroot.  Monsen et al., (2004) infer that 
establishment, production, and management of cutleaf 
balsamroot are similar to arrowleaf balsamroot 
( Balsamorhiza sagittata).   They  further state that neither 
cutleaf or arrowleaf balsamroot should be seeded in place 
of each other but site differences for the two species are 
not easy to differentiate.  
 
Cutleaf  balsamroot should be drill -seeded into a weed -
free seedbed in late fall.  S eeding depth should be 0.25-
0.50 inches (0.6- 1.3 cm).  Broadcast seeding can be 
successful if seed can be covered by dragging or 
harrowing.  There are 33,000 -  55,000 seeds per pound 
( Monsen et al, 2004; PLANTS Database).  The calculated 
seeding rate based  on 25 pure live seeds (PLS) per square 
foot at 12 inch row spacing is 19.8 pounds PLS/ac  with a 
seed count of 55,000 seeds per pound.  When planted in a 
mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted according to 
the proportion of cutleaf  balsamroot in the  mix.  Young 
seedlings develop slowly and are not competitive against 
more vigorous species.  Alternate row seeding is 
recommended for arrowleaf balsamroot to help reduce 
interspecies competition and dense stands may take 10 
years or more to develop (Monsen  et al., 2004).  This is 
likely to be similar for cutleaf  balsamroot.  
Management  
Cutleaf balsamroot should be used as a minor component 
of seed mixtures.  Management strategies should be based 
on the key species in the established plant community.  
Grazing  should be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment 
(Ogle et al., 2008).  Cutleaf balsamroot is likely to be 
tolerant of fire due to its deep taproot.   Plants are long 
lived with a life expectancy of a pproximately 14 years 
(Treshow and Harper, 1974).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
The gall -forming nematode, Angui llulina balsamophila 
has been observed on cutleaf balsamroot (Goodey, 1948).   
Since  cutleaf balsamroot  is similar to arrowleaf 
balsamroot, the fo llowing information on pests and 
potential problems is from Tilley et al., (2012).  Rodents 
and birds feed on the seed.  Insect damage to seed can be 
significant and stored seed may require pesticide  treatment and cold storage.  Mold has been observed on 
s
eedlings in greenhouse and growth chamber production.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Cutleaf balsamroot is native to western North America.  It 
can spread under favorable conditions but does not pose 
any environmental concern to native plant communities.  
Seed and  Plant Production  
There is no published information regarding seed and 
plant production of cutleaf balsamroot.  Since it is similar 
to arrowleaf balsamroot, the following information on 
seed and plant production is from Tilley et al., (2012).  
Seed requires stratification for germination and for 
container plant production, seed should be planted into 
containers to a depth of 0.25- 0.5 inches, lightly covered 
with pea gravel and then placed outdoors in late fall or 
early winter for natural stratification.  Tr ansplanting is 
difficult and plants should be handled carefully to prevent 
damage to the root system.  Plants develop slowly and 
take 3 or more years after establishment to produce 
flowers.  
 
Seed production fields are typically planted at 36 -42 inch 
row sp acing to facilitate between -row cultivation.  Seed 
should be planted at a depth of 0.25- 0.5 inches in the fall 
to allow for natural stratification.  Germination is erratic 
with new plants appearing for 2 - 3 years after planting.  
Once established, cutleaf balsamroot is probably very 
competitive with weeds which may be controlled by hand, 
between -row cultivation and herbicides.  
 
Fertilizer is not generally recommended and irrigation is 
limited to 15 -20 inches (381- 508 mm) per year including 
natural precipita tion.  Overhead irrigation should be 
avoided during pollination.  It is very likely that cutleaf 
balsamroot requires insect visitation for pollination.  
Plants are slow to develop and may take 3 -5 years to 
reach full production.  Peak yields of arrowleaf 
b alsamroot of 75 to 125 pounds per acre have been 
reported.  
 
As with arrowleaf balsamroot, seed crops of cutleaf 
balsamroot may often be damaged by frost during 
flowering.  Harvest can be done by hand, with a vacuum -
type harvester, or by direct combining.  Timing of harvest 
is critical.  Mature, viable seed readily shatters.  Seed 
cleaning is easy with the seed falling readily from the 
flower heads.  Seed should be stored at cool temperatures 
ranging from 33 -40°F (1 -4°C).  Seed is susceptible to 
insect damag e and can be treated with pesticide prior to 
storage.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no cultivars, improved, or selected materials of 
cutleaf  balsamroot.  Common wildland collected seed is

available from commercial sources (Native Seed 
Network).  
 
References  
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A. Holmgren N., Reveal, J., 
Holmgren, P. 1994.  Asterales.  Intermountain Flora.  
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 
Volume Five. The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx,  New York.  496 p.  
Flora of North America, Online.  Balsamorhiza  macrophylla.  http://www.efloras.org  (Accessed June 
11, 2012)  
Forest Service, 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.  United 
States Government Printing O ffice.  Variously 
paginated.  
Goodey, J.B. 1948.  The galls caused by Anguillulina  
balsamophila  (Thorne) Goodey on the leave s of 
Wyethia amplexicaulis  Nutt.  and  Balsamorhiza 
sagittata  Nutt. Journal of Helminthology.  22(2): 
109- 116. 
Herman, F. 1966.  Notes on Western Range Forbs.   Cruciferae through Compositae.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 293.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service.  United States Government Printing 
Office.  365 p.  
Monsen,  S., Stevens, R, Shaw, N., comps, 2004.  
Restoring western ran ges and wildlands.  Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS -GTR -136- vol-2.  Fort Collins, CO.  U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station.  P 295 -698 plus index 
Montana Field Guide, Online.  Large -leaved balsamroot.  
http://fieldguide.mt. gov (Accessed June 11, 2012)  
Native Seed Network.  http://www.nativeseednetwork.org  (Accessed June 15, 2012)  
Ogle, D., St. John, L., Cornwell, J., Stannard, M.,  Holzworth, L.  2008.  Pasture and Range Seedings: 
Planning -Installation -Evaluation- Management.   
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Technical Note No. 
10.  Boise, Idaho.  35p.  
PLANTS Database. Balsamorhiza macrophylla.  
[Online].  http://plants.usda.gov. U.S. Department of  Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(Accessed June 11, 2012).
 
Plants of Utah.  Cutleaf balsamroot.   http://extension.usu.edu/rangeplants/htm  (Accessed 
June 11, 2012)  
Tilley, D., St. John, L., and Shaw, N. 2012.  Plant Guide  for arrowleaf balsamroot (Balsamorhiza sagittata).  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho.  
5p.  
Treshow, M., and Harper, K. 1974.  Longevity of  perennial forbs and grasses.  Oikos. 25: 93- 96. 
Walter, A. 2007.  Cutleaf (large -leaf) Balsamroot 
( Balsamorhiza macrophylla) .  
http://ehleringer.net/B iology_5460/Veg_Manual 
(Accessed June 11 , 2012 ) 
 
Prepared By : 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
Citation  
St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012.  Plant Guide for cutleaf 
ba lsamroot ( Balsamorhiza  macrophylla). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Published  June, 2012 
Edited:  15June2012ls;  15June2012djt; 15June2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER