Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHEATGRASS 
Bromus tectorum  L. 
Plant Symbol = BRTE  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center; Idaho NRCS State Office; and University of 
California, Department of Botany; partial funding 
from the USGS and the US National Biological 
Information Infrastructure 
 
Caution: This plant is highly invasive. 
 
Alternate Names 
Downy brome, downy bromegrass, downy chess, 
early chess, slender chess,  drooping chess, junegrass, 
and bronco-grass 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control:  due to being a winter annual 
species with a shallow root system, cheatgrass is 
considered a poor erosion  control plant particularly 
during periods of extended drought. 
 
Invasive to Noxious Traits : Cheatgrass or downy 
brome is native to the Mediterranean region.  In  Europe, its original habita
t was the decaying straw of 
thatched roofs.  ‘ Tectum’ is Latin for roof, hence the 
name Bromus tectorum, ‘brome of the roofs’.   
 
Introduced into the United States in packing 
materials, ship ballast and  likely as a contaminant of 
crop seed, cheatgrass was first found in the United 
States near Denver, Colorado, in the late 1800s 
(Whitson et al. 1991).  In the late 1800’s and early 
1900’s, it spread explosively in the ready-made seed-
beds prepared by the trampling livestock hooves of 
overstocked rangelands.  Disturbance associated with 
homesteading and cultivation of winter wheat also 
accelerated its spread and establishment.  By the 
1930’s, cheatgrass was becoming the dominant grass 
over vast areas of the Pacific Northwest and the 
Intermountain West regions and the “worst” western 
range weed.  
Hitchcock (1950) 
 
Cheatgrass has developed into a severe weed in 
several agricultural systems throughout North 
America, particularly western pastureland, rangeland, 
and winter wheat fields.  It is now estimated to infest 
more than 41 million hectar es (101 million acres) in 
western states (Mack 1981).   
 
Winter wheat growers in  the western United States 
proclaim it as their worst weed problem.  In the 
Palouse winter wheat c ountry of the Pacific 
Northwest, at high density, it reduces wheat yields by 
an average of 27% (FICMNEW, 1997). It can reduce 
seed yield of winter rye as  much as 33%.  In winter 
wheat and alfalfa fields, it is especially troublesome, 
because of its ability to reproduce prior to crop and 
hay harvesting (Peepers 1984).  It is an aggressive 
invader of sagebrush, pinyon-juniper, mountain brush 
and other shrub communities, where it often 
completely out-competes native grasses and forbs.  
Approximately five million  hectares of overgrazed 
rangeland in Idaho and Utah  are covered by almost 
pure stands of cheatgrass (FICMNEW 1997).  
Serious problems with downy brome have been 
reported in the New England nursery trade and in 
orchards (Morrow & Stahlman 1984). 
 
Stands of cheatgrass on western rangeland are highly 
flammable in late spring through early fall after 
maturation, which usually occurs long before native 
species mature and enter summer and autumn 
dormancy.  Consequently, its  presence, in altering the 
timing and occurrence of range and forest fires, 
negatively impacts other species.

Livestock: Although cheatgrass provides good quality 
forage early in the season, the plants mature quickly; 
initially turning reddish before completely curing to a 
tan- buff color.  Forage yields fluctuate widely with 
changes in annual precip itation. The best forage 
quality is in late winter to mid spring and it must be 
grazed early in the growing season. Moreover, under 
drought situations the pr esence of cheatgrass causes 
rapid depletion of early season soil moisture, thus 
serving to out-compete, retard or prevent the 
establishment of perennial grasses (Welsh 1981).  
 
Mature plants are unpalatable, the characteristic 
drooping seed heads becoming brittle as the plant 
dries, shattering upon disturbance and disseminating 
the sharp-tipped seeds with their barbed awns.  These 
sharp-tipped seeds work their way into the eyes, 
nostrils, mouths, and intestines of grazing animals.  
Put succinctly by Aldo Leopold (1949), he writes “to 
appreciate the predicament of a cow trying to eat 
mature cheat, try walking through it in low shoes.  
All field workers in cheat c ountry wear high boots.”  
Leopold was perhaps one of the first authors to bring 
to the general public an awareness of the impact of 
cheatgrass in the west.  In his essay “Cheat Takes 
Over,” he addresses the ecological implications of its 
establishment with clarity and humor.  His list of 
negative impacts and noxious characteristics are: 
 
•   replacement of rich and useful native 
bunchgrasses and wheatgrasses with the inferior 
cheat; 
•   prickly awns that, when mature, cause cheat-
sores in the mouths of cows and sheep; 
•   extreme flammability of cheat-covered lands that 
results in burn-back of  winter forage such as 
sagebrush, bitterbrush, and perennial grasses, 
and destruction of winter cover for wildlife; 
•   degradation of hay following invasion of alfalfa 
fields; and 
•   blockading of newly-hatched ducklings from 
making the vital trek from upland nest to 
lowland water. 
 
Vectors: Overgrazing and misuse of western 
rangelands has resulted in trampling of native 
bunchgrasses and destructio n of the soil surface and 
sometimes cryptogam layer, resulting in an increase 
in evaporation of soil moisture and reduction of 
bunchgrass population.  Such disturbance favors the 
invasion of cheatgrass, whose seedlings become 
established during fall through late winter before the 
principal germination and growth period of native 
taxa.  Homesteading and cultivation of winter wheat, 
beginning with the railroad boom of the 1880s,  disturbed the land even fu
rther, and accelerated the 
introduction and establishment of cheatgrass. 
 
Cultivation of land for winter wheat prepares a 
seedbed. The lack of the use of selective herbicides 
for the control of cheatgrass has aided its increase 
and spread. 
 
The barbed awns of the florets penetrate or adhere 
readily to fur or clothing.   When vehicles are driven 
across cheatgrass- infested land, seeds become 
lodged in clothing, tire trea ds, in cracks and crevices, 
and in mud of tires and bumpers, to be dislodged 
perhaps hundreds of miles distant.  Since its 
introduction, cheatgrass has  been spread far and wide 
by livestock, by trains and other vehicles, and by 
wildlife and livestock.  Seeds, maturing before 
harvest of alfalfa and winter wheat, contaminate hay 
and grain. 
 
Wildlife:  Deer and elk make some use of cheatgrass 
in late winter to early spring while it is green and 
prior to other grasses and forbs beginning growth. It 
seems to be very important food, cover and nesting 
habitat for Hungarian partridge and chukar. Canada 
geese graze cheatgrass heavily in fall, winter and 
early spring. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Cheatgrass is an 
annual or winter annual, softly downy to short-hairy 
throughout, and generally 10- 60cm (4- 24 in) tall.   
 
Stems are solitary or in a few-stemmed tuft. Ligules 
are short (usually 1- 2 mm long), membranous, and 
fringed at the top; auricles  are lacking.  Leaf blades 
are up to 20 cm (8 in) long, flat, relatively narrow, 
usually 2- 5 mm wide (1/8- 3/16 in), and generally 
long-ciliate near the base.   
 
The roots are fibrous and usually quite shallow; the 
plants do not root at the nodes.  The inflorescence is a 
soft and drooping, much-branched, open panicle, 
usually becoming a dull red- purple color as it 
matures to a tan- buff color when fully cured.  
Spikelets are about 1.5- 2.0 cm (0.6- 0.8 in) long with 
3- 6 florets. Florets are 12- 19 mm (1/2- 3/4 in) long, 
tapering to sharp points. The glumes are shorter than 
the florets, the first 1-veined and the second 3-veined.  
Lemmas are sharply tipped, glabrous to densely 
hairy, more-or-less rounded on the back, and with a

nearly straight awn that is 7- 18 mm (3/8- 5/8 in) 
long.  Flowering occurs from April to mid June 
depending on climate and location.   
 
Reproduction is by seed.  Germination occurs in fall 
through winter to early spring, depending on the 
climate and rainfall (Hickman 1993; Gleason & 
Cronquist 1991; Cronquist et al. 1977; Muenscher 
1955; Uva et al. 1997). 
 
Adaptation 
Cheatgrass grows in rainfall areas receiving 6- 22 
inches or more. It does particularly well under 
conditions where rainfall occurs in fall, winter and 
early spring. During periods of multiple year drought, 
it may almost disappear from the plant community 
only to return in very lush stands as moisture 
conditions improve. 
 
Cheatgrass prefers well drained soils of any soil 
texture. It is not well adapted to saline or sodic soil 
conditions or soils that are too wet.  
 
Cheatgrass can be found at almost any elevation, but 
it does particularly well at elevations ranging from 
500- 6,000 feet. 
 
Distribution 
Cheatgrass is one of the most widespread introduced 
annual grasses in the North  America, occurring in all 
50 states as well as in most of the Canadian provinces 
and also in parts of Mexico.  It is most common 
where annual rainfall ranges from 15-55 cm (6- 22 
in) and autumn rainfall ranges from 5-12 cm (2- 6 in) 
(Peepers 1984).  It is a weed of roadsides, cropland, 
hayland, pastureland, ra ngeland and waste places, 
usually occurring on dry, sometimes weakly alkaline,  clayey to loamy to sandy or gravelly soils.  
Cheatgrass is especially common in the western 
states including the Columbia Basin, Snake River 
Basin and the Great Basin (Morrow & Stahlman 
1984).  Uncommon or sporadic in the southeastern 
part of the United States, it is abundant over large 
areas of sagebrush plant communities, where whole 
landscapes are lush green, turning red- purplish by 
the developing inflorescences, then a tan- straw- buff 
color as the plants mature and cure.   
 Hitchcock (1950) 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
This species is not recommended for seeding. 
 
Control 
Contact your local extension specialist or county 
weed specialist for assistance on recommendations 
for cheatgrass control in your area. Tillage and 
chemicals are the most 
common control methods. 
When using chemicals, it is important to always read 
and follow label and safety instructions. Trade names 
and control measures that a ppear in this document are 
only to provide specific information.  USDA, NRCS 
does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective.  
 
Environmental and Mechanical : Environmental 
practices, which minimize the further spread of 
cheatgrass, are suggeste d by knowledge of the 
circumstances, which have accompanied its spread.  
Vehicles, clothing, camp gear, and pets should be 
cleaned of adhering seed after driving, camping, and 
walking in cheatgrass-infested areas.  Excessive 
roadside and rangeland disturbance should be 
avoided.  In cultivated fields, mowing cheatgrass 
before seeds are formed and clean cultivation assist 
in control. Infested meadows and pastures can be 
harrowed while seedlings are small (Muenscher 
1955).  In cropland and hayland, the best control is 
often achieved by fallowing or planting continuous 
spring crops for two or more years (Kennedy et al. 
1989). 
 
Biological : Soil bacteria which cause crown rot may 
be a potential biological control for cheatgrass in the 
arid environment of wester n North America (Grey et 
al. 1995).  The crown rot  causing soil bacteria has 
been found to produce a toxin that is specific for 
cheatgrass and related species.  Studies have shown 
that these bacteria can be used to suppress the growth 
of cheatgrass, thus resulting in substantial increases 
in winter wheat yields (Kennedy et al. 1989).

Applications of a strain (D7) of Rhizobacterium have 
been shown to selectively suppress cheatgrass in 
winter wheat test plots by means of a phytotoxin 
produced by the bacteria (Tranel et al. 1993), 
apparently by inhibition of root elongation. 
 
Chemical : Non-selective herbicides are presently the 
primary chemical available fo r control of cheatgrass.  
Since non-selective herbicides can kill all vegetation 
they contact, not just the pr oblem weed, care must be 
taken that they do not contact desirable plants. 
 
The chemical fluazifop ha s been shown to prevent 
seed formation in cheatgra ss, most successfully when 
applied early in the reproductive phase (Richardson 
et al. 1987.  Metribuzin or Metribuzin plus terbutryn, 
fall-applied, have succeeded in reducing cheatgrass 
infestations and increasing wheat yields.  The 
combination results in better control.  Sulfonylurea 
herbicides have been shown to increase winter wheat 
yields when used for cheatgrass control. 
 
Other herbicides that have been recommended for 
cheatgrass management include glyphosate, 
bromacil, imidazolinone and tebuthiuron.   
 
Formulations containing glyphosate are marketed as 
JURY, RATTLER, ROUNDUP, and RODEO.  
Those containing bromacil are sold as HYVAR X 
and HYVAR X-L. Those co ntaining imidazolinone 
are sold as Plateau. Tebuthiuron is sold as SPIKE 
80W. 
 
Glyphosate controls cheatgrass by inhibition of 
biosynthesis of amino acids.  It is applied to above 
ground parts, since the activ e ingredient is adsorbed 
and made inactive by soil particles.  Following 
absorption, glyphosate is translocated to underground 
structures and should thus be applied during active 
growth.  Growth is inhibited soon after application, 
and foliar chlorosis and necrosis are seen within 10-
20 days.  Contact with formulations of glyphosate 
should be avoided.   Ingestion requires emergency 
medical attention . 
 
Bromacil inhibits photosynthesis.  It is readily 
absorbed through the root system and is then 
translocated to foliage.  It is applied as a spray just 
before or during the period of active growth, 
preferably when rain can be expected for soil 
activation.  Application near desirable plants or 
grazing of cattle in treated areas should be avoided.  
After the herbicide has been carried into the root zone 
by rain, leaf chlorosis and defoliation occur within a 
week.  Contact with bromacil may irritate eyes, nose, 
throat, and skin.  In case of contact, flush eyes  copiously with water and wash skin with soap and 
water.  
Get medical attention if irritation persists . 
 
Tebuthiuron is a pre- and post-emergence herbicide 
used for total control of vegetation.  A small amount 
of the herbicide in contact with roots of desirable 
plants may kill them.  It produces browning of 
vegetation within one week, which suggests that it 
acts through photosynthesis inhibition.  It is absorbed 
principally through the roots, and is readily 
translocated.  For best results it should be applied 
before spring growth begins.  At least one inch of 
rainfall is needed to activate the herbicide and place it 
in the seed germination zone, so it should be applied 
before the predominant portion of annual rainfall 
occurs.  It may not be fully  effective on clay soils or 
those high in organic matter.  Tebuthiuron should not 
contact skin, clothing, or ey es (causes eye irritation).  
If it gets on skin or in eyes, wash with plenty of 
water; if swallowed, or if breathing difficulty 
develops from inhalation, get emergency medical 
attention.  
 
Imidazolinone, sold as Plateau is a pre- and post-
emergence herbicide used for partial to total control 
of vegetation. Plateau herbicide may be used for 
control of brome grass speci es and tall fescue. It can 
be used for the release of most other wheatgrasses, 
native grasses, wildflowers and certain legumes. It is 
readily absorbed through l eaves, stems, and roots and 
is translocated rapidly throughout the plant, with 
accumulation in the meristematic regions.  Treated 
plants stop growing soon after spray application.  
Adequate soil moisture is important for optimum 
herbicide activity.  When adequate soil moisture is 
present, it will provide residual control of susceptible 
germinating weeds.  Activity on established weeds 
will depend on the weed species and rooting depth. 
Post emergence application  is the method of choice 
in most situations, particularly for perennial species. 
It may be applied in the dormant or growing season 
for weed control. Tolerance of desirable grass species 
to Plateau herbicide may be reduced when grasses are 
stressed due to insect damage, disease, environmental 
conditions, shade, poorly  drained soils or other 
causes. It should not be applied to newly seeded or 
sprigged grass stands, unless stated in label.   
 
References 
Abrams, L. 1923.   An illustrated flora of the Pacific 
States .  Vol. 1.  Stanford Un iversity Press, Stanford, 
California. 
 
Albee, B.J., L.M. Shultz, & S. Goodrich 1988.   Atlas 
of the vascular plants of Utah .  Utah Museum of 
Natural History Occasiona l Publication No. 7.

Blackshaw, R. E. 1991.  Control of downy brome 
(Bromus tectorum) in conservation fallow systems .  
1991 Weed Tech. 5:557-562.  
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  Columbia University Press, New 
York, New York. 
 
FICMNEW (Federal Interagency Committee for the 
Management of Noxious and Exotic Weeds) 1997.  
Invasive plants – changing the landscape of America .  
Washington, D.C. 
 
Gleason, H. A., & A. Cronquist 1991.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York. 
 
Gray, W. E., P.C. Quinby Jr., D.E. Mathre, & J. A. 
Youngll 1995.  Weed Tech 9:362-365. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Kennedy, A. C., F. L. Young, & L. F. Elliot 1989.  
Proceedings Western Soci ety Weed Science 42:86. 
 
Leopold, A. 1949.   A Sand County Almanac, and 
sketches here and there .  Oxford Univ.  
Press, New York, New York. 
 
Mack, R. 1981.   Invasion of Bromus tectorum L. into 
western North America; an ecological chronical .  
Agro-ecosystems 7:145-165. 
 
Morrow, L. A. & P. W. Stahlman 1984.   The history 
and distribution of downy brome (Bromus  
tectorum) in North America .  North America Weed 
Science 32: supplement. 
 
Muenscher, W.C. 1955.   Weeds.  The Macmillan Co., 
New York, New York. 
 
Peeper, T. F. 1984.  Chemical and biological control 
of downy brome.  North Am erican Weed Science 32. 
 
Richardson, J. M., D. R. Gealy, & L. A. Morrow 
1987.  Weed Science 35: 277-281. 
  USDA, NRCS 2000.  
The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000412.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Uva, R.H., J.C. Neal, & J.M. DiTomaso 1997.  
Weeds of the northeast .  Cornell University Press, 
Ithaca, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Welsh, S. L., et al. 1987.   A Utah flora.  Great Basin 
Naturalist Memoirs No. 9.  Brigham Young 
University, Provo, Utah. 
 
Whitson, T.D. (ed.) 1991.   Weeds of the west.  
Western Society of Weed  Science, University of 
Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming. 
 
Prepared By 
Mark Skinner, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 
Daniel G. Ogle,  Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, 
NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John , Manager, USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
James Briggs , Regional Plant Materials Specialist, 
USDA, NRCS, Portland, Oregon 
 
Elizabeth Neese 
University of California, Botany Department, 
Berkeley, California (deceased) 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Skinner 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 10feb03ahv; 25may06jsp; 14oct08dgo; 01oct08lsj; 
01oct08jb 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local 
NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web 
site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all 
its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, 
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or 
family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's 
TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil 
Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, 
Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.