Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GROUNDSEL TREE 
Baccharis halimifolia L. 
Plant Symbol = BAHA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Eastern baccharis, silverling, sea myrtle, manglier, 
consumption weed, saltbush 
 
Uses 
The native groundsel tree  is recommended as a 
garden shrub or hedge in Florida because of its 
hardiness, freedom from disease, fall flowering, and 
resistance to salt spray.  The female plants, in 
particular, with their densely silver-green aspect, are 
beautiful when few other plants are flowering.  Plants 
can be trained to a single trunk – tree-like and up to 
10 feet tall.  It is a useful shrub for reclaiming moist  or wet sites, including retention areas and drainage 
ponds.    
 
Although it apparently has little or no value as a good 
food source for game animals (“wildlife”), groundsel 
tree provides cover and nesting habitat for various 
species of birds.  Bees and small butterflies use the 
abundant nectar from the male
 flowers, which in turn 
attract songbirds to forage on the insects.   
 ©  William S. Justice Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Deciduous 
shrubs 1-2(-6) m tall, sometimes single-stemmed 
from the base and tree-lik e.  Leaves: deciduous, 
obovate to elliptic or narrowly elliptic-oblanceolate, 
3-nerved, 2-6 cm long, smooth-margined or with 1 
tooth or 1-3 pairs of coarse teeth on the upper 
margins, the surfaces sligh tly resinous, usually with 
small dots.  Florets closely clustered in heads 
surrounded by involucral bracts, the heads borne in 
tight aggregations; heads of two sexes, each produced 
on a separate plant (the species dioecious) –– the 
staminate heads (pollen-pr oducing, with sterile 
ovaries) with only tubular, 5-lobed corollas; the 
pistillate heads (with fertile  ovaries) with only thread-
like corollas.  Fruits (“cy pselae” or achenes) are 1-
seeded, nearly cylindric, 1.3-1.8 mm long, topped by 
a ring of numerous, slender, flexible, silvery-white 
bristles (the “pappus”), which elongates at achene 
maturity to 10-12 mm long, much longer than the 
involucre.  The small fruits are shed with the pappus, 
a wind-catcher that enables fruit dispersal over a 
wide area.  In a steady wind of about 17 km/hour, 
drift of seeds from a shrub two meters in height has 
been recorded up to 140 meters.  The common name 
“silverling” alludes to the silvery aspect of pistillate 
plants in the fall, when the pappus of each maturing 
fruit elongates and protrudes from the head.   
 
Variation within the species : Plants of this species 
from the West Indies have been called Baccharis 
halimifolia  var. angustior  DC., but there appears to 
be little justification for their formal recognition.  
Baccharis halimifolia closely resembles the Mexican 
species  Baccharis heterophylla  Kunth.  Where both 
occur in Veracruz, Mexico,  B. halimifolia can be

recognized by its habitats along the coast or coastal 
plain, its more gradate, blunt-tipped involucral bracts, 
and its longer pappus.  Plants from central Nuevo 
León, Mexico, have narrower leaves than typical for 
B. halimifolia , but in most respects they are more 
similar to it than to  B. heterophylla.   Baccharis 
halimifolia  hybridizes with  B. neglecta Britt. where 
the two meet in east Texas.   
 
Groundsel tree is a member of the sunflower family, 
but the sunflower-like nature of the heads is not 
evident without close inspection.   Baccharis 
halimifolia  is the species upon  which the concept of 
the genus  Baccharis is based (the type species).   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Groundsel tree occurs in all states bordering the 
Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico, plus the 
Caribbean and into northeastern Mexico as far south 
as Veracruz and San Luis Potosí.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Groundsel tree grows on beaches, 
marshes and hammocks near the shore, and various 
more inland sites, including ditches, old fields, and 
roadsides.  Flowering in  the United States occurs 
mainly in August-December.   
General : Plants of groundsel tree as young as 3 years 
may produce viable seed.  Because it is dioecious, 
male and female plants are necessary for seed 
production.  There is no dormancy requirement for 
germination.  Other reasons for its colonizing success 
are prolific seed production and high seed 
germination percentage, long-range seed dispersal, 
shade tolerant seed production, wide adaptability to 
soil nutrients and salinity, survival in extreme wet 
soil conditions, and ability to resprout after fire.    
 
Groundsel tree can be cultivated in a sunny location.  
It does not tolerate heavy clay soils but can be 
successfully grown in nutrient-poor soil.  Most native 
coastal plain habitats are sa ndy.  In its resistance to 
salt spray, it is useful in coastal situations.  It is a 
fast-growing plant and will quickly regrow, even if 
cut back to the base.   
 
Management  
Probably from initial introductions of groundsel tree 
as an ornamental into west ern Europe (France, Spain, 
and Italy) and Queensland, Australia, it has become 
an invasive weed, rapidly occupying open sites and 
encroaching into grasslan d and parkland.  Because 
animals apparently find it unpalatable (the leaves and 
flowers contain a cardioactive glycoside), it is  common to see the species growing in abundance in 
pastureland.  Groundsel tree is toxic to livestock, 
causing staggering, trembling, convulsions, diarrhea, 
and other gastrointestinal symptoms, but this feature 
is less significant than the displacement of other 
vegetation through its rapid colonization.  This native 
species has been regarded as an “infestation” on 
overgrazed rangeland in the southern United States.   
 
Various native species of beetles and moths are 
known to feed on leaves and buds of 
Baccharis.  
Larvae and adults of several of these are capable of 
defoliating plants of groundsel tree.  North American 
gall-forming midges, seed-feeding bugs, and stem 
borers also cause damage and some have been 
introduced into Australia as agents of biological 
control for  Baccharis halimifolia .   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government”.  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Boldt, P.E. 1989.  Baccharis, (Asteraceae), a review 
of its taxonomy, phytochemistry, ecology, economic 
status, natural enemies and the potential for its 
biological control in the United States .  MP 1674, 
Texas Agric. Expt. Station, Texas A&M Univ., 
College Station, Texas. 
 
Cronquist, A. 1980.   Vascular Flora of the 
Southeastern United States.  Vol. 1.  Asteraceae .  
Univ. of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina. 
 
Nesom, G.L. 1990.   Infrageneric taxonomy of North 
and Central American Baccharis  (Asteraceae: 
Astereae).  Phytologia 69:40–46.  
 
Zanowiak, D.J. 1991.   An analysis of systematic and 
phyletic relationships within the Baccharidinae 
(Asteraceae: Astereae) .  Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas 
A&M University, College Station, Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina

Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp;10feb03ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.