CANE BLUESTEM 
Bothriochloa barbinodis  (Lag.) 
Herter  
Plant Symbol = BOBA3  Figure 1. Cane bluestem panicle (Photo by Mary Hershdorfer, USDA-
NRCS.  Tucson Plant Materials Center) 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  
Cane beardgrass, feather bluestem, 
plains beardgrass, and pinhole 
bluestem. 
Scientific Names:  Andropogon barbinodis ( Lag.) Description
 
General :  Cane bluestem is a native, coarse perennial , 
warm season bunchgrass.  It typically grows 2-4 feet tall.  
The leaves are wide, fairly long, occurring basally and on 
the flower stalks, bluish green, and cure to a dull red or 
yellow.  Seeds are borne in tufts of silvery hair on the end 
of the long seed stalks.  The fan shaped panicles appear 
silvery white due to the long tufts of hair and awns on the 
paired spikelets.   The seeds stalks are usually 2 to 4 
inches long and about twice as long as wide ( Ruyle and 
Young 2013).  Cane bluestem is very similar to silver 
bluestem ( Bothriochloa saccharoides ) in habit and  appearance, however, the nodes are not as noticeably 
bearded as cane bluestem (Shreve and Wiggins, 1964). 
 
Distribution
:  Cane bluestem is commonly found in 
Ar izona, New Mexico, western Texas, and north-central 
Mexico (Gucker, 2011). 
 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat :  Cane bluestem can be found growing on open, 
sandy or gravelly ground, and rocky slopes.  It is 
particularly abundant along graded roadsides, banks of 
washes, railroad rights of way, or other places where the 
soil has been exposed (USDA-NRCS, 2013; Ruyle and 
Young,  2003). 
Cane bluestem is most common in the semi-desert 
grassland, oak woodland, chaparral, and short grass plains 
types . 
 It is usually found as scattered plants or in small 
groups, but seldom in pure stands (Judd, 1962).  In Oak 
woodlands of Arizona, it is often an understory co-
dominant with side oats gram a (Bouteloua curtipendula ), 
Hairy grama ( Bouteloua hirsuta ), threeawn (Aristida 
spp.), and plains love grass ( Eragrostis intermedia) 
(Carmichael et. al., 1978).  Cane bluestem is common at 
elevations ranging from 1,600 to 3,900 feet, however, 
elevations beyond this range have been reported ( Gucker, 
2011).  
Adaptation 
Cane bluestem can be found growing on a variety of soil 
types and textures, but growth may be best on calcareous , 
deep loams, or sandy loams.  Cane bluestem is also 
common on microsites that support pooling water after 
high precipitation events ( Gucker, 2011).   This species is 
important in the southwest since it grows in relatively dry 
habitat.  It can grow where annual precipitation ranges 
from 5-7 inches,  if supplemented by occasional flooding 
from heavy summer showers (Judd, 1962).  This species 
produces best in areas receiving 12-16 inches of rainfall 
(Pater and Munda 2002). 
Uses 
Forage:   Cane bluestem, when actively growing, provides 
fair to good forage for cattle and sheep.  However, dry 
plants are low in nutrients as they leach readily (Gay and 
Dwyer, 1984 ).  It is a good indicator of proper grazing, 
since it is one of the first species to disappear when a 
range is excessively utilized (Judd, 1962). 
 
Conservation:   
Cane bluestem may be used as  an erosion 
control plant on rangelands and critical areas such as 
abandoned cropland and road cuts.   It also has beneficial 
qualities for food and/or cover for wildlife species

including gamble’s quail, dove, rabbits, and other small 
rodents (Pater and Munda, 2002). 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  No 
Wetland Indicator:  Obligate Upland-UPL (USDA-
NRCS, 2014) 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
The recommended seeding rate for a solid stand (100%) 
cane bluestem is 1.4 pure live seed (PLS) pounds per acre 
with a drill and approximately 2.8 PLS pounds per acre, if 
seed is broadcast.  If planting as a component of seeding 
mixture, adjust rate based on 25 seeds per square feet 
(Garner et. al., 2002; Pater and Munda, 2002).  Cane 
bluestem has approximately 754,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Successful seed establishment is reported to increase 
when seeds were planted during the summer rainy season 
(Gucker, 2011).  In southern Arizona, the recommended 
planting period is from late June to late August.  Seed 
should be planted into a firm, weed-free seedbed at a 
depth of ¼- ½ inch.  Broadcast seeding should be 
followed with a cultipacker or harrow to provide seed 
with a shallow covering of soil. 
 
Management 
Cane bluestem is considered a decreaser species and will 
decline if overgrazed.  The presence of cane bluestem is 
considered an indicator of good range condition (Judd, 
1962).  Cane bluestem tends to be coarse and fibrous, 
however, it has been rated as fair to good forage when 
green (Gould, 1978). 
 
Experimental grazing studies with cane bluestem stress 
the importance of avoiding continuous and heavy grazing 
of cane bluestem to maintain a vigorous and productive 
stand (Gucker, 2011). 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No specific pests or potential problems were noted in the 
literature reviewed. 
Environmental Concerns 
No negative environmental impacts were found in the 
literature reviewed. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
For commercial seed increases, cane bluestem should be 
planted in the early spring into a firm, weed free seedbed 
at a ¼ depth with 24-38 inches within row spacing.  Row 
spacing can vary from 24-38 inches.  The planting should 
be irrigated to maintain a moist soil surface and to avoid 
soil crusting.  Pre-emergent herbicide may be used to 
control weeds after the plants have reached the 3-5 leaf 
stage (Garner, 2004; USDA-NRCS, 2004). 
 
Commercial seed production of cane bluestem may 
require from 40 to 60 pounds per acre of available 
nitrogen per year and should be irrigated approximately 
every four weeks during the growing season.  Application 
of phosphorus and potassium fertilizer should be done 
according to soil test results (Garner, 2004). 
 
Seed production fields of cane bluestem may be harvested 
with a seed stripper.  The harvested seed can be cleaned 
by using a brush huller scarifier with a #12 screen to 
remove the hairs and awns from the seed heads.  Seeds 
may then be separated from the chaff using a clipper air 
screen seed cleaner with a #9 top screen and a 45x45 
bottom screen. (Garner et. al., 2002). 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
 
Saltillo origin 
Cane bluestem, was released in 2002 by the USDA-
NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center in cooperation with 
the Agricultural Research Service and the University of 
Arizona Agricultural Experiment Station.  This release 
was selected for its superior vigor, forage production, and 
tolerance to drought and cold (Pater and Munda, 2002). 
 
Grant Germplasm 
This germplasm was released in 2001 by the USDA-
NRCS New Mexico Plant Materials Center and New 
Mexico State University Agricultural Science Center at 
Los Lunas, New Mexico.  It was selected for superior 
forage and seed yield (Garner, et al., 2001) 
 
Literature Cited 
Buechner, Helmut K. 1950. Life History, ecology, and 
Range Use of the Pronghorn Antelope in Trans-Pecos 
Texas. American Midland Naturalist. 43(2):257-354. 
Carmichael, R.S., O.D. Knipe, C.P. Pase, W. W. Brady. 
1978.  Arizona Chaparral: Plant associations and 
ecology. RES. Pap. RM-202. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, CO 80523 
Gucker, Corey L. 2011. Bothriochloa barbinodis. In: Fire 
Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(Producer). Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 15 July 
2014; verified 18 July2014).

Gay, C. W., and D. D. Dwyer. 1984.  New Mexico Range 
Plants.  Circular374.  New Mexico State University, 
Cooperative Extension Service.  Las Cruces, NM. 
88003. 
Garner, E. R., M. Jespersen, and D. Goodson.  2001.  
Notice of Release of a Selection of Cane Bluestem 
Selected Class of Germplasm.  USDA-NRCS, New 
Mexico Plant Materials Center.  Los Lunas, NM 
87031 
Garner, E.R. 2004.  Native Plant production. USDA-
NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center. Tucson, 
Arizona 85705 
Garner, E.R., B. Munda, and M. Pater.  2002. USDA-
NRCS, Tucson Plant Materials Center.  Cane 
Bluestem, Plant Fact Sheet. Tucson, AZ 85705 
Gould, Frank W. 1978. Common Texas Grasses. Texas 
A&M University Press, College Station, TX. 267p. 
Humphrey, Robert R. 1970. Arizona Range Grasses: 
Their description, forage value and management. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 159p. 
Judd, B. I.  1962.  Principal Forage Plants of Southwest 
Ranges.  Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. Colorado State University.  Fort 
Collins, CO 80523. 
Pater, M. and B. Munda.  2002.  Notice of Release of 
Selection of Cane Bluestem Saltillo Origin.  USDA-
NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center.  Tucson, AZ 
85705 
Ruyle, G.B. and. J. Young (eds.) 2003. Arizona range 
grasses: their description, forage value, and grazing 
management.  University of Arizona Cooperative 
Extension.  College of Agriculture.  Tucson, Arizona 
85716. 
USDA, NRCS. 2013. Conservation Plant Release 
Brochure for Saltillo Origin Germplasm cane 
bluestem (Bothriochloa barbinodis (Lag.) Herter). 
Tucson Plant Materials Center, Tucson, AZ 85705. 
USDA-NRCS.  2004.  Field Office Technical Guide, 
Section IV: Range Planting - Code550. Conservation 
Practices Standards and Specifications for Arizona. 
USDA, NRCS. 2014. The PLANTS Database. Available 
at http://plants.usda.gov (verified 9 July 2014). National 
Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401-4901 USA. 
 
Citation 
E.R. Garner, B.D., Munda, and M. Pater.  2014.  Plant 
Guide for cane bluestem (Bothriochloa barbinoides). ed. 
rev. M. Rosales, 2014. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Tucson Plant Materials Center, 
Tucson, AZ 85705 
Published:  September 2002 
 
Edited: 23jul2014 mr 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER