Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAY BIRCH 
Betula populifolia Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = BEPO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Betula alba var. populifolia, Betula populifolia  forma 
purpurea , fire birch, old field birch, poverty birch, 
white birch, wire birch. 
 
Uses 
Conservation:  Gray birch is a pioneer species that 
can tolerate multiple soil conditions.  It is a good 
hardwood species for use in the revegetation of mine 
spoils and other disturbed areas. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used a bark 
decoction of gray birch on swollen or infected cuts. 
 
Landscaping:  Gray birch is an attractive tree that is 
often used as a winter landscape plant or when space 
limitations require the use of trees with a smaller 
stature.  It can also be planted as a nurse tree to 
protect more valuable pines in the landscape that 
require protection to become established. 
 
Wildlife:  Beavers and porcupines chew the bark of 
gray birch.  Sapsuckers consume sap and songbirds 
consume the seeds.  Ruffed  grouse eat the catkins and 
buds.  Snowshoe hare, moose, and white-tailed deer 
browse the twigs.  Gray birch also provides cover for 
the bobcat and hare in Maine. 
 
 
 
 
Wood products: Gray birch is often used for fuel.  It 
is also popularly used for woodenware such as 
spools, spindles, and other turned articles. 
 
Legal Status 
Gray birch is extinct in  Delaware, endangered in 
Illinois, extirpated in Indiana, potentially threatened 
in Ohio, and rare in Maryland.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov) and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious stat us, and wetland indicator 
values). 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock.  1995 USDA NRCS 
 
Description 
General : Birch Family (Betulaceae).  Gray birch can 
be distinguished from Betula papyrifera by its tight, 
non-exfoliating bark.  Other key characteristics 
include: tapered, sharp leaf tips (acuminate) and 
black triangular bark patches on branch bases.  
Several trees occur in a cluster, growing from the 
same root group. 
 
Gray birch is a rapid grower (0.6 m per year) and 
short-lived (approximately 20 years).  The trees begin 
producing fruit at 8 years of age. 
    
Gray birch grows to 10 m tall; trunks are seldom over 
1.5 dm thick.  Bark is chalky-white with black 
triangular markings.  Leaves are acuminate, with 
serrated edges near the tip.  Male catkins (elongated 
flower clusters) are yellow and 1.3 to 3 cm long.  
Female catkins are stouter and resemble cones in 
appearance.  Flowering takes place between April 
and May.  Fruit sets in late summer to fall, and seeds 
are wind dispersed during late fall and winter. 
 
Distribution : Gray birch is native to the northeastern 
United States.  It occurs from Nova Scotia to 
Southern Quebec, south to New Jersey and 
Pennsylvania, with outlying populations in southern 
Ontario, northern Ohio, northeast Indiana, and south 
to the North Carolina mountains.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Gray birch is an early colonizer of poor 
sites, road cuts, and burned areas.  It is listed as a 
common associate of the aspen-birch and beech-
birch-maple communities in the northeastern 
hardwood forest.  However, it is not an indicator any 
particular habitat type.

Adaptation 
The USDA Hardiness zones for gray birch are 3 to 8.  
It grows best on moist, well-drained soil along 
streams, ponds, lakes, and swamps but also on dry 
sandy or gravelly soils.  Gray birch can grow in 
inorganic soils of slopes and hillsides but growth is 
slow.  Soils with high pH can cause chlorosis of the 
foliage.  It grows easily in sun and partial shade but is 
shade intolerant. 
 
Establishment 
Seed heads (strobiles) should  be collected when they 
are still a little green and then spread out in a dry 
place until strobiles begin to fall apart.  Seeds can be 
easily removed from the strobiles and are best stored 
at 1% to 3% moisture content at 2.2 to 3.3
oC.  Cold 
storage temperatures and exposure to light aid in 
germination.  Birch seeds can be sown after 
collection in the late summer or fall, or in the spring 
after prechilling for 4 to 8  weeks.  Cover seeds with 
soil to one times the depth of the seed (approximately 
3mm).  Greenhouse temperatures should be set at 
alternating temperatures of 30
oC for 8 hours and 20oC 
for 16, with light supplied during the 30oC period.  
Seedlings require light shade during the first 2 to 3 
months of the first summer. 
 
Rooted cuttings can also produce gray birch 
seedlings.  Collect 8 to 10 inch apical cuttings from 
trees in November or late  March to April.  Wound the 
base of each cutting by  making two 1-inch 
longitudinal cuts.  Apply a rooting hormone 
containing approximately  .10% indole-butyric-acid 
(IBA) to the lower portion of the cutting, covering 
the wounds, and place each cutting in a combined 
medium of coarse and fine sand.  If leaves are 
present, remove all but three apical leaves.  Place 
cuttings in a mist bed, keeping the soil temperature at 
22-24
oC.  Rooting will take place within 8 weeks. 
 
Management  
Gray birch is an early colonizer of disturbed sites, 
growing best with little competition from other 
species.  It often forms pure stands from seedlings 
and root suckers. 
 
Gray birch is usually to p-killed by fire, but will 
resprout from root suckers.  The tree can be killed by 
fire during drought periods when soil organic matter 
is too dry to protect the roots.  The species 
accumulates abundant seed banks in the soil.  
Seedling regeneration following fire is probable from 
the seed banks. 
 
Gray birch is prone to injury by snow and ice. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Birch leaf miner is a pest that is disfiguring to the 
foliage, but does not kill the plant.   
Gray birch can be susceptible to the bronze birch 
borer that can cut off sap flow and cause branches to 
die back.  A healthy vigorous tree is much less 
susceptible to attack.  The best way to prevent birch 
borer attack is to plant the birch in a cool, moist, 
shady location and to keep it healthy by watering and 
fertilizing when needed.  A birch tree planted in a 
sunny exposed area may lose vigor and become 
weakened allowing the borers to become established. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
any cultivars of gray birch for conservation use.  
Ornamental cultivars of this species include 
‘Laciniata,’ with pinnately-lobed leaves, ‘Pendula,’ 
with drooping branches, and ‘Purpurea,’ with purple 
young leaves. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brand, M. 2001.  Betula populifolia  
(http://www.hort.uconn.edu/plants/index.html).  
University of Connecticut Plant Database, Storrs. 
 
Coladonato, M. 1992.   Betula populifolia 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis). USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain  Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Ft. Collins.  
 
Gilman, E.F. and D.G. Watson. 2003.  Betula 
populifolia: gray birch  (http://www.umaine.edu/ 
umext/mainetreeclub/Fact SheetsGrayBirch.htm). 
University of Maine Extension Service, Orono. 
 
Karrfalt, R.P. 2004.  Betula L. (http://wpsm.net/ 
Betula.pdf, 9 February 2004). USDA Forest Service, 
National Tree Seed Laboratory, Dry Branch. 
 
Mechling, W.H. 1959. The Malecite Indians with 
notes on the Micmacs.  Anthropologica 8: 239-263. 
 
Mohlenbrock, R.H. 1995.  USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database , Version 3.5 (http://plants.usda.gov, 18 
February 2004).  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge.

Schneider, G. 1993. Betula populifolia, gray birch  
(http://www.dnr.ohio.gov/dnap/heritage/). Ohio 
Department of Natural Resources, Columbus.  
 
Web of Species. 1998.  Gray birch, Betula populifolia  
(http://www.wellesley.edu/Activities/homepage/web/
index.html). Wellesley College, Wellesley.  
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 26Feb2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.