Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RIVER BIRCH 
Betula nigra L. 
Plant Symbol = BENI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
Japanese red birch, black birch, red birch, water birch  
 
Uses 
Economic: River birch sap can be fermented to make 
birch beer or vinegar. The wood is used to 
manufacture inexpensive furniture, woodenware, 
wooden shoes, basket mate rials, toys, staves, and 
fuel. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  The leaves were chewed, or used as an 
infusion in the treatment of dysentery.  An infusion 
of the bark was used to treat stomach problems and 
difficult urination (Moerman 1998). 
 
Landscaping &Wildlife : Betula nigra  is a very 
attractive ornamental tree.  It is a desirable specimen 
for estates, golf courses, parks, and public grounds.  
Many species of birds eat  the seeds including wild 
turkey and grouse.  The l eaves are browsed by white-
tailed deer. 
 
Conservation : River birch is used for strip mine 
reclamation and erosion control (Grelen 1990).  It is 
used in forested riparian buffers to help reduce 
stream bank erosion, protect water quality, and 
enhance aquatic environments. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Birch family (Betulaceae).  River birch is a 
deciduous medium to large-sized native tree.  The 
leaves are alternate, doub le serrated, wedge-shaped, 
and sharp pointed.  The flowers are unisexual, borne 
in separate male and female catkins on the same tree.  
The bark is light brown to buff, paperlike; exfoliating 
on young trees, turning to scaly bark on older trees. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock Midwestern Wetland Flora USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : River birch is distributed throughout 
North America.  It extends from southern New  
England, west to Kansas and Minnesota, and south to 
Texas and Florida.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
River birch can survive on drier soils, although it is 
best adapted to moist soils and is usually found along 
stream banks and in swampy bottomlands that are 
periodically flooded.  Maximum development is 
reached in fertile areas with a pH of 6.5 to 4.0.  It is 
intolerant of shade and requires full sunlight. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Sow seeds in containers or 
seed trays containing a seed germination medium to 
which a slow release fertilizer is added.  Firm the 
medium and sow seeds thinly and evenly on top, and 
cover to desired depth with planting medium (Heuser 
1997).  Place pots in a sunny location in a cold frame.  
When seedlings are large enough to handle they 
should be placed into individual pots and grown in a 
cold frame for their first winter. 
 
Management 
Fertilize young trees in late winter before new growth 
begins to ensure faster growth.  Don’t prune this 
birch and other birches until summer because they 
are “bleeders” and should no t be cut when the sap is 
flowing. 
 
River birch is quite disease resistant but has severe 
problems in early spring with aphids and is favored 
by gypsy moth larvae.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Readily available through commercial nurseries.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Coombes, A.J. 1992.   Eyewitness handbooks: trees .  
Dorling Kindersley, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Inc., 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
great plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawerence, 
Kansas. 
 
Grelen, H.E. 1990.   Betula nigra.  Silvics of North 
America.  Volume 2.  Ha rdwoods.  United States 
Department of Agriculture.  Agriculture Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1983.   The illustrated book of trees .  
Stackpole Books, Mechanicsburg, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Heuser, C.W.  1997  The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Lyon, H.H. & W.T. Johnson 1988.   Insects that feed 
on trees and shrubs .  2nd ed.  Cornell University 
Press, Ithaca, New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Odgenwald, N.G. & J.R. Turner.   Plants for the 
south: a guide for landscape design .  Claitor’s 
Publishing Division, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1933.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Rosendahl, C.O. 1955.   Trees & shrubs of the upper 
midwest .  University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.