Plant Guide
HOOKER’S 
BALSAMROOT  
Balsamorhiza hookeri (Hook.) 
Nutt. 
Plant Symbol =  BAHO 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS P lant Material s C enter, 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
 
Hooker's balsamroot.  Photo by Mrs. W.D. Bransford, Lady Bird 
Johnson Wildflower Center.  
Alternate Names 
Cutleaf balsamroot, cutleaf sunflower, hairy balsamroot.  
Uses  
Livestock and big game utilize Hooker’s balsamroot.  It is 
rated as desirable forage for cattle, s heep, horses and elk 
during the spring and for deer and antelope in both spring  and summer (
Ogle and Brazee, 2009).   Leaves are grazed 
lightly and flowers are often eaten.  The plant becomes 
dry and worthless as forage by midsummer (Forest 
Service, 1937 ; Herman, 1966).  It is recognized by 
pollination ecologists as attracting large numbers of 
native bees (Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , 
Online ).  It may have some value for restoration but is not 
a dominant or major species in its area of adaptation.  
St atus  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Ethnobotany  
The Atsugewi people  parched, winnowed and ground the 
seed into cakes.  The Gosiute, No rthern Paiute, and 
Okanagan -Colville cooked and ate the roots.  The Paiute 
used the plant root for food, as a decoction to treat severe 
stomach problems and for bladder troubles.  The Washo 
made a decoction of the root to treat gynecological 
complaints (Native American Ethnobotany, Online)  
Description  
General :  Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Hooker’s 
balsamroot is a perennial, native forb.  It has a carrot -like 
taproot and simple crown, oft en producing slender, short 
creeping roots from which new plants arise, so that 
separate rosettes are connected underground.  The leaves 
are 10 -40 cm  (3.9 -15.8 in)  long, basal, and deeply 
segmented.  The flower stems are lax , 6-50 cm  (2.3 -19.7 
in)  tall.  F lowers are solitary, involucral bracts are 
subequal or somewhat imbricate and wooly to hairy.  The 
yellow sunflower -like flowers are 5 -7 cm (1.9 -2.8 in) 
wide.  The fruit is an achene with no pappus .  The 
chromosome number is 2n = 38  (Cronquist et al. , 1994; 
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, Online).  
PLANTS Database (Online) recognizes six varieties:  
hirsuta , hispidula,  hookeri, idahoensis , lagocephala, and 
neglecta .   The  ill-defined  differences between the 
varieties are based on leaf and involucral bract 
differences, and geographic distribution (Cronquist and 
others, 1994).  
Distribution :  Hooker’s balsamroot is found in the 
western United States from Washington east to Montana, 
south into Colorado and Arizona and westward into 
California.  For current d istribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
Habitat :  Hooker’s balsamroot is a minor component of 
plant communities  found in lowlands and foot hills in

grasslands, dry woodlands and shrublands (Munger, 
2006).  
Adaptation  
Hooker’s balsamroot is adapted to dry, open, and rocky or 
gravelly sites occurring mainly in foothills from 2,600 –  
9,500 feet (792- 2896 m) elevation.  It is adapted to fine, 
medium, and coarse textured soils in areas receiving 9 -20 
inches  (228- 508 mm)  annual precipitation and pH ranges 
from 6.6 -9.0.  It has medium tolerance to salinity, 
intermediate shade tolerance and no tolerance for flooding 
conditions .  It is often one of the earliest plants to produce 
leaves and flowers in the spring  (Munger, 2006; PLANTS 
Database).  
Establishment  
There is no published information on the establishment of 
Hooker’s balsamroot .  Monsen et al., (2004)  infer that 
establishment, production, and management of Hooker’s 
balsamroot  are similar to arrowleaf balsamroot 
( Balsamorhiza sagittata).  
 
Hooker’s balsamroot should be drill -seeded into a weed -
free seedbed in late fall.  Seeding depth should be 0.25 -
0.50 inches  (0.6 -1.3 cm) .  Broadcast seeding can be 
successful if seed can be covered by dragging or 
harrowing .  There are 55,000 seeds per pound (PLANTS 
Database).  The calculated seeding rate based on 25 pure 
live seeds (PLS) per square foot at 12 inch row spacing is 
19.8 pounds PLS/ac.  When planted in a mixture, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted according to the 
pr oportion of Hooker’s balsamroot in the mix.  Young 
seedlings develop slowly and are not competitive against 
more vigorous species.  Alternate row seeding is 
recommended for arrowleaf balsamroot to help reduce 
interspecies competition  and dense stands may t ake 10 
years or more to develop (Monsen et al. , 2004).  This is 
likely to be similar for Hooker’s balsamroot.  
Management  
Hooker’s balsamroot should be used as a minor 
component of seed mixtures.  Management strategies 
should be based on the key species in the established plant 
community.  Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands 
for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand 
establishment (Ogle et al. , 2008).   
 
Hooker’s balsamroot is tolerant of fire due to its deep 
taproot.  Following fire, th e species will often regenerate 
from the persistent caudex (Munger, 2006).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There is no published information regarding pests and 
potential problems of Hooker’s balsamroot.  Since it is 
similar to arrowleaf balsamroot, the follo wing 
information on pests and potential problems is from Tilley 
et al., (2012).   Rodents and birds feed on the seed.  Insect 
damage to seed can be significant and stored seed may 
require pesticide treatment and cold storage.  Mold has  been observed on seedlings in greenhouse and growth 
chamber production.
 
Environmental Concerns  
Hooker’s balsamroot is native to western North America.  
It can spread under favorable conditions but does not pose 
any environmental concern to native plant communities.  
Seed and Plant Production  
There is no published information regarding seed and 
plant production of Hooker’s balsamroot.  Since it is 
similar to arrowleaf balsamroot, the following 
information on seed and plant production is from Tilley et 
al.,  (2012).  Seed requi res stratification for germination 
and  for container plant  production, seed should be planted 
into containers to a depth of 0.25- 0.5 inches, lightly 
covered with pea gravel and then placed outdoors in late 
fall or early winter for natural stratification.   
Transplanting is difficult and plants should be handled 
carefully to prevent damage to the root system.  Plants 
develop slowly and take 3 or more years after 
establishment to produce flowers.  
 
Seed production fields are typically planted at 36 -42 inch 
row  spacing to facilitate between -row cultivation.  Seed 
should be planted at a depth of 0.25- 0.5 inches in the fall 
to allow for natural stratification.  Germination is erratic 
with new plants appearing for 2 - 3 years after planting.  
Once established, Hooker ’s balsamroot is probably very 
competitive with weeds which may be controlled by hand, 
between -row cultivation and herbicides.  
 
Fertilizer is not generally recommended and irrigation is 
limited to 15 -20 inches  (381- 508 mm)  per year including 
natural precip itation.  Overhead irrigation should be 
avoided during pollination .  It is very likely that Hooker’s 
balsamroot requires insect visitation for pollination.  
Plants are slow to develop and may take 3 -5 years to 
reach full production.  Peak yields of arrowleaf 
balsamroot of 75 to 125 pounds per acre have been 
reported.  
 
As with arrowleaf balsamroot, seed crops  of Hooker’s 
balsamroot  may  often  be damaged by frost  during 
flowering .  Harvest can be done by hand, with a vacuum -
type harvester, or by direct combini ng.  Timing of harvest 
is critical.  Mature, viable seed readily shatters.  Seed 
cleaning is easy with the seed falling readily from the 
flower heads.  Seed should be stored at cool  temperatures  
ranging from 33 -40°F (1 -4°C).  Seed is susceptible to 
insect  damage and can be treated with pesticide prior to 
storage.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no cultivars, improved, or selected materials of 
Hooker’s balsamroot.  Common wildland collected seed 
is available from co mmercial sources (Native Seed 
Network).

References 
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A. Holmgren N., Reveal, J., 
Holmgren, P. 1994.  Asterales.  Intermountain Flora.  
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 
Volume Five. The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bron x, New York.  496 p.  
Forest Service, 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.  United 
States Government Printing Office.  Variously 
paginated.  
Herman, F. 1966.  Notes on Western Range Forbs.   Cruciferae through Composit ae.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 293 .  U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service.  United States Government Printing 
Office.   365 p.  
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center . [ Online ].  
Balsamorhiza hookeri .  http://www.wildflower . org.  
(Accessed May 24, 2012)  
Monsen,  S., Stevens, R, Shaw, N., comps, 2004.  
Restoring western ranges and wildlands.  Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS -GTR -136- vol-2.  Fort Collins, CO.  U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, R ocky 
Mountain Research Station.  P 295 -698 plus index.  
M unger, G. 2006.   Balsamorhiza hookeri .  In: Fire Effects 
Information System. [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants  (Accessed 
May 24, 2012).  
Native American Ethnobotany. [Online].  A Database of  Foods, Drugs, Dyes and Fibers of Native American 
Peoples Derived from Plants.  University of 
Michigan, College of Arts, Sciences, and Letters 
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  (Accessed May 24, 2012 
Nat ive Seed Network.  http://www.nativeseednetwork.org 
(Accessed May 24, 2012)  
Ogle,  D. and  Brazee, B. 2009.  Estimating Initial Stocking 
Rates.  USDA -NRCS Technical Note No. 3. Boise, 
Idaho. 39 p.  
Ogle, D., St. John, L., Cornwell, J., Stannard, M.,  Holzworth , L.  2008.  Pasture and Range Seedings:  Planning
-Installation -Evaluation- Management.  
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Technical Note No. 
10.  Boise, Idaho.  35p.  
PLANTS Database. Balsamorhiza hookeri .  [Online].  
http://plants.usda.gov . U.S. Department of 
Agric ulture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(Accessed May 24, 2012).  
Tilley, D., St. John, L., and Shaw, N. 2012.  Plant Guide  for arrowleaf balsamroot (Balsamorhiza sagittata).  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho.  
5p.  
 
Prepared By : 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
Citation  
St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012.  Plant Guide for Hooker’s 
balsamroot ( Balsamorhiza hookeri ). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Published  June, 2012 
Edited:  6June2012ls;  8June2012djt ; 11June2012gm ; 
18June2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants , please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for  the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER