Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
SLOUGHGRASS 
Beckmannia syzigachne  (Steud.) Fernald  
Plant Symbol = BESY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 Gary Larson. USDA NRCS. 1992.  Western Wetland Flora: Field 
office guide to plant species. Western Region, Sacramento, CA. 
Courtesy of USDA NRCS Wetland Science Institute. 
 
Alternate Names  
Slough grass; western sloughgrass 
 
Uses 
Beckmannia syzigachne  is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and is frequently hayed or grazed. It 
frequently colonizes denuded wetland soils resulting 
from mud flat exposure (Walker and Coupland, 
1968). Its seed units provide food for migratory water 
fowl. The variety ‘Egan’ wa s selected and released 
for wetland restoration and erosion control in Alaska.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae). American 
sloughgrass is a cool seas on annual or short lived 
perennial grass that is commonly found in shallow 
marshes or sloughs. Its shallow root system supports  a leafy stem, which may be as tall as one meter. Basal 
leaves contain cross veins that intersect the 
longitudinal veins at right angles to form rectangles. 
American sloughgrass is clas
sified by most flora’s as 
an annual species. However, Wynia and Boe, (1984) 
stated that  Beckmannia syzigachne  had over wintered 
in several plots and nurseries at Brookings, South 
Dakota and was at least a short lived perennial 
depending on use. The branched inflorescence is 
classified as a closed panicle (Looman, 1983). The 
spikelets have very short pedicels and are arranged 
on only one side of the panicle branches (Reeder, 
1953). Spikelets disarticul ate below the glumes, and 
are one or two flowered (Wynia and Boe, 1983). 
Beckmannia  syzigachne  possesses the C-3 
photosynthetic pathway for carbon dioxide fixation 
(Waller and Lewis, 1979). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  American sloughgrass is the 
North American native of a two species genus that is 
widespread in the cooler parts of Eurasia and North 
America. Beckmannia syzigachne  is present in 
marshes and ditches throughout the northwest and 
north central states and is occasional in the northeast 
(Gould and Shaw, 1983).  
 
Habitat: In their examination of prairie, meadow and 
marsh vegetation in Nelson County, North Dakota, 
Dix and Smeins (1967) studied the drainage regimes 
of 100 stands selected to represent the vegetative 
diversity within the county. The drainage regime 
gradient went from excessively drained to permanent, 
or near-permanent gravitational water available 
throughout most summers. Beckmannia syzigachne  
was noted to occur in the three wettest regimes in 
combination with other species. Thus  Beckmannia 
syzigachne  is known to occur in the presence of 
gravitational water, either permanently or for 
extended periods, during the growing season.  
 
Adaptation   
American sloughgrass is adapted to conditions in the 
northern United States and southern Canada, Alaska 
and a portion of eastern Asia. Wilcox  et al (1915) 
noted that Beckmannia  was well adapted to low, 
irrigated, alkaline soils in western Nebraska. 
Chapman (1960) classified  Beckmannia syzigachne 
as a preferential halophyte which indicated that it 
exhibited its best growth on saline soils, but will also 
grow on non-saline soils. Looman (1983) stated that 
it performed best on clay soils covered by a shallow

layer of organic matter. Dix and Smeins (1967) found 
Beckmannia syzigachne grew in association with  
Eleocharis acicularis,  Alisma triviale, Sagittaria 
cuneata, Glaux maritima,  Polygonum coccineum , and 
Gratiola neglecta . 
 
Establishment 
Propagation of American sloughgrass via seed is the 
preferred method since th ere aren’t any dormancy 
restrictions that inhibit rapid and uniform 
germination. The planting site should be prepared 
and tilled to discourage weeds during the 
establishment period. The best planting times in the 
Great Plains are late fall, to allow fall establishment, 
or a dormant seeding, which would promote early 
spring establishment. The free flowing spikelets 
present no difficulty for conventional planting 
equipment. Spikelets should be planted at a depth of 
7 to 15 mm deep in the soil.  
 
 Richard Wynia. USDA NRCS. Beckmannia forage production 
plots at Brookings, SD. 
 
Management  
Beal (1896) pointed out that  Beckmannia syzigachne 
was a forage grass of some prominence west of the 
Mississippi River. It is palatable to livestock 
(Stevens, 1963) and is frequently hayed or grazed 
(Clarke and Tisdale, 1945). Forage nutritional data 
(Clarke and Tisdale, 1945; National Academy of 
Science, 1971) indicated it is high in protein and 
nonstructural carbohydrates. Boe and Wynia (1985) 
found that forage and seed yields of sloughgrass 
ranged from 1990 to 5300 Kg/ha of forage and 440 to 
620 Kg/ha of seed in an  experimental planting at 
Brookings, South Dakota. Crude protein of 5 
Beckmannia syzigachne  populations harvested at 
early head ranged from 9.17 to 13.77 while ADF 
ranged from 39.15 to 44.16 (Wynia, 1987). The Egan 
release notice (1986) indicated that this cultivar 
produced seed yields of 453 and 305 pounds/acre of 
clean seed in 1984 and 1 985, respectively. The lower 
yield in 1985 was the result of high winds causing 
seed shatter prior to harves t. Seed harvest in Alaska  is generally accomplished during the second or third 
week in August. Mature s
eed was harvested in early 
August by Boe and Wynia (1985) at Brookings, SD. 
Boe consistently harvested  Beckmannia syzigachne 
from a creek in northeast M ontana in August of 1979, 
1980 and 1981.  Seed harvesting and processing can 
be accomplished with standard equipment. Seed 
storage in a cool, dry environment is ideal.  
  Richard Wynia. USDA NRCS. Regrowth of Beckmannia from an 
established crown. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Stands tend to decline af ter 4 or 5 years due to 
competition when more aggressive grass species 
become established in the  Beckmannia syzigachne 
stand. Seed shatter prior to harvesting remains a 
moderate problem. The Alaska Plant Materials 
Center has found that if ‘Egan’ is grown on upland 
farm land without irrigation, the plants will be 
stressed to the point of disease onset (Wright, 1986). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Boe and Evans (1981) reported that panicles of 
American sloughgrass bagged to prevent cross 
pollination exhibited 100% seed set. This would 
indicate that it is a self pollinated species and 
probably does not depend on much out crossing for 
sexual reproduction. The base chromosome number 
is X=7. All populations observed in South Dakota 
contained 2n=14 or 7 chromosome pairs (Wynia,

1987). This is the most commonly cited number for 
both Beckmannia syzigachne  and Beckmannia  
erucaeformis  (Nielsen and Humphrey, 1937; Reeder, 
1953).  However, there has been a report in the 
Russian literature of a tetraploid (2n=28) population 
(Zhukova and Petrovskii, 1976).  
Germination:  Hoffman et al. (1980) reported low 
germination percentages for Beckmannia  obtained a 
high of 26% from seeds that had over wintered dry 
and were tested under ambient April light and 
temperatures at Vermillion, South Dakota. Boe and 
Evans (1981) reported int act spikelets and caryopses 
freed from spikelet bracts exhibited poor germination 
at room temperature and disappointing emergence in 
greenhouse plantings. Wynia and Boe (1989) 
reported on germination and early seedling growth 
differences among populations of American 
sloughgrass from South Dakota(SD), Montana (MT), 
and Alaska (AL). Caryopses of these populations, 
produced simultaneously in the greenhouse under 
uniform conditions, were immediately subjected to 3 
constant (15,20 and 25 degrees C) and 2 alternating 
(15-30 and 20-30 degrees C)  temperature treatments 
during germination studies. Population AL had 
significantly higher percent germination at constant 
temperatures than did SD  or MT. No significant 
difference in final germination was detected among 
populations at 15-30 degrees C. The AL population 
had significantly faster rate s of germination and early 
seedling growth than the other populations at all 
temperatures. SD and MT populations are apparently 
inhibited from germination at constant temperatures 
even when adequate moisture was available. This 
germination restriction in Great Plains populations 
may be an adaptive trait which prevents initiation of 
growth during the summer months when 
temperatures are high and moisture tends to be 
erratic. Hoffman  et al. (1980) indicated that darkness 
inhibited germination in American sloughgrass. Boe 
and Wynia (1985) found that darkness did not inhibit 
germination of  Beckmannia syzigachne  that was 
subjected to an alternating temperature regime. Plant 
propagation in the greenhouse may require initiating 
germination under alternating temperature conditions 
for some ecotypes. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Egan’ American sloughgrass was named and 
released as a cultivar by the Alaska Plant Materials 
Center at Palmer, Alaska in 1986. The original seed 
collection was made by James R. Stroh, July 26, 
1973. The seed was harvested from a single plant 
growing on a gravel road fill site off Steese Highway 
in Gold Stream Valley, North of Fairbanks, Alaska. 
The name Egan was selected in honor of William A.  Egan, the first and fourth Governor of the State of 
Alaska. Governor Egan signed into law the act 
creating the Alaska Plant Ma
terials Center in 1972. 
Breeder and Foundation seed production will be 
maintained by the Alaska Plant Materials Center. 
Foundation class seed will be available from the 
Alaska Seed Growers, Inc.  to seed growers for the 
production of Certified class seed (Alaska Plant 
Materials Center, 1986).   
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Alaska Plant Materials Center. 1986. Plant Release 
Notice ‘Egan’. 
 
Beal, W.J. 1896. Grasses of North America. Holt 
Publishing Co. New York, NY. 
 
Boe, A. and J. Evans. 19 81. Spikelet characteristics 
and germination of American sloughgrass 
( Beckmannia syzigachne ) (Steud.)Fern.) from 
northeastern Montana. Proc.  S.D. Academy of 
Science. 60:170. 
 
Boe, A. and R. Wynia. 1985. Germination, forage 
yield, and seed production of American sloughgrass 
( Beckmannia syzigachne ). Journal of Range 
Management. 38:114-116. 
 
Chapman, V.J. 1960. Salt marshes and salt deserts of 
the world. Plant Science Monographs. Interscience 
Publishers Inc. New York. 
 
Clarke, S.E. and W.E. Tisdale. 1945. The chemical 
composition of native forage plants of southern 
Alberta and Saskatchewan in relation to grazing 
practices. Can. Dept. of Agr. Pub. 769. 
 
Dix, R.L. and F.E. Smiens. 1967. The prairie, 
meadow, and marsh vegetation of Nelson County, 
North Dakota. Can. J. Botany. 45:21-58. 
 
Gould, F.W. and R.B. Shaw. 1983. Grass 
Systematics. 2
nd Ed. Texas A&M, University Press.

Hoffman, G.R., M.B. Hogan, and L.D. Stanley. 1980. 
Germination of plant species common to reservoir 
shores in the Northern Great Plains. Bull. Torr. Bot. 
Club. 107:506-513. 
 
Looman, J. 1983. 111 Range and Forage Plants of the 
Canadian Prairies. Res. Branch Agric. Can. Pub. 
1751. Ottawa, Canada. 
 
National Academy of Science. 1971. Atlas of 
nutritional data on United States and Canadian feeds. 
Nat. Acad. Sci., Washington, D.C. 
 
Nielsen, E.L. and L.M. Humphrey. 1937. Grass 
studies. I. Chromosome number in certain members 
of the tribes Festuceae, Hordeae, Aveneae, 
Agrostideae, Chlorid eae, Phalarideae, and 
Tripsaceae. Am. J.  Bot. 24:276-278. 
 
Reeder, J.D. 1953. Affinities of the grass genus 
Beckmannia.  Host. Bull. Torr. Bot. Club. 80:187-196. 
 
Stevens, O.A. 1963. Handbook of North Dakota 
Plants. North Dakota Inst. Environ. Studies. Fargo, 
North Dakota.  
 
Stewart, R.E. and H.A. Ka ntrud. 1971. Classificaion 
of natural ponds and lakes in the glaciated prairie 
region. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Ser. Resour. Pub. 92. 
 
Walker, B.H. and R.T. Coupland. 1968. An analysis 
of vegetation environmental relationships in 
Saskatchewan sloughs. Can. J. Bot. 46:509-522. 
 
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North American 
grasses. Journal of Range Man. 32:12-28.  
 
Wilcox, E.M., G.K.K. Link, and V.W. Pool. 1915. A 
Handbook of Nebraska Grasses. Neb. Ag. Exp. Sta. 
Bull. 148. 
 
Wright, Stoney. 1986. Personal Communications. 
Alaska Department of Natural Resources. Alaska 
Plant Materials Center. 
 
Wynia, R. and A. Boe. 1983. The occurrence of 
biflowered spikelets in  Beckmannia syzigachne  
(Steud.)Fern. Am. J. Bot. 70(5)(2):135. 
 
Wynia R. and A. Boe. 1984. Variation in growth 
habit of  Beckmannia syzigachne  (Steud.) Fern. Proc. 
S.D. Acad. Sci. 63:120-121.  
 
Wynia, R. and A. Boe. 1989. Germination 
characteristics of  Beckmannia syzigachne  populations from widely separated latitudes. Society for Range 
Management Abst. 031. SRM Annual Meeting. 
 
Wynia, R. 1987. Agroec
ological studies of 
Beckmannia syzigachne  populations. PhD Thesis. 
South Dakota State University. 
 
Zhukova, P.G. and V.V. Petrovskii. 1976. 
Chromosome numbers of some plant species of 
western Chukotka. Botanicheskii Zhurnal. 61 
(7):963-969. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Richard L. Wynia, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 080916jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.