Plant Guide       
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIDE-OATS GRAMA 
Bouteloua curtipendula  
(Michx.) Torr. 
Plant Symbol = BOCU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
 Alan Shadow, East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, 
Texas 
 
Uses 
Forage: Side-oats grama produces high quality, 
nutritious forage that is relished by all classes of 
livestock throughout the summer and fall, and it 
remains moderately palatable into winter. This makes 
it one of the most important range grass species. 
 
Erosion Control:  Weaver and Albertson (1944) 
described the role of side-oats grama in the recovery 
of grasslands following the drought of the 1930’s. It 
was one of the few grasses that covered large areas 
bared by the loss of other grasses during the drought 
period. Side-oats grama is recommended in grass 
mixtures for range and pasture seeding, for earth fill 
and bank stabilization, for other critical areas and 
recreational plantings. Successful seeding can be 
obtained in rocky, stony or shallow soil sites. In fact 
side-oats is often found in nearly pure stands on 
caliche outcrops, stony hillsides and breaks (Harlan, 
1954). 
 
Wildlife:  Side-oats provides some forage for antelope 
and deer when actively growing.  Elk will use this 
grass as forage throughout  the year.  Leithead et al. 
(1971) indicated that the seed of this species was 
consumed by wild turkeys.  
 
Status  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Side-oats grama is a deep rooted, perennial 
grass. The plants crown will spread very slowly by 
means of extremely short, stout rhizomes. A mid-
grass in height, it has rather wide leaves and a very 
distinct inflorescence consisting of a zigzag stalk 
with small compressed spikes dangling from it at 
even intervals. The short sp ikes dangle from one side 
of the stalk, thus providing the plant with its common 
name. In the vegetative state the grass is easily 
recognized by the long, ev enly spaced hairs attached 
to the margins of the leaf near its base. Side-oats 
grama possesses the C-4 photosynthetic pathway 
common to warm-season grasses (Waller and Lewis, 
1979).  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. One of the most widely 
distributed of the grama grasses. It has a widespread 
distribution eastward from  the Rocky Mountains to 
near the east coast except in the southeast. 
 
Habitat: Side-oats grama grow s effectively in the 
dryer mid-grass prairie section of the Great Plains 
that has an annual rainfall of 12-20 inches. This 
species occurs naturally in mixed stands with blue 
grama ( Bouteloua gracilis ) and little bluestem 
( Schizachyrium  scoparium ).  This grass is better 
adapted to calcareous and moderately alkaline soils 
than to neutral or acidic so ils (Leithead etal., 1971) 
 
Adaptation 
Side-oats is adapted to a broad range of sandy to 
clayey textured soils; it is least tolerant of loose sands 
and dense clays. The best stands of side-oats are 
found on medium to fine texture upland soils. This 
species has shown varying tolerance to soil salinity 
from weak to moderate. Side-oats is moderately 
drought tolerant, but less than blue grama. It is 
moderately tolerant of semi-shaded conditions and 
can be found in open woodlands. It will sustain 
damage from wildfires when actively growing and 
under drought stress conditions, but is fairly tolerant 
of fire in a dormant state. It  is also fairly tolerant of 
spring flooding. It probably has the widest range of 
adaptation of any of the wa rm-season perennial grass 
plants. It grows in combination with tall warm-season

grasses such as big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii) 
and switchgrass ( Panicum virgatum ) all the way to 
the short grass plants such as buffalo grass 
( Bouteloua dactyloides ) and blue grama (Bouteloua  
gracilis ). Thus, it can successfully grow in a variety 
of climates and habitats in the continental U.S.  
 
Establishment 
Seed improved cultivars of this grass no deeper than 
¼ inch on fine textured soils and ¾ inch on coarser 
textured soils. Planting with a grass seed drill on a 
firm, weed free seedbed at the rate of 2.5 to 5.0 
pounds of pure live seed (PLS) is encouraged. 
Broadcasting at a higher seeding rate (50 to 100 
percent increase) can be utilized on a previously 
prepared seedbed that will be culti-packed after 
seeding is completed. Increased seeding rate should 
also be used on bare areas, harsh sites, or on areas 
that require denser or quicker stand establishment. 
Seeding is more likely to be successful if moisture 
conditions are good and if mulch is used to retain 
moisture on the seeding site. Most seed germinates 
within 7 days under good field conditions. Seedling 
vigor is good when compared to other warm season 
grasses. Field germination, emergence and 
establishment of this species are better than other 
grama grasses. Protection from grazing is encouraged 
while seedlings are in the juvenile stage of growth.  
 
Management 
As a mid-grass, side-oats grama is intermediate in 
many respects between the tall and short grass 
species. Side-oats grama is not as resistant to grazing  
pressure as is blue grama due to its taller growth 
habit. Side-oats seedlings are vigorous and stands 
tend to establish quickly and can often be utilized for 
forage production the second year after planting. 
Side-oats grama is usually included in range mixes 
and should be managed as native rangeland. 
Management should include proper livestock 
stocking rates and correct season of use.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshoppers can be destructive of seedling stands. 
Some stem and leaf rust  occurs in wet years and 
Mankin (1969) found several leaf spot and root rot 
fungi occurred on side-oats grama.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed production experiment s conducted in Nebraska 
in the 1950’s found that si de-oats grama response to 
nitrogen fertilization was dependent on moisture 
conditions during critical growth periods (Newell et 
al., 1962). Seed yields measured as whole spikes 
were substantially increas ed over unfertilized check 
plots by all rates of nitrogen applied. Under drought  conditions the application of 60 and 90 pounds of 
nitrogen yielded whole spike yields of approximately 
equal amounts. Under favorable moisture conditions 
nitrogen fertilization improved the quality of the 
caryopsis by increased weight per 1000 caryopsis 
over unfertilized plots. 
 
Seed of side-oats grama normally found on the open 
market consists of either 
whole spikes or individual 
florets, or mixtures of these, which vary widely in 
their content of germinable caryopsis. Thus, seeding 
rates of side-oats must be computed on the basis of 
purity and viability of the seed lot. Purity analysis of 
side-oats can be complicat ed by the inclusion of 
adhering glumes and spike fragments as part of the 
seed unit. As long as the seed unit has a germinable 
caryopsis in the spike it is considered viable and used 
in the computation of pure live seed by the seed 
analyst. Thus a spike may contain several germinable 
caryopses, but is counted only as one for the purpose 
of germination percentage. 
 
The effect of burning on  seed yield was studied by 
Newell etal. (1962) in fertilized and unfertilized 
plots. Although the seed yield results were 
numerically larger from both levels of fertilized plots 
when burned, the differences could not be proven to 
be statistically different. This finding is noteworthy 
since it proves that proper burning, if not conducted 
too late in the spring, does not reduce seed yield. 
Burning is a proven method of cleaning the field for 
the new seed crop year. Burning has also been known 
to help control cool season weeds and reduce disease 
inoculums for the new crop.  
 
Thus, side-oats grama may be grown for seed in 
cultivated rows, and will respond to timely 
fertilization and irrigation applications.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
‘Butte’ was selected at Nebraska AES, Lincoln, 
USDA-ARS and SCS cooperatively by E.C. Conard 
and L.C. Newell. It represen ts native collections from 
Holt and Platte Counties in Nebraska that were 
combined and tested as Ne braska 37. Repeated field 
plantings revealed superior germination and 
establishment characteristic s when compared with 
other sources.

‘El Reno’ was released cooperatively in 1944 by the 
SCS, Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials Center and 
Kansas AES. The original seed was collected in a 
field location near El Reno, Oklahoma in 1934. The 
material was outstanding for leafiness, forage 
production and vigor. It also ranked well for disease 
resistance, seed production, and winter hardiness. It 
is widely used in range seedings and is adapted to 
Kansas, Oklahoma and northern Texas. 
 
‘Haskell’ was released in 1983 by the James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Texas AES and 
USDA-ARS. The seed for this release was originally 
collected in 1960 by J.C. Yeary, Jr. in Haskell, Texas. 
It was selected based on rhizome production and 
adaptation as far south as the Rio Grande Valley in 
Texas. It is also known for its high forage palatability 
and prolific seed production. 
 
Killdeer was informally released in the late 1960’s by 
the Bismarck Plant Materials Center in Bismarck, 
ND. It is composed of s eed collected from native 
stands in 1956 near Bowman, Bowman County and 
Killdeer, Dunn County, North Dakota. Killdeer 
possesses outstanding vigor, leafiness, fair seed 
production, freedom from disease and persistence in 
a cold, semi-arid environment.  
 
‘Niner’ was released in 1984 by SCS and the New 
Mexico and Colorado AES.  The original seed for the 
release was collected by G.C. Niner and J.A. 
Anderson in 1957 west of Socorro, New Mexico. 
Niner was a bulk increase of the collection made by 
Niner and Anderson.  
 
Pierre was informally released in 1961 by the 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center and the South 
Dakota AES. The original seed for the release was 
collected in 1954 in Stanley County west of Pierre, 
South Dakota. The release is described as outstanding 
in vigor, leafiness, free dom from disease, seedling 
vigor and persistence in a semi-arid environment.  
 
‘Premier’ was released in 1960 cooperatively by 
Texas AES and USDA-ARS and NRCS. The original 
seed was collected in 19 53 from a single plant 
growing between Cuauhtemoc and Chichuahua, 
Mexico. The release is described as having good 
seedling vigor, good seed yield, drought tolerance, 
upright growth form and leafiness.  
 
‘Trailway’ was cooperatively released in 1958 by 
Nebraska AES and USDA-ARS. The original seed 
was collected in 1953 in northern Holt County by 
L.C. Newell. The release is described as winter  hardy, long lived, late maturing with a somewhat 
indeterminate heading and flowering response. 
Requires most of the growing season to mature a crop 
in eastern Nebraska and ma
y fail to produce seed in 
areas with a shorter growing season. 
 
‘Vaughn’ was released in 1940 by the New Mexico 
AES and SCS Plant Science  Division. The original 
seed was collected from native stands in 1935 near 
Vaughn, New Mexico. The release is described as 
slightly variable, but all have erect leaves, good 
seedling vigor and easy to establish.  
 
Northern, Central and Southern Iowa Germplasms 
were released in 1995 as source identified releases, 
by the Elsberry Plant Materi als Center, University of 
Northern Iowa, Iowa Department of Transportation, 
Iowa Crop Improvement Association and NRVC. 
They are all composite lines from collections made in 
Northern, Central and Southern Iowa. 
 
References 
Harlan, J.R. 1954. Side-oats Grama ( Bouteloua 
curtipendula)  Forage Crops Leaflet No. 18. 
Oklahoma A&M College, Stillwater, OK. 
 
Leithead,H.L., Y.L. Yarlett,  and T.N. Shiflet. 1971. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states.  
USDA-SCS Agric. Handb. 389. U.S. GOV. Print 
Office. Washington,D.C. 
 
Mankin, C. J. 1969. Diseases of Grasses and Cereals 
in South Dakota . South Dakota State Univ., Agric. 
Exp. Stn. Tech. Bull. 35. 
 
Newell, L.C., R.D. Staten,  E.B. Jackson, and E.C. 
Conard. 1962. Side-oats Grama in the Central Great 
Plains. Nebraska Ag. Exp. Stn. Research Bull. 207. 
 
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North American 
grasses.  J. Range Manage. 32:12-82. 
 
Weaver, J.E. and F.W. Albertson. 1944. Nature and 
recovery of grasslands from the great drought of 
1933 to 1940. Ecol. Monogr. 14:393-479. 
 
Prepared by and Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 070717 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service
.