Plant Guide
FIELD MUSTARD 
Brassica rapa L. var. rapa   
Plant Symbol =  BRRAR 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis,  Oregon  
 
Photo by George W. Williams, 2011, courtesy of Wildflowers in Santa 
Barbara at http:// sbwildflowers.wordpress.com . 
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common Names: common mustard, wild 
mustard , wild turnip , forage turnip,  wild rutabaga, 
birdsrape mustard, bird’s rape , rape mustard  
Horticultural cultivar  common name s:  turnip,  summer 
turnip,  seven -top turnip, rapini,  broccoli raab,  Italian kale ; 
swede or white turnip (Ireland, Scotland, northern 
England ) 
Alternate  Scientific Names: Brassica rapa L.  ssp. rapa,    
Brassica rapa L. var . campestris (L.) W.D.J. Koch ,      
Brassica campestris L. ssp.  rapifera  (Metzger) Sinsk. ,     
Brassica campestris L. var.  rapa  (L.) Hartm. , Brassica 
napus  var. quadrivalvis (Hook. f. & Thomson)  O. E.  Schulz
, Brassica quadrivalvis Hook.  f. & Thomson, 
Caulanthus sulfureus Payson  
Uses  
Cover crop : Field mustard  is  used as a winter  annual  or 
rotational  cover crop  in vegetable and specialty crops as 
well as row crop production .  It has the potential to 
prevent erosion, suppress weeds and soil -borne pests, 
alleviate  soil compaction and scavenge nutrients (Clark, 
2007).   It has  rapid fall growth, high biomass production , 
and nutrient scavenging ability following high input cash 
crops.   Field mustard can  be grown as a cover crop alone 
or in a mix with other brassicas, small grains , or  legumes . 
In the Northeast, Mid -Atlantic , and Great Lakes 
bioregions, it appears  to be a good tool as a  biofumigant 
cover crop for control of nematodes, soil -borne diseases  
i ncluding the fungal pathogen ( Rhizoctonia) responsible 
for damping -off , weeds , and other pests . W hen biomass is 
incorporated  into the soil,  soil microbes break down  
sulfur compounds in the plant  into  isothiocyanide, which 
can act as a fumigant and weed sup pressant (Olmstead, 
2006) .  Field mustard  produces 2,000 to 5,000 pounds of 
dry matter per acr e per year and 40 to 160 lb/ac re total N  
(Clark, 2007) .      
Intercropping:  Intercropping can increase cropping 
system diversity and profitability by producing two 
simultaneous crops on  the same land.  In New Mexico, 
f orage turnip  was interseeded between rows of chi li 
peppers  and sweet corn without affecting yields of the 
cash crop  when  the turnip  seeding wa s timed correctly  
(Gulden et al., 1997a, 1997b) .   
Forage : Cultivars with larger roots , commonly called 
forage turnip,  have been a popular forage  crop for 
livestock in Europe and Asia for at least 600 years 
(Undersander et al., 1 991). Forage turnip is a useful crop 
for extending the fall grazing season for dairy cows and 
other livestock (Thomet and Kohler, 2003; UMass 
Extension, 2012).  Forage turnip  was largely replaced 
with corn silage in the early 1900s because it required less  
labor . The  use of forage turnip increased again in the 
1970s with the  development of new cultivars  that could 
be  seeded directly into pastures.    
Aboveground  vegetation contains 20 to 25% crude 
protein , 65 to 80% in vitro digestible dry matter 
(IVDDM) , about 20% neutral detergent fiber (NDF) , and 
about 23% acid detergent fiber (ADF) .  T he roots contain 
10 to 14% crude protein , and 80 to 85% IVDDM  
(Undersander et al., 1991) .  However,  the roots, leaves, 
and especially seeds of Brassica  and related species  
contain sulfur compounds (glucosinolates) that can irritate 
the digestive tracts or create thyroid problems in livestock 
if consumed in large quantities over time ( DiTomaso and