Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CROSSVINE 
Bignonia capreolata L. 
Plant Symbol = BICA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Anisostichus capreolata, Anisostichus crucigera , 
Bignonia capreolata  forma lutea, Bignonia 
capreolata  var. atrosanguinea, Doxantha capreolata , 
quartervine, trumpet flower. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans used crossvine as a 
remedy for numerous health  ailments. An infusion of 
leaves was used to purify bl ood. Decoctions of leaves 
were used for rheumatism.  Decoctions of mashed 
bark were used to alleviate edema and headaches. 
Individuals with diphtheria gargled a mashed root 
infusion.  
 
Ornamental:  The showy, fragrant flowers and unique 
leaves of crossvine make this plant appropriate for 
some gardening and landscaping needs. It is often 
used as a cover for fences, arbors, walls, pillars or 
large trellises and as a groundcover. It is often 
recommended as a native ornamental alternative to 
non-native climbing vines. 
 
Wildlife:  The tubular flowers and large quantities of 
nectar produced by cros svine are attractants for 
hummingbirds and butterflies. 
 
Legal Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Crossvine can spread aggressively. This plant may 
become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.   
 J.R. Manhart. 2004.  Texas A&M University Herbarium. 
 
Description 
General: Bignonia family (Bignoniaceae). Crossvine 
is a perennial, woody, semi-evergreen vine that can 
grow to be 17 m long.  Tubers can grow to 10 cm in 
diameter. The stem is squarish and reddish-purple. 
Leaves are opposite, pi nnately compound, and 
reduced to two basal leaflets and a branched tendril 
between them. Leaflets are 6-15 cm long, 2-7 cm 
wide and have smooth edges (entire), narrowly 
tapered tips (acuminate), and a notch at the base that 
makes them heart-shaped (cordate). The foliage turns 
from a lustrous green in the growing season to a 
reddish purple in the winter. Buds are reddish-purple 
and less than 1 cm long. Flowers are bell-shaped with 
orange on the outside and yellow inside, have 5 
irregular lobes, and are 4-5 cm long. The fruit is a 
multi-seeded, flat capsule th at is up to 15 cm long. 
Crossvine blooms from mid-March to mid-June and 
sets fruit in late summer. 
 
Crossvine gets its name from the cross-shaped pith, 
as seen from a transverse section of the stem. Other 
key characteristics of crossvine include its opposite 
compound leaves with two leaflets and branched 
tendrils. 
 
Distribution : Crossvine is native to the United States 
in the northeastern, north central, south central, and 
southeastern regions. It is found from southern 
Ontario, south to Florida, west to Texas and Illinois. 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Crossvine is found in rich forests and 
swamps and along roadsides and fencerows.

Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for crossvine are 5-9. 
Although it is semi-evergreen, it may lose its leaves 
during especially harsh winters in zones 5 and 6. 
 
Crossvine prefers full sun  and moist, acidic, well-
drained soils for best flowering. It is adaptable to 
other soil conditions, including poorly drained soils, 
once established and it can do well in low light 
levels. It is drought tolerant. 
 
Management 
If not properly managed, crossvine can spread 
quickly by root suckers and become problematic. 
Pruning will reduce aggressive  growth if spread is 
not desired. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Crossvine can be propagated by seeds or cuttings. 
Pretreatment of seeds is  not necessary. Although a 
90% germination rate can be expected, seedling 
survival and growth may be low. Seedlings may need 
to harden in winter temperatures before outplanting.  
 
The species can be rooted at any time of the year but 
June or July cuttings are generally recommended. 
Crossvine cuttings root easily, but may take six to 
eight weeks. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
any cultivars of crossvine for conservation use.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Ornamental cultivars of  Bignonia capreolata include 
‘Atrosanguinea,’ ‘Dragon Lady,’ ‘Helen Fredel,’ 
‘Jekyll,’ ‘Shalimar Red,’ and ‘Tangerine Beauty.’  
These cultivars have been bred for flower color, 
flower and leaf size, and winter hardiness. 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 22 
April 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Creech, D. 2004.  Plants page, SFA Mast Arboretum  
(http://arboretum.sfasu.edu/plants/index.htm, 22  April 2004). Stephen F. Austin State University, 
Nacogdoches. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 2004. 
Horticulture 3710 plant list: vines 
(http://www.nobleplants.com/classnotes/spring/sprin
gprofiles/vines.htm, 22 April 2004). Noble Plants, 
Athens.  
 
Floridata. 2004.  Plant encyclopedia  
(http://floridata.com, 22 April 2004). Floridata 
Marketplace, Tallahassee. 
 
Johnson, F.L. and B.W. Hoagland.  Catalog of the 
woody plants of Oklahoma 
(http://www.biosurvey.ou.e du/shrub/cover.htm, 22 
April 2004). Oklahoma University, Norman. 
 
Kemper Center for Home Gardening. 2004.  Kemper 
web, PlantFinder 
(http://ridgwaydb.mobot.org/k emperweb/plantfinder/
Alpha.asp, 22 April 2004). Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Lindstrom, J.T. 2002. Bignonia capreolata 
(http://www.uark.edu/campus-
resources/cotinus/plants3_html/bigncapr.html, 22 
April 2004). University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.  
 
Manhart, J.R. 2004.  Texas A & M University 
Herbarium digital flora of Texas  
(http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/gallery1.htm, 22 
April 2004). Texas A & M University, College 
Station. 
 
Reed, D. 2002.  Wildflowers of the Southeastern 
United States  (http://2bnthewild.com/).  
 
Stine, M. 2003.  Louisiana ecosystems and plant 
identification, 
(http://rnrstreamer.lsu.edu/ec osystems/webtour/, 22 
April 2004). LSU AgCenter, Baton Rouge. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 6May2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.