Plant Guide       
 
SOFT CHESS 
Bromus hordeaceus  L. ssp. 
hordeaceus 
Plant Symbol = BRHOH  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 Alternate Names 
Soft brome, Bromus mollis  
 
Uses 
Livestock: Soft chess is rated highly in California as 
an important forage plant.  It ranks highest of the 
annual bromes in forage  rating, producing excellent 
forage when young and is grazed heavily up to the 
time of reaching maturity.  Seed does not shatter 
readily and the plants are  grazed extensively during 
the summer with the livestock getting more nutrients 
than they would otherwise  from the dry stalks and 
leaves alone.  
 
Erosion Control : The ease with which it can be 
established and its outstanding reseeding ability 
contributes to its suitability for seeding natural or  man-made disturbed areas to protect them from soil 
erosion and producing sediment.  These include bare 
un-vegetated slopes, such as brush burn areas, newly 
constructed roads, driveways, housing and industrial 
developments, gullies, drainages, ditch and channel 
banks, dikes, levees, dams, reservoirs, and other 
types of construction on sloping land.  
 
Wildlife Food and Cover: During the winter and 
spring months when the leaves of soft chess are green 
and succulent, it is an important component in the 
diets of both deer and quail.  Quail use a small 
amount of the seed after maturity.  It also furnishes 
good nesting cover for quail in areas that are 
protected from grazing, which will occur normally if 
ranges are properly used. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Soil Improvement
: It is especially adapted for 
reseeding use as an annual cover crop on orchard and 
vineyard land, because of  its ability to withstand 
excessive mowing better than other grasses and 
maturing to seed under minimum watering. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS website. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Soft chess is widely 
distributed on the annual rangeland in the 
southwestern United States.   It is a winter growing, 
self-seeding, annual grass.  It has strong seedling 
vigor, is suberect in growth habit, medium early in 
maturity, and has an outstanding reseeding ability.  
Its growth starts in the fall of the year and it matures 
in April and May.  
 
Distribution 
Soft chess, a native of Europe, is widespread 
throughout much of western North America, Hawaii, 
South America and Asia.  Soft chess may have

become widely established no later than the end of 
the 19th century.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Soft chess is adapted to  the Mediterranean climatic 
zone from sea level to approximately 3,000’ and in 
areas with an annual rain fall above 10 inches.  It 
grows well on low fertility sites, but responds 
exceptionally well to applications of nitrogen-
phosphorus fertilizers.  It requires good drainage, is 
adapted on coarse to fine textures soils, and does best 
on neutral or slightly acid to mildly alkaline soils. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed : Areas to be seeded should have a firm 
seedbed, which has been previously roughened by 
disking, harrowing, raking, or otherwise worked to a 
depth of approximately 2 inches (5 cm).  
 
Seeding : Seeding should be made in the fall of the 
year.  The preferred method of seeding is with a drill. 
Good stands have been obtained from broadcast 
seeding, followed by a cultipacker, spiketooth 
harrow, or similar tool to cover the seed.  Seed 
should be planted uniformly over the area and 
covered to a depth of ½ inch (1.25cm).  
 
The seeding rate for pasture or range seeding is 4 
pounds per acre drilled or 6 pounds per acre if 
broadcast planted.  An annual legume like ‘Lana’ 
vetch ( Vicia villosa ) at the rate of 10 pounds per acre 
drilled is frequently planted with soft chess.  For 
critical area planting, the seedling rate is 10 pounds 
per acre broadcast.  When used in cover crop 
planting, soft chess is s eeded at 5 pounds per acre 
broadcast.  
 
Management  
Livestock: When using soft chess for forage 
production, do not graze until  plants are 4 to 6 inches 
(10cm to 15cm) tall.  On newly seeded stands, 
withhold grazing until a seed crop has matured.  In 
subsequent years, at the  end of the grazing season, 
adequate seed will have been produced if the pasture 
has a uniformly patchy appearance.  
 
Erosion Control : On critical areas, the plants can be 
left to grow to maturity.  The seed and its stalks and 
leaves from the one year’s growth will provide plants 
and protection of the slopes for next year’s stand.  
Soft chess responds very well to applications of 
nitrogen-phosphorus fertilizer s, particularly on the 
low fertility sites of natural or man made disturbed 
areas.  
 
Soil Improvement : When using soft chess for cover 
crops in orchards and vineyards, the area under the 
trees and vines can be kept clean by spraying a strip 2 
to 6 feet (.61cm to 1.83m) wide with an approved 
herbicide.  This leaves a strip of cover between the 
tree or vine rows.  During the growing season, the 
cover can be left to grow to seed set or it can be 
mowed as frequently as necessary.  
 
Mowing height should be kept at 4 inches (10cm).  
Soft chess must not be mowed later than 3 to 4 weeks 
prior to seed maturity.  This will allow the plant to set 
seed for next year’s cover.  Following seed set, the 
cover can be mowed as close as desirable or disked 
under.  Regular cultural operations are then carried 
on throughout the year.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Blando’ Cultivar-Collected May 21, 1940, from 
winter annual rangeland near San Ramon, CA, by 
D.J. Vanderwal. Used for range reseeding, cover 
crop, revegetation of disturbed areas, and wildfire 
burn rehabilitation. Primary advantage over other 
strains is its consistent forage  and seed production 
from year to year. During low rainfall years, its 
superiority was demonstrated by out-performing all 
other strains.  In relation to the other strains tested, it 
is intermediate in maturity and sub-erect in growth 
habit.  ‘Blando’ is a reliable, intermediate strain of 
soft chess that was selected for its consistent 
production of forage and seed, especially under 
adverse soil and variable climatic conditions.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties in 
the United States. USDA NRCS, Washington DC. 
 
USDA NRCS. 1981.  Management and uses of 
Blando brome: Bromus mollis L . Davis, California.  
 
USDI Geological Survey. 1969. Bromus madritensis 
L. (Poaceae) foxtail chess.. Accessed: 7 Sep. 2005.

<www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC/factsheets/Bromus_sp
p.pdf>  
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 Edited: 8Sep2005 ro; 27sep05 jsp 
 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.