Plant Guide
SIDEOATS GRAMA 
Bouteloua curtipendula  
(Michx.) Torr. var. caespitosa 
Gould & Kapadia   
 
Plant Symbol =  BOCUC 
 
Sideoats grama  plant . Photo by  Forrest Smith, South Texas 
Natives , Kingsville, TX. 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  and  South Texas Natives   
Uses  
Livestoc k: Sideoats grama  (Bouteloua curtipendula 
[Michx.]  Torr. var. caespitosa  Gould & Kapadia) 
produces abu ndant forage on many range sites .  It 
provides moderate to high quality forage for  all types 
of grazing livestock.   
 
Wildlife :  Sideoats grama  provides fair  forage for 
wildlife.  It  also provides good nesting cover for 
upland game birds  and escape cover for all wildlife. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Sideoats grama  is a native, warm -season 
perennial bunchgrass.  It grows 3-4  feet tall.   The 
leaf blade is long, and is distinguished by papilla 
based hairs along the margin .   Variety  caespitosa 
does not have rhizomes, and has an upright, 
caespitose growth form. The seedheads are numerous 
spikes with 10 -30 spikelets generally oriented to one 
side of the rachis  (Barkworth et al. 2007) . 
Distribution :   T he natural range  of sideoats grama  is 
throughout North America  and continuing down  into 
Central America.  Variety caespitosa  is generally 
found in the western portions of the species’ range.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation  
Sideoats grama  grows best on  fine to medium 
textured  soils.   
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
o r later summer -autumn .  Establish a clean, weed -
free seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to 
planting, the site should be firm and have 
accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Sideoats grama  is best seeded using a native -grass 
drill with picker wheels  or medium  to large seed box  
to ensure a good planting of the  seed.  Broadcast 
seeding may be used in areas not easily planted with 
a drill, but some type of additional coverage such as 
culti -packing or light dragging will be beneficial to 
ens ure good seed to soil contact. Seed should be 
planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to plant too 
shallow than too deep.    
 
If one plant  per square foot has  become established  in 
field plantings , then the seeding can be considered 
successful.  
Management  
Sideoats grama  should not be grazed the first year  
after planting .  After a stand is established, either 
continuous or rotational grazing can be used.  It i s 
recommended that a minimum 6 inch stubble height 
be maintained under continuous grazing. Contact 
your local USDA -NRCS field office for assistance in

planning and applying prescribed grazing.  P lants 
should be allowed to produce seed annually to insure 
stand health.  Sideoats  grama is a long -lived 
perennial that is extremely drought and fire tolerant 
‘Butte’ was selected at Nebraska AES, Lincoln, 
once established.    USDA-ARS and SCS cooperatively by E.C. Conard 
and L.C. Newell. It represents native collections from 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Holt and Platte Counties in Nebraska that were 
Thrips and rice stink bugs can limit seed production  combined and tested as Nebraska 37. Repeated field 
on seed production fields.  
plantings revealed superior germination and 
  establishment characteristics when compared with 
Environmental Concerns  
other sources. 
There are no known environmental concerns   
associated with sideoats grama .   
‘El Reno’ was released cooperatively in 1944 by the 
  SCS, Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials Center and 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Kansas AES. The original seed was collected in a 
Seed increase plots have been  managed on 36” 
field location near El Reno, Oklahoma in 1934. The 
bedded rows, however flat p lantings may be possible 
material was outstanding for leafiness, forage 
with  adequate weed control . Sideoats grama  can also 
production and vigor. It also ranked well for disease 
be established with vegetative transplants.  Rapid  resistance, seed production, and winter hardiness. It 
spread and growth has been observed in transplant  is widely used in range seedings and is adapted to 
established stands providing seed harvests within the  Kansas, Oklahoma and northern Texas. 
first year.  Furthermore transplants facilitate better   
weed control in the seed production  fields.  Deep soil 
‘Haskell’ was released in 1983 by the James E. 
tillage or frequent close cultivation is recommend ed 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Texas AES and 
to promote seed production.    USDA-ARS. The seed for this release was orig inally 
  collected in 1960 by J.C. Yeary, Jr. in Haskell, Texas. 
Seed  can be harvested with a Flail -Vac or combine.  
It was selected based on rhizome production and 
To clean stems and chaff from harvests, a C lipper 
adaptation as far south as the Rio Grande Valley in 
seed cleaner has been used . Sideoats grama can 
Texas. It is also known for its high forage palatability 
produce multiple seed crops per year when grown  in 
and prolific seed production.  
cultivation.  The quantity and quality of seed harvests   
vary greatly depending on location and field  Killdeer was informally released in the late 1960’s by 
conditions.    
the Bismarck Plant Materials Center in Bismarck, 
ND. It is composed of seed collected from native 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and  stands in 1956 near Bowman, Bowman County and 
area of origin)  
Killdeer, Dunn County, North Dakota. Killdeer 
 possesses outstanding vigor, leafiness, fair seed 
South  Texas Germplasm sideoats grama was released 
production, freedom from disease and persistence in 
by  South Texas Natives,  the E. “Kika” de la Garza 
a cold, semi-arid environment.  
Plant Materials Center, and Texas AgriLife Research   
Beeville in 2012.  It was selected for its survivability,  ‘Niner’ was released in 1984 by SCS and the New 
plant vigor, forage production and seed production  Mexico and Colorado AES. The original seed for the 
characteristics.  This germplasm is known to be  release was collected by G.C. Niner and J.A. 
adapted to the Rio Grande Plain, Gulf  Coast Prairies 
Anderson in 1957 west of Socorro, New Mexico. 
and Marshes, and Coastal Sand Plains  Ecoregions of 
Niner was a bulk increase of the collection made by 
s outh Texas.   
Niner and Anderson.  
   
For calibration purposes, South Texas Germplasm  Pierre was informally released in 1961 by the 
contains approximately 165,000 seeds per  bulk 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center and the South 
pound.  A seeding rate of 5 -10 pounds of pure live 
Dakota AES. The original seed for the  release was 
seed (PLS) per acre is recommended.  In planting  collected in 1954 in Stanley County west of Pierre, 
mixtures reduce the rate according to the percent of  South Dakota. The release is described as outstanding 
sideoats grama desired on the planting site.  Breeder  in vigor, leafiness, freedom from disease, seedling 
seed is maintained by South Texas Natives .      
vigor and persistence in a semi -arid environment.  
   
Well managed seed fields of South Texas Germplasm  ‘Premier’ was released in 1960 cooperatively by 
have produced 80- 350 bulk pounds of clean seed per 
Texas AES and USDA-ARS and NRCS. The original 
year.  Purity of the seed is usually around 50% and  seed was collected in 1953 from a single plant 
germination rates range from 5 -20%.  South Texas 
growing between Cuauhtemoc and Chichuahua, 
Germplasm has a large amount of dormant seed.  It  
Mexico. The release is described as having good 
pr
 oduces
 four seed crops per year when grown under 
irrigation  in South Texas.

seedling vigor, good seed yield, drought tolerance, 
upright growth form and leafiness.  
 
‘Trailway’ was cooperatively released in 1958 by 
Nebraska AES and USDA-ARS. The original seed 
was collected in 1953 in northern Holt County by 
L.C. Newell. The release is described as winter 
hardy, long lived, late maturing with a somewhat 
indeterminate heading and flowering response. 
Requires most of the growing season to mature a crop 
in eastern Nebraska and may fail to produce seed in 
areas with a shorter growing season.  
 
‘Vaughn’ was relea sed in 1940 by the New Mexico 
AES and SCS Plant Science Division. The original 
seed was collected from native stands in 1935 near 
Vaughn, New Mexico. The release is described as 
slightly variable, but all have erect leaves, good 
seedling vigor and easy to establish.   
 
Northern, Central and Southern Iowa Germplasms 
were released in 1995 as source identified releases, 
by the Elsberry Plant Materials Center, University of 
Northern Iowa, Iowa Department of Transportation, 
Iowa Crop Improvement Association and N RVC. 
They are all composite lines from collections made in 
Nort hern, Central and Southern Iowa.  
 
References  
Barkworth, M.E., L.K. Anderton, K.M. Capels, S. 
Long, and M.B. Piep. 2007. Manual of   
Grasses for North America.  Intermountain 
Herbarium and Utah State University Press. Logan, 
UT.  
SCS 1983. Notice of Release of ‘Haskell’ sideoats 
grama.  United States Department of Agriculture. 
Washington, D.C.  
SCS 1984. Notice of Release of ‘Niner’ sideoats  grama.  United States Department of Agriculture. 
Washingt on, D.C
. 
 
  S

mith, F.S., A.D. Falk, and 
W.R. Ocumpaugh 2012.  
Notice of Release of South Texas Germplasm 
Sideoats grama.  Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research 
Institute. Kingsville, TX.  
USDA NRCS 2010. Plant Guide: Side -oats grama.  
http://plants.usda.gov/plantguide/pdf/pg_bocu.pdf 
USDA NRCS 2011.  ‘El Reno’ sideoats grama.  
http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/kspmcrb10371.pdf 
 
 
Prepared By :   
John Lloyd -Reilley , Manager  
USDA -NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  
 
Forrest S. Smith, Director  
South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife 
Research Institute, Texas A&M University -
Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas   
Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J.  and F. Smith. 2012.   Plant guide for 
South Texas Germplasm sideoats grama.  USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” 
de la  Garza Plant Materials Center and South Texas 
Natives , Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, 
Texas A&M University -Kingsville , Kingsville, Texas 
78363.    
Published  July 2012 
For more information about this and other plants, 
ple ase contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is  not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
US

DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER