Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WATER BIRCH 
Betula occidentalis  Hook. 
Plant Symbol = BEOC2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
Rocky Mountain birch, mountain birch, red birch, 
black birch, spring birch 
 
Uses 
Economic: The wood is hard and heavy and is used 
for firewood and fence posts (Hosie 1969). 
 
Wildlife : Goats, sheep, mule deer, and elk browse 
Water birch.  Beavers harvest the stems of water 
birch to aid in their construction of dams and lodges.  
The broad-tailed hummingbird and red-napped 
sapsucker feed on sap oozing from holes in the bark 
made by sapsuckers (Gullion 1964). 
 
Agroforestry : Water birch is used in forested riparian 
buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, protect 
aquatic environments, enha nce wildlife, and increase 
biodiversity. 
 
Description 
General : Birch family (Betulaceae).  Water birch 
( Betula occidentalis ) is a small native tree or shrub 
that grows in clusters along the banks of streams and 
lakes.  The leaves are thin, ovate, rather coarsely 
toothed and are usually 1-2 inches long.  The fruit is 
tiny hairy nutlets with wings broader than the seed.   The bark is thin, dark reddish-brown to black, with 
mark horizontal slits, and does not peel like other 
birches. 
 
Distribution
: White birch is distributed from southern 
Manitoba to southern Alaska and North Dakota and 
south to California and New Mexico.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation 
Betula occidentalis  is very shade tolerant.  It is 
mostly found in wet to moist nutrient-rich soils, along 
streams, in mountain canyons, usually in coniferous 
forest (Little 1980).  Water birch occurs on a wide 
variety of soil textures generally at low to middle 
elevations. 
 
Establishment  
Propagation from Seed : Seeds may be collected from 
local trees for establishing  nursery stock.  Sow the 
seeds as soon as they are ripe in containers or seed 
trays containing a slow-release fertilized.  Firm the 
medium and sow the seeds thinly and evenly on top, 
and lightly cover with medium.  Once the seedlings 
are large enough to handle  they should be placed into 
individual pots.  Once seedlings are 18-30 inches tall 
remove from individual pots and outplant to 
premature location. 
 
Management 
Nursery grown seedlings should be planted onto 
moist sites.  The seedlings should be transplanted 
when they are one to two years old.  The best time for 
transplanting is in the spring as the buds begin to turn 
green. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Arno, S.F. 1977.  Northwest trees.  The 
Mountaineers, Seattle, Washington.

Brinkman, K.A. 1974.  Seeds of wood plants in the 
United States .  USDA Agriculture Handbook 450.  
Washington, D.C. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  
Stibes Publishing Company, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Gullion, G.W. 1964.   Wildlife uses of Nevada plants .  
Contributions toward a Flora of Nevada No. 49.  
Beltsville, Maryland. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Hosie, R.C. 1969.   Native trees of Canada .  7th ed.  
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
 
Lanner, R.M. 1983 .   Shrubs of the Great Basin: A 
Natural History .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada. 
 
Little, E.L. 1980.   National Audubon Society field 
guide to North American trees: western region .  
Alfred A. Knopf Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1965.   A California flora.  University of 
California Press, Berkely and Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Nelson, R.A. 1992.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  Roberts Rinehart Publishers, Niwot, 
Colorado. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1922.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Van Dersal, W.R. 1938.   Native woody plants of the 
United States, their erosion-control and wildlife 
values .  Washington, D.C. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.