Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA BROME
Bromus carinatus Hook. & 
Arn.  
Plant Symbol = BRCA5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & California Plant Materials Center 
 
 F. Ballerini 2008 
 
Alternate Names  
Big brome, Bromus carinatus  var. californicus, 
Bromus carinatus var.  hookerianus, Bromus 
laciniatus, Ceratochloa carinata , keeled brome, 
mountain brome. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  The seeds of California brome were 
feared by the Native Americans to be poisonous if 
swallowed.  However, they were often dried and 
ground into flour to make bread and other foods. 
Livestock:  California brome is an important forage 
species for livestock throughout its growing season.  
It is sometimes planted as pasture grass. 
  Restoration: 
California brome is a rapid establisher 
and has good soil stabilizing capabilities.  For these 
reasons, it is useful for revegetation and erosion 
control in disturbed rangeland sites, spent oil shale, 
coalmine spoils, heavy metal mine tailings, and 
roadsides.  It is best suited for side-slopes and back-
slopes because it can withstand periodic drought.   
 
It is effective in improving water infiltration and has 
been used successfully  on waterfront sites. 
 
Wildlife:  Elk, grizzly bear, geese, squirrels, pocket 
gophers, and other rodents consume California brome 
plants.  Birds consume the seeds.  California brome 
also provides good cover for small mammals, small 
non-game birds, and upland game birds.   
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
The Western Society of Weed Science has listed 
California brome as having invasive characteristics.  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  California brome 
is a native, cool-season perennial bunchgrass that 
lives 3 to 5 years and grows to be 60 to 120 cm tall.  
The roots of California brome are fibrous, grow very 
quickly, and become deep and widespread.  Young 
plants are erect, but older stems grow along the 
ground with only the apical tips remaining erect 
(decumbent).  Stems are robust with hairy sheaths.  
Leaf blades are 0.5 to 1 cm wide and 15 to 30 cm 
long.  They can be pubescent or glabrous.  The 
inflorescence is a stiff, open panicle, 10 to 20 cm 
long and droops at maturity.  The spikelets are 5 to 7 
flowered, 2 to 4 cm long, 5 to 7 mm wide and 
flattened.  Lemmas are 1 to 1.5 cm long, flattened, 
keeled and usually pubescent.  The awns are 2 to 5

mm long.  Seeds mature in May and June at low 
elevations and by late August at high elevations. 
 
Distribution : California brome occurs from Alaska 
east to Ontario and south to Illinois, Texas, 
California, and northern Mexico.  It is native from the 
Pacific Coast to the Rocky Mountains and is casually 
introduced in the Great  Plains.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: California brome grows in open woods and 
forests, shrublands, grasslands, meadows, and waste 
places.  It is closely associated with pine dropseed, 
bracken fern, corn lily, dwarf purple monkey flower, 
mountain muhly, and Rocky Mountain iris and shares 
dominance in plant communities like coastal prairie 
and northern coastal scrub, sagebrush steppes, aspen, 
oak woodland, and Douglas-fir. 
 
Adaptation 
California brome grows well in a variety of soils 
including poorly drained types.  It is most abundant 
in moderately moist, well-developed, deep, medium-
textured soils.  It tolerates soils in the pH range of 5.5 
to 8.0.  It occurs in bottomlands, mountain slopes, 
valleys, and ridge tops, up to elevations of 4,000 m.  
It requires nearly full to full sunlight. 
 
Management 
Although fair control of California brome by 
trifluralin and pronomaide has been documented, it 
does not respond to most herbicides. 
 
It is reduced by heavy grazing and favored in 
moderate to light grazing.  Sheep are more likely to 
kill plants by trampling them rather than overgrazing.  
Cattle are more likely to overgraze than trample the 
plants.  
 
California brome is top-killed by fire, but appears to 
recover within a few years.  It can sprout from 
surviving root crowns as  early as the next growing 
season.  Coverage of California brome is slightly 
reduced from pre-fire levels for several years after 
fire, then returns to pre-fire levels.   It is sometimes 
seeded in after fire to help stabilize soil. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
California brome is sometimes prone to stem rust, 
head smut, leaf rust, and leaf spot. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are collected between May 1 and September 
10, depending on rate of maturation.  Mature  inflorescences turn from 
green-purple to brown and 
mature seeds are light brow n-gray.  Cleaning is not 
required for germination.  Seeds should be stored in a 
dry, evenly temperate envi ronment.  Dry refrigeration 
is best for long term storage.   
 
Seeds are surface sown, 3 seeds per container, and 
planted 2 times the diameter of seed to depth.  Sixty-
five percent germination will occur within 30 days 
and seedlings are transplanted into individual 
containers.  
 
Other sources state that 85% germination will occur 
in 13 days at 30
oC, 83% in 13 days between 19o and 
23oC, and 46% in 21 days at 14oC.  Natural seed 
stock will have higher germination rates than 
commercial stock. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
California brome seed is  readily available from 
commercial sources. 
 
‘Southern Cal 1000’ Germplasm
 California brome 
( Bromus carinatus ) was collected in 2006 in Orange 
County near Irvine Ranch at 1,000 feet elevation on 
silty clay soils in a purple needlegrass community. It 
was selected from 28 accessions after a two-year 
field trial evaluation.  It is noted for its vigor, plant 
mass, and seed yield amongst other southern 
California accessions within the trial.  It is 
recommended for use in southern California in 
MLRA 14d, 15d, 19 and 20. 
 
‘Central Coast 2600’ Germplasm 
California brome 
( Bromus carinatus ) was collected in 2006 in a 
location east of Los Olivos, California on Figueroa 
Mountain at 2,600 feet elev ation on sandy clay soils 
in a blue oak grassland community.  It was selected 
from 28 accessions after a two-year field trial 
evaluation.  It is noted for its superior vigor, height, 
and seed yield.  It is recommended for use in MLRA 
15d, 20, 22d, and 22e. 
 
‘Coastal 500’ Germplasm
 California brome (Bromus 
carinatus ) was collected in 2006 in San Luis Obispo 
County near Cal Poly Cany on at 500 feet elevation 
on sandy clay loam soils in a coast live oak grassland 
community.  It was selected from 28 accessions after 
a two-year field trial evalua tion.  It is noted for its 
vigor, plant mass, and seed yield.  It is recommended 
for use in MLRA 4c, 14c, 14d, 15c, and 15d. 
 
‘Northern Cal 40’ Germplasm
 California brome 
( Bromus carinatus ) was collected in 2006 near Point 
Pinole in Pinole, California  at 40 feet elevation on

silty clay loam soils within an annual grassland 
community.  It was selected from 28 accessions after 
a two-year field trial evaluation.  It is noted for its 
superior vigor, plant mass, early seed production, and 
seed yield amongst other coastal accessions within 
the trial.  It is recommended for use in MLRA 14c, 
14d, 15c, 15d, 15e, 16e, 17d, 17e, and 18d. 
 
‘Central Sierra 3200’ Germplasm
 California brome 
( Bromus carinatus ) was collected in 2006 in Yuba 
County at Pike County Peak at 3,200 feet elevation 
on silty clay soils within a pine and fir community.  It 
was selected from 28 accessions after a two-year 
field trial evaluation.  It is noted for its superior 
vigor, plant mass, and seed yield amongst other 
higher elevation accessions within the trial.  It is 
recommended for use in MLRA 18d, 22c, and 22d.  
 
‘Bromar’ is recommended for revegetating high-
elevation sites.  It is resist ant to stem rust, head smut, 
leaf rust, and leaf spot. 
 
‘Cucamonga’ is recommended for erosion control 
and ground cover on droughty, low fertility 
grasslands.  It can also be used for revegetation of 
disturbed areas, and wildfire land rehabilitation   It is 
susceptible to head smut, which can be controlled 
with a mercuric fungicide.  This cultivar was 
collected from a native stand near Cucamonga, 
California in 1939. 
 
 ‘Luval’ is a drought resistant cultivar. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective.  
  
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 2 
July 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Harrison, S. 2000.  Rangeland ecosystems and plants 
(http://www.usask.ca/agriculture/plantsci/classes/ran
ge/index.html, 2 July 2004). University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. 
 
Howard, J.L. 1997.  Bromus carinatus. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 2 July 2004).  Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Missoula. 
 
Moerman, D. 2003. Native American ethnobotany 
database  (http://herb.umd.umich.edu, 2 July 2004). 
University of Mi chigan, Dearborn. 
 
Pratt, M., J. Bowns, R. Banner, and A. Rasmussen. 
2002.  Range plants of Utah 
(http://extension.usu.edu/rangeplants/index.htm, 2 
July 2004). Utah State University Extension, Logan. 
 
Wilson, M. 2004.  Bromus carinatus 
(http://oregonstate.edu/~wils omar/Species/Brca.htm, 
2 August 2004).  Department of Botany and Plant 
Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis. 
 
Young, B. 2001.  Propagation protocol for 
production of container Bromus carinatus Hook. & 
Arn. Plants. (http://www.native plantnetwork.org, 2 
July 2004). College of Natural Resources, University 
of Idaho, Moscow.   
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg , previously USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana   
Edited: 4Aug2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln;  27sep05 jsp; 25may06jsp; 
01July08capmc; 080916jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.