Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MOUNTAIN BROME 
Bromus marginatus Nees ex 
Steudel 
Plant Symbol = BRMA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Bromus carinatus, California brome 
 
Uses 
Soil stabilization/erosion control: Mountain brome 
germinates and establishes quickly when seeded 
making it a good choice for quick cover of disturbed  
 
sites such as highway right- of-ways, coal mine spoils, 
heavy metal mine tailings, spent oil shale and 
wildfire revegetation. It is a short-lived pioneer 
perennial species and when planted with slower 
developing native plants, provides excellent cover  crop attributes for the slow
er establishing species. It 
has good root production, especially when combined 
with a legume. Mountain brome roots decompose 
slowly providing long lasting erosion control even 
after the plants have died.  
 
Wildlife : Mountain brome is an excellent plant for the 
revegetation of livestock and big game ranges in 
foothill and mountain locations. It is highly palatable 
in the spring providing good forage for wildlife and 
livestock. The leaves provide excellent grazing for 
elk, cattle and horses and are also eaten by sheep and 
deer. The seeds are readily eaten by small mammals 
and birds.  
 Jeanne R. Janish.  1977. 
©TheNewYorkBotanicalGarden
 
Grazing/livestock/pasture : Because mountain brome 
is a short lived perennial it should not be used for 
permanent pasture. Hay production levels drop after 
the third to fourth year as plants lose vigor and begin 
to die out. It can be used successfully, however, as a 
mixture component with slower developing long-
lived perennial pasture species. 
 
Legal Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Taxonomy 
There is debate concerning  the proper placement of 
mountain brome in plant taxonomy. The California 
brome (Bromus carinatus)  complex, to which 
mountain brome belongs alon g with foothills brome 
( B. polyanthus ), is highly variable and taxonomists 
have named many taxa that can be viewed at a 
specific or subspecific level. Following the rules of 
botanical nomenclature, if  B. marginatus is 
synonymous with B. carinatus , then B. carinatus  has 
priority because that name was published by William 
Jackson Hooker and George Walker Arnott in 1840 
(Hook. & Arn. Bot. Beech ey’s Voyage 403. 1840), 
while  B. marginatus  wasn’t published until 1854 by 
Christian Gottfried Daniel Nees von Essenbeck, some 
fourteen years later (Nees ex Steudel, Syn. Pl. Glum. 
1: 322. 1854). However, if they are to be seen as 
separate entities, then the group should be broken 
into the following three taxa as suggested by 
Cronquist et al (1977): 
1  plants annual or biennial, 3-10 dm tall: awns 
usually > 7mm long  B. carinatus

1  plants perennial, 8-12 dm tall; awns usually < 7 mm long 
2  plants mostly pubescent throughout   B. marginatus  
2  plants glabrous, at least in the 
spikelets   B. polyanthus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Mountain brome is 
a short-lived, perennial, cool season C-3 type bunch 
grass native to the mountain and intermountain 
regions of Western North America.  
 
Plants develop from a shallow, non-rhizomatous root 
system. Culms are tall, usually 0.5 to 1.0 meters (20 
to 40 inches), but someti mes reaching 1.5 meters (60 
inches). Leaves are flat and broad, 4 to 10 mm wide 
(0.15 to 0.4 inches), mostly soft hairy, especially 
around the sheath, but can be glabrous or scabrous. 
Auricles are absent or much reduced, and the ligule is  membranous, from 1 to 4 mm (0.05 to 0.15 inches) 
long. 
 
The inflorescence is a lo
osely contracted, nodding 
panicle reaching 10 to 30 cm  (4 to 12 inches) long. 
Spikelets are 5 to 10 flower ed, 20 to 40 mm (0.8 to 
1.6 inches) long; the glumes lanceolate, strongly 
keeled. The first glume is 7 to 11 mm (0.3 to 0.45 
inches) long with 3 to 5 nerves. The second glume is 
larger, 9 to 13 mm (0.35 to 0.5 inches) long and 5 to 
7 nerved. Lemmas are long, 11 to 15 mm (0.45 to 0.6 
inches), keeled with the apex slightly bifid to entire 
with awns 4 to 6 mm (0.15 to 0.25 inches) long. 
 Jeanne R. Janish.  1977. 
© The New York Botanical Garden
 
Distribution 
Mountain brome is common in the mountains and 
foothills of the Intermountain West. It is often found 
in relatively moist habitats in mountain big 
sagebrush, mountain shrub, aspen, and spruce-fir 
communities and up to sub-alpine mountain 
meadows.  
 
For more information on distribution, please consult 
the plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
website. 
 
Adaptation 
Mountain brome is well adapted to the foothills and 
mountains of the Intermountain West in areas with 
sixteen inches or more annua l precipitation. It can be 
found naturally at elevations ranging from 1,500 to 
3,200 meters (5,000 to 10,500 feet) and has been 
tested at elevations as high as 3,000 meters (9,850 
feet). It prefers deep, fertile , mesic soils of medium to 
fine textures, but also survives on thin, dry or coarse 
soils, resulting in lower levels of production.  
 
Mountain brome does not tolerate flooding or high 
water tables but can tolerate very mild salinity. It is 
winter hardy and has good shade tolerance and fair 
tolerance to fire. 
 
Establishment 
Seed should be planted in a well-prepared, firm, 
weed-free seedbed in late fall or early spring. Spring 
plantings should not be later than May 15
th in the 
mountain foothill zone or no later that June 1st in the 
mountain zone. Dormant fall plantings should be 
made no earlier than October 20
th and preferably after 
November 1st.  
 
Seed should be planted at ¼ to ½ inch depth. For 
pure stands the recommended drill seeding rate is 10 
lb/ac.  
For native mixtures limit mountain brome to 2 lb/acre 
to ensure slower devel oping species are allowed

adequate space for establishment. For erosion control 
plantings following wildfire, seeding rates should be 
1.5 to 2.0 times the rates listed above (broadcast 
plantings should target 40 to 60 seeds per square 
foot). 
 
This species is often seeded into rough terrain not 
easily transversed by equipment. In such cases 
mountain brome can be successfully broadcast 
seeded. 
 
Management 
Seedlings germinate in early spring (or fall under 
proper conditions) and plants mature by late June to 
early August. Moderate fall regrowth will occur with 
adequate soil moisture or when fall rains occur. 
Mountain brome has medium to rapid seedling vigor. 
However, mountain brome plants do not anchor their 
root systems rapidly, and plantings should be 
protected from grazing until a strong root system has 
established and plants are producing seed heads.  
 
Weed control measures may be required during the 
establishment year. 
 
Plants are fairly sensitive to grazing and should be 
managed carefully. Grazing utilization should be 
limited to 50% of the total annual growth. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Although mountain brome is native to Western North 
America, it is sometimes considered “weedy” due to 
its ability to quickly establish in disturbed sites.  
 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service Office or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding this 
species’ status and use. Weed information is also 
available from the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Mountain brome is known to be susceptible to head 
smut ( Ustilago bullata ); however ‘Garnet’ mountain 
brome has shown increased head smut resistance 
when compared to other  mountain brome accessions. 
Fungicidal seed treatments have proven to be an 
effective means of further controlling head smut in 
mountain brome (see Hewitt, 1977) in seed 
production fields.   
 
Mountain brome releases ar e resistant to stem rust, 
leaf rust, and leaf spot, but are susceptible to stripe 
rust and to aphid injury. A phid injury typically occurs 
when mountain brome is grown in pure solid stands. 
Seed Production 
Drill seed in the fall as a dormant planting or in 
spring into a firm weed-free seed bed with soil 
moisture at field capacity.  
 
Plant 5.0 pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre at 36 
inch row spacing or 25 to 30 PLS per foot of drill 
row. Soil surface should be kept moist throughout the 
two week germination period. Low rates of broadleaf 
herbicides should be applied when grasses are in the 
3 to 5 leaf stage. Fertilization is not recommended 
during the first growing season unless indicated by a 
soil test. 
 
Good soil moisture should be maintained throughout 
the growing season and post harvest. If sprinkler 
irrigated, plants should not be watered during 
flowering. 
 
Seed is normally ready to harvest in late June to mid 
July of the second growing season. Harvest by direct 
combining or swather. Swathing with a temporary 
“diaper” (a heavy piece of plastic or canvas clipped 
under the belt draper) can minimize seed loss due to 
shatter.  
 
Expected seed yields rang e from 300 lb/acre dryland 
to 600 to 1200 lb/acre irrigated for the first and 
second year of production. Third year yields are 
approximately 600 to 800 lb/acre. By the fourth year 
irrigated yields normally drop below 400 lb/acre. 
 
Seed should be dried to 12 percent moisture or less 
before storing. Seed should be stored in a cool, dry 
environment. Under proper storage conditions seed 
will retain viability for 5 to 7 years. 
 
Weed control measures may be required during the 
establishment year, and cultivation for maintenance 
of row culture is recommended for the life of the 
stand. Seed production fields should be regularly 
monitored for insects and disease. Soil tests should be 
conducted on seed producti on fields to determine the 
proper fertilization regimen, however only a 
moderate response to fertilization can be expected 
from mountain brome, and  fertilization may stimulate 
weed growth and competition. 
 
Releases 
There are two registered varieties of mountain brome 
that have been released  in the U.S., ‘Bromar’ and 
“Garnet”. If, however, one takes a broader view of 
the taxonomy, one must also include two additional 
varieties of California brome, ‘Cucamonga’ and 
‘Deborah’.

Aberdeen PMC Display nursery plots of Bromar 
(left) and Garnet (right). Photo by Dan Ogle. 
 
‘Bromar’ was chosen from among 154 accessions 
collected in the Pacific Northwest and was released 
in 1946 cooperatively by Washington, Idaho and 
Oregon Agricultural Experiment Stations at Pullman, 
Moscow and Corvallis. It was selected for being 
taller, leafier and having better seedling vigor than 
commercial strains. It shows outstanding 
performance when planted in mixtures with 
sweetclover or red  clover for short pasture rotations. 
Tests have shown Bromar to be moderately resistant 
to head smut, but chemical seed treatment is 
recommended. Breeder seed  is maintained by the 
NRCS Plant Materials Center in Pullman, 
Washington and Foundation seed is produced by the 
Washington Crop Improvement Association. 
 
‘Cucamonga’ comes from the Mediterranean climate 
of California and was released in 1949 by California 
AES, Davis and the California NRCS Plant Materials 
Center. It has a short green period which limits its 
value as a forage plant, but it has been used 
successfully for erosion control and ground cover on 
droughty sites with low fertility. It is known to be 
susceptible to head smut, and therefore must be 
treated chemically.  
 
‘Deborah’ was developed in Great Britain by 
combining two ecotypes, one from the UK and one 
from the South American Andes. It shows good 
drought tolerance, moderate resistance to smut and 
powdery mildew, but is susceptible to fruit fly.   
 
Garnet Germplasm was released in 2001 by the 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center in 
Meeker, Colorado and the Bridger Plant Materials 
Center in Bridger, Montana. The original collection 
came from a site near the town of Garnet in Granite 
County, Montana in 1976. Garnet shows improved 
seedling vigor, longer plant duration, extended seed  production and better resistance to head smut when 
compared to Bromar. Tested class seed is available 
from the UCEPC in Meeker, CO. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W. C. Sharp 1994. 
Grass varieties in 
the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
 
Cornforth, B., L. St. John and D G. Ogle. 2001.  Seed 
production standards for conservation plants in the 
intermountain West . Technical Note 14. USDA-
NRCS. Boise.  
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977.  Intermountain flora: vascular 
plants of the intermountain West, USA. The New 
York Botanical Garden, Bronx. 
 
Hewitt, B.V. 1977. Control of head smut (Ustilago 
Bullata Berkeley) in mountain brome (Bromus 
marginatus Nees).  Masters Thesis. Washington State 
University, Pullman. 
 
Janish, J.R.  1969.   Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest, Part 1: Vascular Cryptogams, 
Gymnosperms, and Monocotyledons.  University of 
Washington Press, Seattle. 
 
Law, A.G. and J.L Schwendiman. 1946.  Bromar 
mountain bromegrass.  Bulletin No. 479. Washington 
State University, Pullman. 
 
Ogle, D.G., L. St. John, M. Stannard & L. Holzworth. 
2003.  Grass, grass-like, forb, legume, and woody 
species for the intermountain west . Technical Note 
24. USDA-NRCS, Boise.  
 
Oregon State University Cooperative Extension 
Service.  Mountain bromegrass . Range Plant Leaflet 
16. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2004. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 
(http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA.  
 
Winslow, Susan R. 2002.  Propagation protocol for 
production of Bromus marginatus seeds; Bridger 
Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana . 
(
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 25 October 
2004). University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Resear ch Nursery, Moscow.

Prepared By: 
Derek J. Tilley 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Larry Holzworth  
USDA NRCS Mont ana State Office 
Bozeman, Montana 
 
Wayne Crowder 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Pullman, Washington 
 
Mark Majerus 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Bridger, Montana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Stannard  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Pullman, Washington 
 Edited: 10Dec04 djt; 21jan05dgo; 4Jan05 lsj; 6Jan05wac; 14Jan05 
lkh, 20Jan05 rln; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.