Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PAPER BIRCH 
Betula papyrifera  Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = BEPA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
White birch (B. p . var. paperifera ), paperbark birch, 
silver birch, canoe birch; western paper birch ( B. p. 
var. commutata ), mountain paper birch ( B. p. var. 
cordifolia ), Kenai birch ( B. p . var. kenaica ) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The sap and inner bark is used as 
emergency food (MacKinnon & Pojar 1994).  White 
birch can be tapped in the spring to obtain sap from 
which beer; syrup, wine or vinegar is made.  The 
inner bark can be dried and ground into a meal and 
used as a thickener in soups or added to flour used in 
making bread.  A tea is made from the root bark and 
young leaves of white birch.  The Shuswap made 
soap and shampoo from the leaves (MacKinnon,  Pojar, & Coupe´ 192).  It is also used by native 
Americans to make canoes, buckets, and baskets.  
The Shuswap were noted for their beautiful birch 
bark baskets (Ibid.).  North American Indian tribes 
used white birch to treat skin problems of various 
rashes; skin sores, and burns (Moerman 1998).  The 
bark has been used to make casts for broken bones. 
 
Economic
: White birch wood is used commercially 
for pulpwood, plywood, veneer, and turnery.  Tree 
chips are used for paper manufacture and fuel. 
 Paper birch in the foreground with larch in the background. © A.V. Lozhkin Atlas of Beringia NationalOceanic&AtmosphericAdministration
 
Medicinal:  A decoction has been used to treat 
dysentery, various diseases of the blood, induce 
sweating, and to ensure an adequate supply of milk in 
nursing mothers (Moerman 1998).  Birch gum could 
have been medicinal for some stone-age gathers.  The 
chewable gum contains zylitol, a disinfectant, and 
some terpenes, which could give the chewier a mild 
buzz (MacKinnon & Pojar 1994).   
 
Landscaping & Wildlife: Betula papyrifera  is 
commonly used as a landscape tree for it’s striking 
coloration.  It is a desirable ornamental to be planted 
around homes and public buildings, in parks, and on 
campuses. Moose, snowshoe hare, and white-tailed 
deer browse paper birch.  Numerous birds and small 
mammals eat the buds, catkins, and seeds. 
 
Agroforestry : White birch is used in forested riparian 
buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, protect 
aquatic environments, enha nce wildlife, and increase 
biodiversity. 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Birch family (Betulaceae).  White birch is a 
deciduous small to medium sized native tree. The 
leaves are alternate, ovate or triangular, five to ten 
centimeters long.  The flowers are male and female 
flowers in separate catkins  two to four centimeters 
long, the catkins break up at maturity (MacKinnon & 
Pojar 1994).  The fruits are mature seed catkins that 
are three to five centimeters  long.  The bark is thin, 
smooth, dark red to almost black on young stems, 
becoming reddish-brown an d then bright creamy 
white (Farrar 1995).

Distribution: White birch is native in Northern North 
America.  It is widely distributed from northwestern 
Alaska east across Canada to Labrador and 
Newfoundland, south in northwestern states to 
Pennsylvania and Iowa and in the western states to 
Montana and northeastern Oregon (Viereck & Little 
& 1972).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
White birch is adapted to a variety of soils.  It grows 
best in well-drained acid, sandy or silty loam, in cold 
soil temperatures and ample moisture.  It is not 
tolerant of drought, compacted soils, or areas with 
high air temperatures.  This species grows best in full 
sunlight and is very shade intolerant.  It does not 
perform well in harsh conditions or heat and is not 
tolerant of pollution. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed:  Propagation by seed requires 
that the seed is best sown as soon as it is ripe.  Sow 
the seeds in containers or  seed trays containing a seed 
germination medium to which a slow release 
fertilizer is added.  Firm the medium and sow the 
seed thinly and evenly on top, and cover with 
medium to a depth of medium (Heuser 1997).  Place 
the pots in a sunny location in a cold frame.  Plant 
seedlings into their permanent positions in late spring 
or early summer.  When seedlings are large enough 
to handle they should be  placed into individual pots 
and grown in a cold frame for their first winter. 
 
Management 
Fertilization and irrigation should be done to 
maintain white birch vigorous condition and to help 
prevent borer infestation.  Don’t prune this birch or 
other birches until summer because they are 
“bleeders” and should not be cut when the sap is 
flowing. 
 
White birch is susceptible to bronze birch borer and 
birch leaf minor. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Readily available at nurseries.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981.   Michigan 
trees .  The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
great plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawerence, 
Kansas. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 410. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
MacKinnon, A., J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´.  1992.   Plants 
of the northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine 
Publishing, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of pacific coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration 
1999.   Paleoenvironmental atlas of Beringia .  
Accessed: 11jan02.

<http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/paleo/parcs/atlas/beringi
a/vphotos.html> 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1989.  North American trees.  4th ed.  
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Weber, W.A. 1990.   Colorado flora: eastern slope .  
University Press of Colorado, Niwot, Colorado. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.