MEADOW BROME  
Bromus biebersteinii  Roem. & Schult. 
[excluded]  
Plant Symbol = BRBI2 
Common Names:  Meadow Brome, Meadow Bromegrass  
        
Scientific Names:  Bromopsis biebersteinii (Roem. & Schult.) 
Holub , Bromus erectus,  Bromus riparius 
   
Description  
General :  Grass Family (Poaceae).  Meadow brome is an 
introduced, long- lived, cool season perennial with short rhizomes.  
Plants are 50 -120 cm (19- 47 in) tall.  The leaves are flat, 5 -7 mm 
(0.20- 0.28 in) wide, 20- 35 cm (7.8-13.8 in) long, and pubescent on 
both leaf surfaces.  The upper  surface is deeply grooved and the 
lower surface has a prominent mid -nerve giving the blade a 
somewhat folded appearance.  Auricles are absent and the ligule is 
membranous and about 0.7 mm (0.03 in) long, truncate, ciliolate, 
and glabrous.  The inflorescence is an erect panicle, branching and 
whorled, drooping at maturity.  The spikelets are 7 -11 flowered.  
The glumes are glabrous, 7 -13 mm (0.28- 0.51 in) long.  The awn is 
8 -10 mm (0.31- 0.39 in) long (Majerus, 2009), (Skinner, 2010).  
Seeds are similar in app earance to smooth brome grass seeds but 
are almost twice the size and have much larger awns (Smoliak et al, 
1990).  Chromosome number is 2n = 70 and is cross pollinated 
(Tuna, et al., 2001).  
 
H ybridization with smooth brome  ( Bromus inermis  L.)  can be obtained under controlled greenhouse intercrossing ,  however  
natural  hybrids appear not to occur under field conditions due to an earlier flowering period (6- 10 days) for meadow brome  
(Knowles, et al., 1993) .  
Distribution :  Meadow brome was introdu ced to the United States from Turkey in 1949 (Smoliak, et al., 1990).  It is most 
commonly used in the northern tier of the United States and the southern tier of Canada (Majerus, 2009).   For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Meadow brome can grow on plains, mountain valleys, mountain brush, aspen, conifer forest and subalpine sites at 
elevations of about 4,000 feet (1219 m).  It has excellent winter hardiness with moderate toleran ce to shade (Ogle, et al., 
2011).  However, it is less winter hardy than smooth brome and crested wheatgrass (Knowles, et al., 1993).  In areas with 
significant spring frost and little snow cover, meadow brome is a much better species selection than orchar d grass. 
Adaptation  
Meadow brome is adapted to a broad range of soil conditions.  It performs best on moderately deep to deep, fertile, well -
drained soils but also performs fairly well on shallower soils.  Preferred soil textures range from coarse gravelly  to medium 
textured.  Meadow brome can be grown under dryland conditions receiving greater than 14 inches (355 mm) of annual 
precipitation, but performs best with 16 inches (406mm) or more of annual precipitation or with irrigation. The cultivar 
‘ Arsenal’  expands the use of meadow brome from irrigated pastures to non -irrigated pastures and rangelands with ≥330 mm 
(13 in) annual precipitation.   Meadow brome is rated poor to moderate for salinity tolerance depending on testing procedures 
(electro conductivity vs. sodium adsorption values) as reported by Sedevec, et al. (2007).  It is sensitive to flooding and 
commonly dies if inundated for more than 10 days.  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Uses 
The primary use of meadow brome is for forage production (Ogle, et al., 2011), (Sedivec, et al., 2007).  It is used for pastu re 
and hay and is highly palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  Meadow brome also provides good er osion control 
with its dense network of fibrous roots.  It is excellent forage for big game animals and waterfowl (particularly geese), and  
can be used in grass -legume mixes for nesting, brood rearing, escape, and winter cover in upland wildlife conservati on 
plantings and field borders.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/
) and your  state ’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Planting Guidelines 
A clean, firm, weed -fr ee seedbed is recommended.  Dry land and erosion control plantings  should be made in the late fall or 
very early spring when soil mois ture is not limited.  Irrigated plantings  should be made in early to mid- spring. On dryland 
sites , do not plant  later than May 15 or a failure may occur because of drought and hot summer conditions before the grass is 
well established  (Ogle, et al., 2011b) .  A deep furrow or double disc drill with press wheels may be used. Meadow brome 
does not flow uniformly through a drill unless it is diluted with rice hulls or other carrier.  There are approximately 86,875 
seeds per pound (PLANTS Database).   For dryland and irrigated land a seeding rate of 10 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre is recommended (20 seeds per square foot).  If broadcast or planted for critical area treatment, double the seeding rate  to 
20 pounds PLS per acre or 40 seeds PLS per square foot.   Meadow brome is very compatible with legumes such as alfalfa, 
cicer milkvetch, birdsfoot trefoil, sainfoin, and clover species  (Ogle, et al., 2011a) . When planting with legumes, alternate 
row planting is recommended due to differences in seedling vigor. Use 6 to 8 pounds PLS of meadow brome seed per acre 
when planting in alternate rows with a legume.  Adjustments in seeding rate should be made when seeding in mixtures  to 
percent of stand desired .  Seeding depth should be 1/4 to 1/2 inch.  
Management  
Under  dryland conditions the new planting should not be grazed until late summer or fall  of the second growing season 
(Ogle, et al., 2011b) . The plants may be severely damaged or pulled out by overgrazing especially in the seedling year due to 
poorly rooted seedlings. Under irrigated conditions the new planting should not be grazed until late summer or fall  of the first 
growing season.  Meadow brome establishes roots very slowly and plants may be severely damaged by grazing too soon. 
Harvesting for hay during the  establishment year  is most beneficial to eliminate grazing damage.  
 
Do not graze in the spring until forage is 8 to 12 inches high and remove animals from pasture when 3 to 4 inch stubble 
height remains  (Ogle, et al., 2009) .   With the exception of in the  spring where rest periods may be shorter than three weeks, a 
3 to 4 week rest period between grazing is recommended.   In May and June, four weeks is to long since meadow brome 
matures early and can become stemmy if not harvested quickly in the spring. Use  no more than 60% of the annual growth 
during the winter season or 50% during the growing season.  This plant responds well to rotation- deferred grazing systems.  
To maintain long -lived stands, the grass should be allowed to periodically mature and produce seed for continuation of the 
stand.  
 
Meadow brome responds very well to good fertility management.  One strategy to even out the forage production is to 
fertilize the stand after the first and second cutting or grazing periods to boost late spring and summ er production.  Apply 
fertilizer based on soil tests. Fertilizer nutrient rates need to be balanced rates of nitrogen and phosphorus to maintain 
optimum stands of grasses and legumes. Nitrogen will favor the grass while phosphorus will favor the legume  (Og le, et al., 
2009) . 
 
In an Alberta, Canada yield trial meadow brome had impressive pasture- hay yield performance (Knowles, 1993): 
 
Species                 Cultivar                 Yield (lbs/ac.)     
Meadow brome    Regar    10805  (5.4 ton)  
                             Fleet    10679  (5. 3 ton)  
                             Paddock     10438  (5.2 ton)  
Smooth brome     Manchar        866 1 (4.3 ton)  
Orchardgrass        Kay       8709 (4.4 ton)  
Meadow foxtail    Common        9177 (4.6 ton)  
 
* Fertilized after each cutting for an annual average of 220 lb/ac N and 55 lb/ac P

The forage yields of the meadow brome releases in this study are not significantly different. These yields may be an indicator 
of production under irrigated conditions. Average yields  under non-irrigated  conditions are estimated to be about 50 percent 
of those listed above.  
 
Forage production can be restored and stands may benefit from ripping if sod bound conditions occur  in older stands .  Care 
should be taken to avoid excessive rippi ng because stands may be damaged.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Meadow brome produced for seed is susceptible to covered h ead smut ( Ustillago bullata ).  Major seed loss usually occurs in 
the first year seed crop.  Later seed crops have less damage because  non-infected plants dominate the stand.  Stock seed 
should be treated with fungicide to kill the spores that adhere to the seed before planting.  Seed treatments will only prevent 
infection from spores on the seed but will not control infection if the soil  is contaminated.  Head smut is not detrimental for 
forage production or erosion control plantings.    
 
Silver top (or “whiteheads”) can cause minor damage in meadow brome seed production fields (Knowles, et al., 1993).  
Silver top is caused from damage to the seed stalk after panicle emergence but before seed development.  Affected seed 
heads die and bleach white, appearing to mature early without affecting the rest of the plant.  Causes of silver  top include 
insects or fungi that damage the seed stalk.  Environmental conditions such as late spring frosts or nutrient deficiencies or  
excesses can also cause silver top.  Banks grass mite ( Oligonychus pratensis) has also been observed in seed fields (F oster, et 
al., 1966
).  
Environmental Concerns  
This species is native to the Middle East, western and central Europe and China and was introduced to  the United States in 
1949.  It has since been used in the northern United States and southern Canada and has  not posed any environmental 
concerns.  It is not considered weedy but could spread into adjoining degraded plant communities via seed under ideal 
conditions . 
Seeds and Plant Production  
When  planting  for seed increase, seed should be treated wi th a fungicide (most seed companies  can treat seed) to reduce 
potential head smut problems common in bromes. Irrigated seed production plantings should be in at least 24- inch rows and 
preferably 36 -inch rows.  Seed ing rate is 4.7 pounds PLS/ac at 36 inch row spacing (C ornforth, et al., 2001).  Dryland seed 
yields are commonly 150 to 200 pounds per acre and irrigated seed yields are commonly 450 to 600 pounds per acre.  Seed 
matures fairly evenly and is ready for harvest in mid -late  July. The preferred method of harvest is to windrow at  the firm 
dough stage and then combine about 7 days later,  once seed has matured in windrow.  Direct combining is also acceptable, 
but the  field must be monitored closely and harvested when seed is mature and before seed shatter occurs.  Th e seed should 
be dried to 12 percent moisture in bins and 15 percent moisture in sacks before storing.  
 
‘Regar’ meadow brome seed production fields are only productive for about two to three seed crops and seed production 
beyond 2- 3 years are normally not economical. Proper row culture ( cultivation) and ripping may help to extend the stands 
productive life.  ‘Fleet’, ‘Paddock’, ‘Montana’, and ‘MacBeth’ were selected for a longer seed production life and higher 
seed production the third production year compa red to ‘Regar’. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)   
 
‘ Arsenal ’
 meadow brome was developed by the USDA -ARS, Forage and Range Research Laboratory at Utah State 
University, Logan, UT and was released in  2015.  Arsenal is a 39 clone synthetic derived from the same base  population as 
meadow brome  cultivar Cache and  wa s selected for use on semiarid rangelands and non -irrigated pastures as a rapid 
establishing forage grass with early spring growth, good fall nutritional quality, an d exceptional winter hardiness. Arsenal 
was also selected for plant vigor, seedling emergence from a deep planting depth, forage and seed yield, and seed mass under 
dryland environments of ≥330 mm (13 in.) annual precipitation.  Arsenal is genetically diff erent from Cache, ‘Fleet’, ‘Regar’, 
‘Armada’ , and ‘Admiral ’ (Jensen, et al., 2015).   
 
‘Cache’  meadow brome was developed by the USDA -ARS, Forage and Range Research Laboratory at Utah State University, 
Logan, UT and was released in 2004 with Plant Variety Protection (PVP).  Cache was derived from selections of Regar, Fleet 
and Paddock and was selected for improved seedling establishment and increased forage yields on irrigated and semi -
irrigated pastures in the Intermountain and Northern Great Plains regions of the western United States.  Individual seed 
weight of Cache is comparable to Fleet and Paddock, but significantly heavier than Regar (Jensen, et al., 2004).

‘Fleet’ meadow brome was developed by the Agriculture Canada Research Station, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and it was 
released in 1987.  Fleet was formed as a synthetic of plants from Eurasi an sources including Regar.  Fleet is similar to Regar 
in having a restricted creeping root habit and abundant basal leaves.  Fleet also has varying degrees of pubescence similar t o 
Regar.  Regrowth following clipping or grazing and fall greenness are also  similar to Regar.  Forage yields are also similar to 
Regar, but Fleet may produce higher seed yields  (Knowles, 1990).  
 
‘MacBeth’  meadow brome was developed at Montana State University and released in 2001. MacBeth has similar forage 
yields to Regar, Fleet  and Paddock, with a slight yield advantage in Montana dryland trials. At two  test locations, MacBeth 
produced more total forage of 30 accessions in the trials (Montana State University, Online) . 
 
‘Montana’  meadow brome was developed at Montana State University and licensed exclusively to a private seed company. It  
was released in 2001. Montana has similar forage yields to Regar, Fleet and Paddock. The major attribute for Montana is its 
improved seed yield potential over Regar and Paddock. At three test locations, Montana averaged 35 percent high seed yields 
than Paddock and 167 percent higher seed yields than Regar in the third year of production  (Cash, et al., 2002) . 
 
‘Paddock’  meadow brome was selected by the Agriculture Canada Research Station, Saskatoon , Saskatchewan, Canada and 
released in 1987.  It was developed from an introduction from Krasnodar, USSR in 1969.  Paddock has a similar habit of 
growth to Regar and Fleet.  Leaves are slightly wider than Regar and forage yields are similar to Fleet and Regar.  Paddock 
seed yields are greater than Regar seed yields  (Knowles, 1990) . 
 
‘Regar’  meadow brome was selected from a collection made near Zek, in Kars Province in Turkey in 1949 and made 
available to the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center in 1957 by the US DA Regional Plant Introduction Station.  It was released 
in 1966 by the Aberdeen, Idaho Plant Materials Center and the Idaho Agricultural Experiment Station.  Regar seed 
germinates readily, seedling vigor is good and seedlings establish rapidly.  Leaves ar e numerous, dominantly basal, mildly 
pubescent, and light green.  Seed stalks are erect and extend above the leaf mass in an open panicle.  Regar develops seed 
heads and matures 7 to 10 days earlier than smooth brome.  Regar greens up early in the spring and remains green late into 
the fall  (Foster et al., 1966) . 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local  
land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Cash, S., Ditterline, R., Wichman, D., Majerus, M. 2002.  Registration of ‘Montana’ Meadow Brome Grass.  Crop Sci. 
42:2211- 2212. 
Cornforth, B., St. John, L., Ogle, D. 2001) Seed Pro duction Standards for Conservation Plants in the Intermountain West. 
Technical Note 14. USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 13 p.  
Foster, R., McKay, H, Owens, E. 1966.  Regar Brome grass. University of Idaho Agricultural Experiment Stat ion Bulletin 
470. Moscow, ID 8 p.  
Jensen, K., Waldron, B., Larson, S., Peel, M. 2004.  Registration of ‘Cache’ Meadow Brome grass.  Crop Sci. 44:2263 -2264.  
Jensen, K., Singh, D., Bushman, S., and Robins, J., 2015. Registration of ‘Arsenal’ Meadow Bromegrass. Journal of plant  Registrations.   
Knowles, R. 1990.  Registration of ‘Fleet’ and ‘Paddock’ Meadow Brome Grass. Crop Sci. 30: 741.  
Knowles. R., Baron, V., McCartney, D. 1993.  Meadow Brome grass.  Agriculture Canada Publication 1889/E.   Communica tions Branch, Agriculture Canada, Ottawa, Ont. 19 p.  
Majerus, M. 2009.  Forage and Reclamation Grasses of the Northern Plains and Rocky Mountains.  Valley Printers, Bridger,  MT 161 p.  
Montana State University, Online. Cool Season Grass Performance in Montana (Irrigated Trials, 2001).   http://www.animalrangeextension.montana.edu (accessed August 24, 2012)  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, 2009. Pasture Species Selection and Grazing Management Guidelines.  Technical Note  11.  USDA- Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 27 p.  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 2011a. Conservation Plant Materials for the Intermountain West.   Technical Note 24.  USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 57 p.  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. St annard, Cornwell, J., L. Holzworth. 2011b. Pasture and Range Seedings: Planning- Installation-
Evaluation -Management. Technical Note 10.  USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 35 p.  
PLANTS Database, Online.  Meadow brome (Bromus bieberstein ii.  http://plants.usda.gov
 (Accessed August 21, 2012)  
Sedivec, K., Tober, D., Duckwitz, W., Dewald, D., Printz, J. 2007.  Grasses for the Northern Plains. Volume 1 Cool Season.  
North Dakota State University Extensio n, Fargo, ND. 89 p. 
Skinner, Q. 2010.  A Field Guide to Wyoming Grasses.  Education Resources Publishing, Cumming GA.  595 p.

Smoliak, R., Ditterline, J., Scheetz, J., Holzworth, L., Sims, J., Wiesner, L. Baldrige, D., Tibke, G. 1990.  Montana Interagency  Plant Materials Handbook.  Montana State University Extension, Bozeman, MT. 337 p.  
Tuna, M. Vogel, K., Arumuganathan, Gill, K., 2991.  DNA content and ploidy determination of brome grass germplasm  accessions by flow cytometry. Crop Sci. 41:1629- 1634. 
 
Citation  
St. John, L., D. Tilley, and K. Jensen. 2012.  Plant Guide for Meadow Brome (Bromus biebersteinii). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
 
Published : 2012    
 
Edited:  24Aug2012ls;  20De c2016tp  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
ht tp://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where  applicable , 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual&#39;s income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity condu cted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)   
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency&#39;s EEO Counselor
  (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information  can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the 
USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632 -
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the informati on requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint  
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 8 77-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail dir ectly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program informat ion (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact  
the USD A SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers
.  
For any other information not  pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 
 
 
Helping  People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER