Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLEXIBLE 
CEANOTHUS  
Ceanothus x flexilis  Greene ex. 
McMinn  
Plant Symbol = CEFL4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS California State Office 
& Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
USDA NRCS Lockeford PMC 
Uses 
Ceanothus x flexilis is used as a ground cover that 
provides erosion control and is used for restoration 
projects due to its low and wide growth pattern.  Its 
maintenance is low and it is used for ornamental 
value on road slopes revegetation and landscaping 
slopes around rural and mountain homes.  
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae).   Ceanothus x 
flexilis  is a native, evergreen, semi-erect shrub that 
grows 0.6 to 1.2m (2 to 4 feet) high and spreads to 
0.6 to 2.4m (2 to 8 feet) wide.  It is a naturally 
occurring hybrid between buckbrush ( Ceanothus 
cuneatus ) and squawcarpet ( Ceanothus prostrates ).  
The leaves are opposite and the flowering period is 
April and May.  Flower clusters are small with white 
to bluish, umbellate flowers.  
 
Distribution 
Ceanothus x flexilis  is native to California.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Ceanothus x flexilis  is adapted to lower elevations 
that receive a coastal influence. 
 
Establishment and Management 
After  Ceanothus x flexilis  has formed a third pair of 
leaves they can be transpla nted individually to larger 
½ to 1 gallon containers.  The young plants will be 
ready for their permanent loca tion in 11/2 to 2 years. 
New plants should be watered occasionally until they 
are well established; after which, deep watering every 
1 to 1 ½ months will be adequate to maintain uniform 
growth.   
 
Container plants may be available from local 
nurseries.  Dig a hole two to three times the diameter 
of the root ball and at least six inches deeper.  
Backfill the hole with six inches of native soil.  Make 
a few, 1/8 inch deep vertical cuts in the root ball, or 
carefully “tease” roots away  from the root ball with 
your hands to encourage roots to grow into the new 
soil.  Set the plant into the hole with 8 feet spacing 
between each plant and fill in around roots, firming 
the soil with your hands as you fill until the hole is 
half full.  Fill the hole with water and allow to settle. 
This will settle the silt and eliminate air pockets 
around the roots.  Backfill with enough planting mix 
so the plant will set at the same level it was growing 
in the container.  Water to allow soil to settle, then 
add more soil if necessary.  Build a berm of soil to 
form a watering basin aro und the outer edge of the 
hole.  Break the basin down after two or three years. 
Provide the plant with weed control measures during 
the first year. 
 
Seed Production 
Ceanothus x flexilis  is a hybrid cross and does not 
produce seed.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin’ 
‘Cuesta’ Cultivar- Collected from a native stand near 
the Grass Valley airport, Nevada County, California 
in 1974.  Stem cuttings we re collected from mature 
plants on this site and used to grow container plants 
for experimental plantings in the Sierra Nevada 
foothills.  It was initially selected for its possible use

on CALTRANS revegetation projects and compared 
to about 60 different species of shrubs in the Sierra 
Nevada foothills.  It showed superior performance in 
establishment, maintenance and ornamental value. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
USDA NRCS. 1991. Notice of Release of ‘Cuesta’ 
Ceanothus x flexilis .  Ecological Sciences Division, 
Washington D.C. and California Agricultural 
Experiment Station, University of California, Davis, 
CA. 
 
Prepared By 
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California. 
 Edited: 8Sep2005 rb; 23sep05 jsp; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.