Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SUNN HEMP 
Crotalaria juncea  L. 
Plant Symbol = CRJU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Soil Quality Institute 
and the National Plant Data Center 
 Uses 
Cover Crop & Green Manure : Used as a cover crop, 
sunn hemp can improve so il properties, reduce soil 
erosion, conserve soil water, and recycle plant 
nutrients.   
 
When grown as a summer annual, sunn hemp can 
produce over 5,000 pounds of biomass and 100 
pounds of nitrogen per acre. It can produce this 
amount within 60 to 90 days, so it has the potential to 
build organic matter levels and sequester carbon in 
the soil.  It is known to suppress nematodes. 
 
Sunn hemp originated in India where it has been 
grown since the dawn of agriculture. It has been 
utilized as a green manure, livestock feed, and as a 
non-wood fiber crop. 
 
Status 
As of 2005, Arkansas considered the genus 
Crotalaria as a noxious weed.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, st ate natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and  use. Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants
.usda.gov. Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description 
Legume family (Fabaceae). Branched, erect, 
herbaceous shrubby annual growing 3 to 9 feet high 
with bright green simple, elliptical leaves. It has deep 
yellow terminal flowers ( open raceme to 10 inches 
long) and the light brown pods  are small (1 inch long 
and 1/2 inch wide) and inflated.  It has a well-
developed root system, with a strong taproot. The 
number of seeds per pound is 15,000. 
 USDA NRCS Hawaii PMC 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Sunn hemp is a tropical or sub-tropical plant that 
when grown in the continental United States 
performs like a summ er annual. It can be planted year 
round in Hawaii below an elevation of 1,000 feet. 
However, it does not perpetuate itself well and is not 
found in the wild.  Sunn hemp is adapted to a wide 
range of soils and performs better on poor sandy soils 
than most crops. It is for such situations that it has 
attracted attention. It grows best on well-drained soils 
with a pH from 5.0 to 7.5. 
 
Establishment 
To establish a successful stand, seed should be 
broadcast or drilled and covered ½ to 1 inch deep into 
a well prepared, weed-free seedbed. If broadcasted, 
seed at a rate of 40 to 60 pounds of live seed per acre. 
If drilled, the rate should be 30 to 50 pounds per acre 
in 6-inch rows. The higher rates should be used if the 
crop will be terminated in less than 60 days or if 
severe weed competition is expected. Where weed 
competition is mild, drilled rates as low as 20 pounds 
of live seed per acre have been satisfactory. Inoculate 
with the cowpea-type rhizobia bacteria. 
 
Using a winter cover crop/green manure is a 
conservation practice that provides soil-improving 
characteristics.  A common problem, however, is that 
the relatively short period  between cash crop harvest 
in the fall and planting the following spring can result 
in less than optimum biomass production of the cover 
crop. Sunn hemp, because of its rapid growth and 
relatively short growing season requirement, can be

an excellent alternative. Where conditions are 
favorable, it can provide the benefits of a winter 
legume prior to a killing frost in the fall and also in 
the summer after the winter crop has been harvested. 
 
Management 
Warm weather (frost-free) is needed for 8 to 12 
weeks to provide biomass an d nitrogen. Small grains  
following sunn hemp can utilize the symbiotically 
produced nitrogen, thus reducing or eliminating the 
loss of nitrogen. It must be plowed under before 
reaching the full bloom stage or it becomes too 
fibrous when using it as a green manure. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Some species of  Crotalaria, including  Crotalaria 
juncea , contain toxic alkaloids, particularly the seeds 
and pods. ‘Tropic Sun’ is non-toxic and is resistant to 
root-knot and reniform nematodes. The genus 
Crotalaria has been known for its suppression of 
plant-parasitic nematodes. 
 
Seed Production 
-Drill 3 to 4 live seeds per foot about 1/2 inch deep in 
36 to 42 inch rows. This will give a live seeding rate 
of about 4 lb/acre. Isolate  the seed field from other 
Crotalaria plants. 
-Test soil and apply fertilizer and amendments per 
recommendations (broadcast before planting or 
banded next to seed at planting). 
-Irrigate if needed until about 75% of plants are 
flowering (usually occurs at  end of the third month).  
Stop irrigating after the 75% bloom stage. ‘Tropic 
Sun’ is easily threshed when dry. To enable the 
plants to dry naturally, time the planting so that 
flowering, seed set, and harvest occur during the dry 
season. 
-Cultivate as needed to control weeds. Fields should 
be weed free at harvest to prevent contamination of 
crop. Remove any wild  Crotalaria before harvest. 
-Combine when seeds rattle in the pods, about 5 
months from planting. Raise the combine header as 
high as possible without leaving seed pods on the 
plants (which prevents excess straw from slowing 
combine). Initially set the  concave clearance at 1/8 to 
3/16 inch and the cylinder speed at 1150 to 1200 
RPM. Adjust as needed according to crop conditions. 
-When seed crop is ready for harvest, the plants 
should be dry and self-defoliated. If crop is still 
green, desiccate by spraying with an approved 
desiccant 1-2 weeks before harvest. 
-Clean seed with standard  commercial seed-cleaning 
equipment. Dry the combined material before 
cleaning. 
-If commercial seed-drying and storage facilities are 
available, dry seed to be low 10% moisture and store 
at low temperature and humidity. 
-Seed yields have ranged from 500 of over 2200 
lb/ac, varying with environmental conditions and 
cultural practices.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Tropic Sun’: This has promise as an alternative to 
winter legume cover crops as an organic matter 
builder and as a symbiotic nitrogen producing 
legume. The USDA NRCS  and the University of 
Hawaii Institute of Tropical Agriculture and Human 
Resources cooperatively released the cultivar ‘Tropic 
Sun’ sunn hemp in 1983. This cultivar is non-toxic  to 
poultry and livestock as shown by laboratory tests 
and feeding trials. Since sunn hemp is a short-day 
plant and will not set seed consistently north of 28 ° N 
latitude (slightly north of Corpus Christi, TX), it has 
little potential for becoming a weed in most of the 
U.S. ‘Tropic Sun’ sunn hemp should receive a 
minimum of 1 inch of moisture per week for 
maximum growth, however it is quite drought 
tolerant. 
 
The supply of sunn hemp seed is limited due to few 
growers and the need for the plant to be grown in 
tropical regions to produce seed. Currently, limited 
supplies of seed can be obtained from the University 
of Hawaii and www.groworga nic.com. If sufficient 
demand develops, it may be possible to produce seed 
in areas like south Texas or south Florida. The NRCS 
does not endorse any certain company over another. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Control  
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information. USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
University of Hawaii. 2005. Sustainable agriculture 
in Hawai’I – green manures – ‘Tropic Sun’ sunn

hemp.  Accessed: 050927.  
<http://www2.ctahr.hawaii.edu/sustainag/GreenManu
res/tropicsunnhemp.asp> 
 
USDA NRCS. 2003. Sunn hemp: A cover crop for 
southern and tropical farming systems. Soil Quality – 
Agronomy Technical Note No. 10. Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By:  
Robert Joy, Plant Materials Center, Hoolehua, 
Hawai’i and  J.S. Peterson , USDA NRCS National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Robert Joy , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Hoolehua, Hawai’i. 
 Edited: 23sep05 jsp; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.