Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN CATALPA  
Catalpa speciosa  (Warder) 
Warder ex Engelm.  
Plant Symbol = CASP8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center and Kansas State University 
Forestry Research 
 J.S. Peterson @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Alternate Names  
Hardy catalpa, western catalpa, Catawba, Catawba-
tree, cigar tree, Indian bean tree, Indian cigar, 
Shawnee wood, early-flowering catalpa.  The name 
‘catalpa’ comes from the  Cherokee Indian language 
as the word for the tree.  ‘Speciosa’ means “showy” 
for the large and numerous flowers. 
 
Uses 
Horticultural : Northern catalpa ( Catalpa speciosa 
(Warder) Warder ex Engelm.)  is primarily used today 
as a large ornamental shade tr ee.  It is widely planted 
in urban areas as a street and lawn tree.  When 
flowering, it has abundant showy blossoms.   
 
Conservation : Conservation uses include being 
planted in mined-land reclamation projects and 
shelterbelts. 
 
European settlers planted it to produce fence posts.  
The wood is lightweight, and the heartwood is 
resistant to deterioration when placed in the ground 
for several years.  Railroad companies grew 
plantations of it for use as track ties and fuel wood.  It 
was also used for making packing materials.  
Carpenters commonly used it for interior trim in 
houses.  Craftsmen used it to make furniture.  It has 
also been used as telep hone or power line poles. 
 
Ethnobotany : In some of the older medical journals 
(19
th century) there were speculations that catalpa 
gave off poisonous emanations.  However, there is no 
scientific evidence to prove those speculations.   
 
Pioneer doctors used the seed pods and seeds to make 
a decoction for chronic bronchial affections, 
spasmodic asthma, labored breathing and heart 
problems.  The juice from either the leaves or roots 
was used to treat swelling of an eye or cutaneous 
affections.  Green leaves were crushed and placed on 
swollen lymph glands.  The bark was dried then 
ground to a powder and taken, or brewed in a tea and 
taken for swollen lymph glands. 
 
Modern pharmaceutical rese arch has shown catalpa 
trees have diuretic properties. 
 
It is sometimes planted to attract the green catalpa 
worms, which are prized fish bait.  These caterpillars 
can be frozen and used as bait at a later time. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable

vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
General : It is a perennial deciduous tree which 
readily grows in USDA Hardiness Zones 4 to 8.  It 
has moderate to fast growth, tending to grow rapidly 
when juvenile, but slows with maturity.   
 
The height at 20 years is about 20 feet.  The biggest 
northern catalpa recorded is in  Indiana.  It is 85 feet 
tall with a spread of 81 feet and a circumference of 
290 inches at 4.5 feet above ground level.  Catalpas 
prefer moist, deep, well drained soil, but adapts to 
dry or wet soils.  The soil pH may range from 5.5 to 
7.0.  It prefers an open sunny space to partial shade.  
When it grows from seed the tree trunk rarely divides 
into two or more branches about the same size.  If the 
tree is cut and grows back there is prolific spouting 
from the stump.  The bole may be straight, but it is 
usually crooked.  It is tall with an irregular, open-
rounded to narrow-oval crown.  This tree comes into 
leaf very late in the spring and it is one of the first to 
lose its leaves in the fall.  Its longevity is about 60 
years. 
 
The tree bark ranges from scaly to ridged, to blocky 
plates.  On a mature tree trunk the bark may be from 
¾ to 1 inch thick, light grayish brown in color, and 
broken into longitudinal, scaly, flat ridges.  On young 
tree seedlings the bark is  thin and easily damaged by 
impact, or rodents. 
 
Twigs in winter have a unique identifying 
characteristic.  They have sunken leaf scars which 
resemble suction cups.   Their whorled arrangement 
of 3 scars per node is another trait easily identified. 
 
Leaves are simple, large, ovate to ovate-oblong, from 
8 to 12 inches long, are heart-shaped tropical looking 
without any lobes and are yellowish green in color.  
The leaf margins are entire, pointed at the tips and 
rounded to cordate at the bases.  The top of the leaf is 
darker green than the und erside which is also 
pubescent.  Leaves are generally opposite on large 
branches and often whorled in 3 on young stems.  
Leaves may scorch and drop during droughts.  They 
turn an undistinguished yellow in the fall before 
dropping.  The leaves do not emit an unpleasant 
aroma when bruised as is the case with the southern 
catalpa (Catalpa bignonioides  Walt.), which are also 
more abruptly pointed.   
The flowers of catalpa are 
perfect.  Flowering takes 
place in late spring to early  summer.  They occur as 
large clusters of showy, white, bell-shaped corollas of 
5 lobes with ruffled edges and yellow, orange or 
purple interior spotting or streaking.   Individual 
flowers are showy, tubular up to ½ inch broad.  They 
are branched in about 10 inch clusters at the stem 
tips.  The northern catalpa flowers about 2 to 3 weeks 
earlier than the southern cat alpa, which also has more 
spotted flowers.  Flowers are good for honey 
production. 
 
Seedpods are slender and green in the summer 
growing from 10 to 24 inches long, looking similar to 
an exaggerated green bean.  They mature in the fall, 
turn dark brown, split open lengthwise to let seeds 
fall in the spring.  The whole pod is often blown off 
the tree.  The shape and co lor of the mature seedpod 
gives rise to the common name of cigar tree.   
 
The southern catalpa seeds are drawn out more to a 
point while the northern catalpas seeds are blunter at 
the end.  Seeds are about 1 inch long and 1/3 inch 
wide.  They have a light brown coat and wings 
rounded at the ends terminating in a fringe of short 
hairs.  There are approximately 20,480 seeds per 
pound.  Seeds which are co llected after overwintering 
in the mature seedpod have a higher germination rate 
than those collected in the fall and stored.  
 
The wood is of moderately light density (specific 
gravity 0.42 oven dry), with pale gray sapwood and 
grayish brown heartwood.  It has a faint, aromatic, 
non characteristic odor and no characteristic taste.  It 
is ring porous, coarse-grained, soft, not strong, but 
very durable in contact with the soil.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Prior to European settlement it was native 
to a small area of the central Mississippi Valley 
basin, western Tennessee, north east Arkansas, the 
lowlands of south east Mississippi and southern 
Illinois and Indiana. Farmers once planted catalpas in 
groves to provide shade for hog lots.  It is now 
readily found from Kansas south to Texas and 
eastward to Louisiana. 
 
Adaptation 
It has been extensively propagated for over 200 
years.  It can now be found  in most eastern states, and 
planted to some extent in Europe and New Zealand.

Establishment 
When placed as an ornamental in a yard setting, care 
must be taken to ensure it is not too close to a 
building, fence, property line or septic system.  
Ample space should be provided to let it reach a 
mature height. 
 
Management 
The biggest management problem with a catalpa tree 
used as an ornamental is litter.  It will drop a heavy 
load of flowers in the spring, then a plentiful supply 
of leaves in the fall and fi nally a lot of large seedpods 
in the winter. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Larvae of the catalpa sphinx caterpillar ( Ceratomia 
catalpae ) eat the tree’s leaves.  This causes 
significantly more nectar th an normal to seep out of 
the damaged leaves.  Almost complete defoliation 
may occur in some years.     This increased nectar 
attracts various species of an ts, ladybird beetles and a 
parasitoid.  These predaceous insects attack and/or 
remove the eggs and young larvae of the catalpa 
sphinx.  The secretion of extrafloral nectar and its 
subsequent harvesting by insects is mutually 
beneficial to both the cat alpa tree and the predaceous 
insects. 
   
Rabbits are especially damaging in their girdling of 
young stems. 
 
Immature seeds in the pods are often destroyed by a 
small yellow grub, the larva of a gnat. 
 
Catalpa midge ( Cecidomyia catalpae Comstock) 
causes leaf spots, injures terminal buds and branch 
tips, as well as seeds in the pods. 
 
Brown leaf spots on leaves  are often created by the 
fungi  Macrosporium catalpae .  This is rarely a 
serious problem so no  chemical treatment is 
recommended.  Catalpa is also susceptible to the 
decay fungus  Polystictus versicolor .  It can severely 
damage catalpa trees after about 20 years of age in 
the western part of its planted range. 
 
Powdery mildew causes a white powdery coating on 
the leaves.  When severe the leaves turn yellow and 
drop. 
 
Verticillum wilt will make the branches die, and can 
eventually kill trees.  A hard to find symptom of 
verticillum wilt is discoloration of the sapwood. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
It is an invasive, we edy tree which escapes 
cultivation easily.  The flowers, long seedpods and 
seeds fall down from spring through winter, and 
create a mess on the ground anywhere near the tree. 
Its brittle wood makes its branches subject to wind 
and ice damage. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Catalpas can readily be grown from seed.  Research 
shows seeds collected afte r overwintering in the 
seedpods had better germination than those collected 
in the fall and stored inside.  Root cuttings may also 
be used to propagate trees. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two species of catalpa native to North 
America, northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa ) and 
southern catalpa (Catalpa bignonioides ).  They 
appear very similar but are two distinct species.  One 
variety of C. speciosa  has been documented: 
pulverulenta from Paul & Son. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
American Forests.  National register of big trees: 
northern catalpa. 
( http://www.americanforests.org/resources/bigtrees/r
egister.php?details=140) [online: cited 14 August 
2008]. 
 
Bailey, L.H. 1939. p. 684  In The standard cyclopedia 
of horticulture .  Volume I –A-E.  The MacMillan 
Company, New York. 
 
Bailey, L.H. and E.Z. Bailey. 1976.   Hortus third, a 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United

States and Canada.  State University at Cornell 
University, New York State College of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences. MacMillan Publishing Company, 
New York.   
 
Bonner, F.T. and D.L. Graney. 1989. Catalpa Scop. 
Catalpa. p. 281-283.  In Schopmeyer, Technical 
Coordinator.  Agricultural Handbook No. 450, 2
nd ed. 
Reprint from 1974. USDA: Forest Service, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washngton, D.C.  
 
Collingwood, G.H. 1943. Northern catalpa.  
American Forests , August, 1943.  p. 401. 
 
Dalby, R. 1999. p. 469  In The case for the catalpa. 
American Bee Journal , June, 1991.  
 
Evans, E. Trees:  Catalpa speciosa . 
( http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/factsh
eets/trees-new/catalpa_speciosa.html). [online: cited 
24 March 2005]. North Carolina State University 
Cooperative Extension Horticultural Science. 
 
Felter, H.W. and J.U. Lloyd. 1898. Catalpa-cigar tree.  
King’s American Dispensatory  
(http://www.henriettesherbal.com/eclectic/kings/catal
pa.html) [online: cited 24 March 2005]. 
 
Fernald, M.L. 1950.  Gray’s Manual of Botany , 8
th ed. 
American Book Company, New York. 
 
Floridata. Catalpa speciosa . 
( http://www.floridata.com/ref/C/cata_spe.cfm
) 
[online: cited 24 March 2005].  Floridata 
marketplace. 
 
Garman, H. 1912.  The catalpa and their allies . 
Bulletin No. 164: 201-223. Kentucky Agricultural 
Experiment Station.  
 
Geyer. W.A. 2000.  Catalpa Outline Data Sheet.   The 
forestry compendium – a silvicultural reference. 
CABI Publishing.  Wellingford, Oxon, U.K.  
 
Gilman, E.F. and D.G. Watson.  1993.  Catalpa spp.  
Fact Sheet ST-130.  Univer sity of Florida, Florida 
Cooperative Extension Service, Environmental 
Horticulture Department, Institute of Food and 
Agricultural Sciences. 
 
Green, W.J. 1904.  The hardy catalpa as a farm crop. 
Bulletin No. 149:69-80. Ohio Agricultural 
Experiment Station.  
  Gossard, H.A. 1908. 
The catalpa midge.  Bulletin 
No. 197: 13p. Ohio Agricultural Experiment Station.   
 
Hortnet.  Catalpa speciosa . 
( http://www.hort.net/gallery/view/big/catsp/
) [online: 
cited 24 March 2005].  Hort.net 
  
Iverson, L., D. Ketzner, and J. Kar.   Illinois plant 
information network on Catalpa speciosa .  
( http://www.fs.fed.us/ne/delaware/ilpin/699.co
) 
[online: cited 24 March 2005].  USDA Forest 
Service, Delaware. 
 
Little, E.L. 1953. USDA, FS.  Checklist of native and 
naturalized trees of the United States.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 41.  U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C.   
 
McGregor, R.L. et al. 1977.  Atlas of the flora of the 
great plains .    Iowa State University, The Iowa State 
University Press, Ames. 
 
McGregor, R.L. et al. 1986.  Flora of the great plains.    
University of Kansas, Univ ersity Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence. 
 
Ohio Department of Natural Resources.   Ohio’s trees, 
northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa ). 
( http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/f orestry/trees/catalpa_nth
rn/tabid/5349/Default.aspx) [online: cited 24 March 
2005].   
 
Oklahoma Biological Survey.   Catalpa speciosa 
(Warder) Warder ex Engelm .  
(h ttp://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/casp8.htm
) 
[online: cited 24 March 2005].  University of 
Oklahoma, Norman. 
 
Paclt, J. 1952.  Synopsis of the genus Catalpa 
(Bignoniaceae) III.  Candolea 13: 242-285. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, and C. R. Bell. 1968. 
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  
University of North Carolin a, University of North 
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 
 
Rehder, A.  1967.  Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs  in North America .  The MacMillan Company, 
New York. 
 
Riffle, J.W. and G.W. Peterson. 1986.  Diseases of 
trees in the great plains .  General Technical Report 
RM-129. p. 14, 44, 47, 49.   In USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins.

Sargent, C.S. 1965. Manual of the trees of North 
America , vol. 2, Dover Publications, Inc. New York.  
  
Scott, C.A. 1912.  The hardy catalpa .  Kansas 
Agricultural Experiment St ation. Circular No. 20, 
20p. 
 
Seiler, J.R., E.C. Jensen, and J.A. Peterson.   Catapla 
speciosa (Warder) Warder ex Engelm . 
( http://www.fw.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/syllabus/cs
peciosa2.htm) [online: cited 24 March 2005].  
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1969.   Trees, shrubs, and woody 
vines in Kansas .  University of Kansas, University 
Press of Kansas, Lawrence. 
 
Stephenson, A.G. 1982. The role of the extrafloral 
nectaries of catalpa speci osa in limiting herbivory 
and increasing fruit production.   Ecology 63(3):663-
669. 
 
Steyermark, J. A.  1975.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa, USA. 
 
University of Illinois.   Northern Catalpa (Catalpa 
speciosa) . 
( http://www.urbanext.uiuc.edu/treeselector/index_tre
e.cfm?id=30) [online: cited 24 March 2005].  
University of Illinois Extension. 
 
USDA-ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
Taxon: Catalpa speciosa (Warder ex Barney) Warder 
ex Englelm .  (http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?9592) [online: cited 24 March 
2005].  National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville. 
 
USDA-FS. 1948.  Woody-plant seed manual .  U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 
 
USDA. 1949. p. 68, 755  In: Trees: the yearbook of 
agriculture .  U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C.   
 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.   PLANTS  profile 
for Catalpa speciosa (northern catalpa)  
( http://plants.usda.gov/java/nameSearch?keywordque
ry=catalpa+speciosa&mode=sciname&submit.x=18
&submit.y=10) [online: cited 24 March 2005]. 
 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.  Conservation 
plant characteristics for: Catalpa speciosa (Warder) 
Warder ex Engelm. 
( http://plants.usda.gov/java/charProfile?symbol=CAS
P8) [online:  cited 24 March 2005].   
USDA NRCS. 2002.  
PLANTS Database, Version 3.5 
( http://plants.usda.gov
) [online: cited 27 June 2005].  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge.   
 
Wisconsin Botanical Information System.   Taxon-
Catalpa speciosa (Warder ex Barney) Warder ex 
Engelm .  
( http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora/scripts/detail.a
sp?SpCode=CATSPE) [online: cited 24 March 
2005].  University of Wisconsin, Wisconsin State 
Herbarium, Madison. 
 
Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dr. Wayne A. Geyer , Kansas State University 
Forestry Division, Manhattan, Kansas   
 
Patrick J. Broyles,  Formerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John Row , USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 27June05 rln; 01jun06 jsp; 081203 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.