Plant Guide       
 
BLADDERPOD 
Cleome isomeris Greene 
Plant Symbol = CLIS  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 Alternate name 
Bladderpod spiderflower 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: It serves as a good wildlife plant for upland 
game, especially quail.  It does provide some escape 
cover and shade for loafing areas and is a source of 
food. The pea-like seeds are taken readily by a 
variety of game and song birds. 
 
Ethnobotanical Uses : The Diegueno Indians used the 
seeds and flowers for food. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Caper Family (Capparaceae).   Bladderpod is a native, 
erect, round, shrub four to si x feet high and at least as 
wide.  The leaves are alternate and trifoliate.  The 
flowers, which are yellow  with six stamens, bloom 
much of the year and are qu ite attractive.  The seed 
pods are large, inflated and pendulous with only a 
few hard, smooth seeds with a prominent end curved. 
 
Distribution 
Bladderpod often grows in disturbed areas, and also 
on coastal bluffs, hills and desert washes.  The  shrub’s native distribution is southern California, 
Baja California, and Arizona from 200 to 3,000 feet 
in elevation.  For current 
distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
This native plant is a desert type.  In California, it 
occurs in San Luis Obispo County and in much of 
lower California, and in the vicinity of Tehachapi, as 
well as western Fresno and eastern Monterey 
counties.  In the Bakersfi eld and Tehachapi regions, 
it can be found to an elevation of 4,000 feet.  In 
cultivated plantings, it has been grown as far north as 
southern Butte County.  It has a wide range of 
temperature tolerance from below freezing to over 
100 degrees F.  It is very  drought tolerant.  Little is 
known at this time about its adaptation to soils below 
a pH of 6.  
 © J.S. Peterson @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Establishment 
The large seed germinates readily.  It requires no 
treatment before planting.  It  may be direct seeded on 
a prepared seed bed in the fall to early spring at a rate 
of one pound of seed per acre.  It should be planted 
no deeper than one inch.  Direct seeding becomes 
progressively less successful as one moves north, 
because of competition from annual grasses. 
 
For best results with small plantings, the seed should 
be propagated in flats and the seedlings should be 
transplanted to gallon cans.  Seedlings can be 
transplanted to the field in either the spring or fall.  
 
Management  
This shrub requires good weed control measures, 
such as hoeing, cultivating, and chemical control 
during the establishment period.  Elimination of all 
weed competition on the planting site prior to direct 
seeding is essential for good stand establishment.  
Normally, the spring rains  are sufficient to establish 
seedlings when directly seeded on deep soils.  Potted 
plants will normally require some summer water 
depending on the locality.  
 
There is some difference of opinion as to whether 
bladderpod is susceptible to livestock damage.  
Generally, damage occurs  only when animals are 
forced onto it by a lack of preferred feed.

Pests and Potential Problems 
This shrub must have good weed control measures 
such as hoeing, cultivation, or by chemical control.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed may be collected easily from wild plants by 
stripping pods from plants and extracting seed.  A 
limited amount of seed is normally available from the 
California Department of Fish and Game for wildlife 
plantings.  Seed is also available from commercial 
seed collectors.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Dorado’ Cultivar- Dorado grows naturally on the 
desert soils and prefers a pH of 6.5 or higher.  It is 
best adapted to the southern part of California up to 
elevations of 1,220m (4,000 feet), but several 
successful plantings have been made in the central 
and northern part of Sacramento Valley.  
 
Dorado has shown excellent performance as a 
conservation plant on critical areas, upland game 
cover and food, and for environmental enhancement 
on deep to moderately deep, medium to finely 
textured soils that are well-drained.  
 
References 
California Department of Fish and Game/US Soil 
Conservation Service. 1976. ‘ Bladderpod’ wildlife 
habitat leaflet no.  2. Compiled by Federal Aid Project 
W-47-R and Upland Game Investigation.  
 
USDA NRCS.  Notice of Release of ‘Dorado’ 
Bladderpod . Davis, California 
 
Mielke, Judy. 1993.   Native plants for southwestern 
landscapes . University of Texas Press. 
 
Dole, J.W. and B. Rose. 1996.  Shrubs and trees of 
the Southern California deserts. Foot-Loose Press, 
North Hills, California. 
 
Hinton, L. 1975. Notes on La Huerta Diegueno 
Ethnobotany. Journal of California Anthropology  
2:214-222 (p. 217). 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck. California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 Edited: 28Mar2005 ro; 23sep05 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.