Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLOUGH SEDGE 
Carex obnupta Bailey 
Plant Symbol = CAOB3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center & the National Plant Data Center 
Alternate Names 
Tall basket grass, sedge 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The leaves of  Carex obnupta, are used 
for both wrapping and twining in the "grass" baskets 
that are well known and widely marketed by Nitinaht 
and Nootka women even today (Turner et al. 1983).  
"Grass" baskets are created using "three-cornered 
grass" ( Scirpus pungens ) for the basket bottom and 
ribs, slough sedge for the wrapping, and the top rim 
is made of the inner bark of western red cedar ( Thuja 
plicata ).  The baskets usually have tightly fitting, 
convex lids of the same weave, and usually both 
basket and lid have designs of whales, birds, canoes,  or geometric patterns woven with dyed strands of 
twining materials. 
 
The Nitinaht believed that picking "grasses" for 
baskets and mats (such as, 
Carex obnupta and 
Scirpus pungens ) causes fog.  The fisherman were 
always getting annoyed with the women who 
harvested these materials, because they were always 
making it foggy.  It is said that Hesaquiat men shaved 
with this "grass" because the edges are so sharp.  
There is a saying in Hesaquiat which means "you're 
just like  citapt, (Carex obnupta ) you never change," 
because  citapt is always the same and never seems to 
change in appearance.  
 Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
Erosion Control : Carex obnupta  provides erosion 
control and streambank stabilization.  The dense 
swards of slough sedge provide sediment retention 
and nutrient uptake, thus contributing to water quality 
improvement.  Emergent wetland plant communities 
dominated by slough sedge provide the following 
hydrologic functions: 
•   maintaining river or stream meander patterns;   
•  providing a broad, shallow plain where 
streamflow velocities slow and sediment 
deposition occurs;  
•  stormwater abatement;  
•  a mixing zone where brackish and 
freshwaters meet; and 
•  nutrient-rich habitat for aquatic organisms, 
fish, waterfowl, and predators such as otter, 
bald eagles, herons, and raccoons to feed.  
 
Wildlife : The lens-shaped seeds of sedges are eaten 
by many kinds of wildlife.  Birds known to eat sedge 
seeds include coots, ducks (such as wood ducks, 
canvasbacks, mallards, pintails, teal, shoveler), marsh 
birds and shorebirds (dowichers, rails, and 
sandpipers), upland gamebirds (grouse, pheasant, and 
wild turkey), and songbirds (house finch, junco, 
sparrow, and towhee).  Waterfowl and ducks eat 
sedge seeds frequently in small to fair amounts.  In 
addition to providing food for many wildlife species, 
sedges are also valuable fo r cover.  Frequently they 
provide nesting cover for ducks, and their tufted 
growth furnishes concealme nt and bedding for other 
animals.  Beavers, otters, muskrats and minks make 
their way through the sedges as they go to and from 
the water.  
 
Invasive Potential : This plant is densely rhizomatous, 
and can be invasive in pastures or wet meadows.

Description 
General: Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Slough sedge 
is a robust sedge that grows 60-150 cm tall; this 
densely tufted, grasslike plant has stout, creeping 
rhizomes.  The leaves are  w-shaped, coarse, with the 
margins rolled under.  The 4-8 cylindrical flower 
spikes are very large and  long (5-12 cm) and loosely 
aggregated at the tip.   Carex lyngbyei is a similar 
species. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Slough sedge is a coastal plant growing from 
San Luis County in California north through Oregon 
and Washington to British Columbia.  Slough sedge 
occurs at elevations below 900 m. 
 
Establishment  
Adaptation : Slough sedge is an obligate wetland 
species that prefers fresh water.  It grows in wet, 
shallow, inundated woods, meadows, roadside 
ditches, coastal swamps, lakeshores, bogs, marshes, 
and riverbanks.  In muddy areas it can grow as a 
dense, single-species stand.  It often grows in 
association with skunk cabbage ( Lysichiton 
americanum ).  Slough sedge is very similar to 
Lyngbye's sedge in growth form and appearance.  
Both species tolerate brackish often saline coastal 
wetland areas; they often grow in similar habitats 
where saltwater and freshwat er meet, such as at the 
mouths of rivers entering the Pacific Ocean, lagoons, 
or the Puget Sound. 
 
General : Carex obnupta  may be planted from bare 
root stock, seedlings from container stalk, or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Bare root stock or seedlings are 
preferred revegetation methods, particularly in areas 
with moving water.  Since slough sedge often grows 
in areas that are hydrologically quite dynamic, with 
both tidal and fluvial influences, bare root stock 
plantings are generally recommended.  Seeds 
generally wash away in these conditions.  Also, 
plants started from seeds tend to stay diminutive for 
over a year, with plant leav es remaining stunted and 
fragile for a considerable period of time. 
 
Live Plant Collections : Live plant collections are 
appropriate only under a very limited set of 
conditions.  Loss of wetla nd ecosystems exceeds 
50% in most states and estuarine wetland losses have 
been as high as 90%.  Pu blic lands that allow plant 
collections, require permits.  Permission from the 
landowner must be acquired to collect on private 
lands.  No more than 1/4 of the plants in an area  should be collected; a depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep enough for digging plugs.  This will 
leave enough plants and roots to grow back during 
the growing season. 
 
Live transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible.  Plants should be transported and stored in a 
cool location prior to planting.  Plugs may be split 
into smaller units, generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm 
(2.4 x 2.4 in) with healthy rhizomes and tops.  Weeds 
in the plugs should be removed by hand.  For ease in 
transport, soil may be washed
 gently from roots.  The 
roots should always remain moist or in water until 
planted.  
 
Clip leaves and stem from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches); this allows the plant to allocate more energy 
into root production and makes plants easier to 
handle (the leaves can be sharp).  Planting densities 
of approximately 1 meter centers provide full 
coverage the first year (given good site conditions).  
If there is flowing water, increase planting densities 
to 1/2-meter centers.  Plant densities should also be 
increased with fine soils such as clay or silt, steep 
slopes or prolonged inundation. 
 
Ideally, plants should be planted in fall just after the 
first rains, depending on the climate and geographic 
location.  This enables plant root systems to become 
established before heavy flooding and winter 
dormancy occurs.  Planting  survival is highest when 
plants are dormant, temper atures are cool, and soils 
are moist.  Plants usually need to be planted by hand, 
as soils are too moist to use machines. 
 
In some areas, winter stor ms and high tides would 
wash away newly transplanted seedlings.  While in 
other areas, avoiding high tides and high floods is 
recommended, because this combination will 
minimize plant survival.  Pl anting in the spring after 
high floods may be warranted in this situation. 
 
Seed Germination 
•   Seeds usually have to be harvested by hand, 
as Carex obnupta  Bailey grows in very wet 
habitats that are inaccessible by machine.  
Carex obnupta  Bailey blooms from April to 
July.  Collect seeds when they are ripe, from 
July to September.  Make sure seed heads are 
full. 
•   Plant cleaned seeds in fall.  
•  Plant seeds in clean, weed free, moist seed 
bed.  
•  Broadcast seeds and roll in or rake 1/4" to 
1/2" beneath the soil surface.  
•  Hold off watering so seeds doesn't float out.

•  Some seeds may be lost due to scour or 
flooding. 
•  Use erosion control blankets to protect soil 
and seeds. 
•  Plants grown from seeds and planted from 
container stock have higher transplant 
survival than direct seeding. 
•  Recommended seed density is unknown at 
this time.  Sedges tend to have low 
germination rates.  While exact seeding 
prescriptions are unknown at this time, 
estimates of from 25% to 50% would be 
reasonable based on other  Carex species. 
•  Nitrate fertilization gr eatly increases both 
biomass production and fecundity.  
Fertilizing plants at moderate nitrate levels 
increases flower stalk  and seed production, 
seed weight, and seed viability.   
•   Increasing temperatures from 21°C to 32°C 
increases germination percentages. 
 
Seed germination in greenhouse 
•  Clean seed - blow out light seeds. 
•  Put in water with sphagnum moss. 
•  Cold stratify seeds by putting in a cooler for 
30 days to improve germination rates. 
•  To grow seeds, plant in greenhouse in 1" x 1" 
x 2" pots, 1/4" under the soil surface. Keep 
moist at 100 ° F (plus or minus 5 degrees).  
Sedges require high temperatures and 
constant moisture for successful germination.  
Seeds begin to germinate after two weeks in 
warm temperatures.   
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come 
out as plugs.  These plants are very small; for 
planting, larger plugs in spring will improve 
revegetation success. 
 
Management 
The leaves of slough sedge are cut in late summer 
(August) (Turner et al. 1983).  A knife was used to 
cut the plant at the base, as low to the ground as 
possible.  The best plants were said to be those 
growing in 10 cm (4") of water.  The cluster of leaves 
are cut off or pulled from the tender white bases, 
where they break off at or just below the ground 
level.  Only the non-flowering, vegetative plants, 
called the "female" plants, were gathered.  
 
The harvested sedge leaves  are bundled and taken 
home, where they are sort ed according to size; the 
longest ones, considered the best, were put together 
and dried.  After the leaves have dried slightly, they 
are split exactly in half lengthwise, from bottom to 
top, using the thumbnail.  After being split, the leaves  are dried completely and bleached in the sun.  They 
can then be bundled or stored.  
 
Traditional Resource Management: Conservation 
practices include the following: 1) gathering only 
during late summer after seeds are produced; 2) 
gathering only infertile sh
oots without flowering 
stalks; 3) weeding out competing species and 
removing impediments to growth such a stones and 
branches; 4) pruning shoots causes sedges to 
retranslocate nutrients belowground, providing a 
nutrient reserve to stimulate new growth the 
following growing season; 5) removal of long, dense 
shoots provides good opportunities for seedling 
establishment and recruitment; 6) harvesting 
aboveground biomass maintains the sedge clone in 
juvenile and mature life stages, removing decadent 
old portions of plants and stimulating new growth; 
and 7) ownership of sedge beds provides the basis for 
careful tending and sustai nable yield of valued 
resources.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CAOB3 is readily available through native plant 
nurseries and seed companies within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Baskin, C.C., E.W. Chester, & J.M. Baskin 1996.  
Effect of flooding on  annual dormancy cycles in 
buried seed of two wetland Carex specie s.  Wetlands 
16(1): 84-88. 
 
Baskin, J.M. & C.C. Baskin 1978.   Seasonal changes 
in the germination response of Cyperus inflexus seeds 
to temperature and their ecological significance .  
Bot. Gaz. 139 (2): 231-235. 
 
Baskin, J.M. and C.C. Baskin 1971.   Germination of 
Cyperus inflexus seeds .  Bot. Gaz. 132(1):3-9. 
 
Bernard, J.M. 1989.  Life history and reproduction in 
Carex .  Can. J. Bot. 68:1441-1448. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and

northwestern Oregon.  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington 
 
Grime, J.P., G. Mason, A.V. Curtis, J. Rodman, S.R. 
Band, M.A.G. Mowforth, A.M. Neal & S. Shaw 
1981.   A comparative study of germination 
characteristics in a local flora .  Journal of Ecology 
69:1017-1059. 
 
Harper, J.L., J.T. Williams and G.R. Sagar 1964.   The 
behavior of soil surfaces and its role in determining 
the establishment of plants from seed .  Journal of 
Ecology 53:273-286. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of Californi a.  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1995. Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands .  
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant Development 
Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1994.   Seed and live 
transplant collection procedures for 7 wetland plant 
species.   Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant 
Development Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Keddy, P.A. & P. Constabel 1986 . Germination of 
ten shoreline plants in relation to seed size, soil 
particle size and water level : an experimental study .  
Journal of Ecology 74:133-141. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts. A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California Press. Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, California.  878 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Stevens, M.L. 1999.   The effect of nitrogen 
fertilization on the growth, reproduction, and  nitrogen use efficiency of Carex barbarae.
  Ph.D. 
Dissertation, third paper.  University of California, 
Davis, California.  In progress. 
 
Schütz, W. 1998.  Seed dormancy cycles and 
germination phenologies in sedges (Carex ) from 
various habitats . Wetlands 18(2):288-297. 
 
Thompson, K. & J.P. Grime 1983.  A comparative 
study of germination responses to diurnally 
fluctuating temperatures .  Journal of applied ecology 
20:141-156. 
 
Thompson, K. & J.P. Grime 1979.   Seasonal 
variation in the seed banks of herbaceous species in 
ten contrasting habitats .  Journal of Ecology 67:893-
921. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson, & R.T. Ogilvie 
1983.   Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island .  Occasional Papers of the British 
Columbia Provincial Museum No. 24.  Province of 
British Columbia. Ministry of Provincial Secretary 
and Government Service. Government of Canada. 
Parks Canada Western Region. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1982.   Ethnobotany of the Hesquiat 
Indians of Vancouver Island . Cultural Recovery 
Paper No. 2. British Columbia Provincial Museum.  
Province of British Columbia.  Ministry of Provincial 
Secretary and Government Services. 
 
Urbaniak, L. 1993.   Variability characteristics and 
comparison of Carex arenaria L. and Carex ligerica  
Gray populations based on rhizome characters .  Acta 
Societatis Botanicorum  Poloniai. 63(1):77-81. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Chris Hoag 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29a pr03 ahv; 31may06 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.