Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GIANT SANDREED  
Calamovilfa gigantea (Nutt.) 
Scribn. & Merr. 
Plant Symbol = CAGI3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center   
 
 Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Big sandreed, big sandreed grass 
 
Uses 
Giant sandreed is valuable for controlling erosion on 
deep sands subject to severe wind erosion. It cures 
well on the stem, thus providing good winter forage 
for livestock. When grown on sites large enough to 
be managed as a separate unit it can be hayed or used 
as reserve for winter forage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Giant sandreed is a robust perennial, 
native, warm season grass with strong creeping 
rhizomes. The culms are erect, thick and solid or 
hollow near the base. Culm height ranges between 1 
and 2 meters tall. The leaf blade is 7 to 11 mm wide 
at the base and rolls inward tapering to a long tip. 
The leaf sheath is usually  glabrous or sometimes 
pubescent in the vicinity of the ligule. The 
inflorescence is an open panicle 30 to 65 cm long 
with lemmas that are villous on their backs.    
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Giant sandreed can be found 
from southern Utah (north of Kanab, Kane County) 
to Arizona, east to southwestern Nebraska, Kansas, 
Oklahoma, and to central Texas.  
 
Habitat: A valuable sand binder that is closely related 
to  Calamovilfa longifolia  of the mid-western states. 
A valuable species to control erosion on deep sandy 
soils subjected to severe wind erosion. Will grow in 
large colonies and dominate a site if properly 
managed.  
 
Adaptation 
This species exhibits optim al performance on sandy 
textured soils.  
 
Establishment 
Normally this species exhibits weak seedling vigor 
and slow growth once it has  germinated. This species 
is typically slow to establish from the seedling stage 
to a mature plant. It tends to put the majority of its 
resources into root and rhizome development during 
the seedling stage. Drill seed 2.54 cm deep in sandy 
soil and shallower in medium textured soils. Drilling 
into crop stubble improves stand establishment on 
erosive sites. Species may be sprigged in sand dunes 
or erosive “blowout” sites.   
 
Management 
Spring growth of this species begins several days 
before other warm season grasses in the same 
locality. This provides an advantage when early 
forage is desired for livestock species. When grown 
on large sites that require separate management this 
species can be hayed or grazed. It provides good 
winter forage for livestock.  Summer grazing should 
be limited to no more than 50 percent removal of  the 
current year’s growth. This will maintain a vigorous

stand of grass, while leaving adequate amounts of 
mulch for control of wind erosion.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are rust fung i that infect or cause disease on 
both  Calamovilfa  and Sporobolus.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns with this 
species. Generally, it has reduced seedling vigor and 
is only adapted to conditions in a sandy soil type 
environment. It has a very low probability of 
becoming a weed problem. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The species is difficult to harvest due to late maturity, 
seed shatter, and hairy seed units. Combine in dough 
stage, process with hammer mill and fanning mill for 
best results. Seed quality at best has a purity of 98% 
and germination of 70% for a Pure Live Seed 
percentage of 69.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book 
for”United States Government”.  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under 
the subheading “Department  of Agriculture.” There 
are currently no cultivars or improved varieties of 
giant sandreed available on  the commercial market. 
 
References 
Cummins, G.B. and H.C. Greene. 1961. The rust 
fungi of Muhlenbergia, Sporobolus , and related 
genera. Brittonia. Volume 13: 277-285. 
 
Cornelius, D.R. and M.D. Atkins. 1946. Grass 
establishment and development studies in Morton 
County, Kansas. Ecology. Volume 27: 342-353. 
 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett,  and T.N. Shiflet. 1971. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA, SCS Agriculture Handbook No. 389, 
Washington, DC. 
 
Rogers, K.E. 1970. A new species of  Calamovilfa 
(Gramineae) from North Am erica. Rhodora. Volume 
72: 72-79. 
 
Reeder, J.R. and M.A. Ellington. 1960.  Calamovilfa, 
a misplaced genus of Gramineae. Brittonia. Volume 
12: 71-77. 
 
Reeder, J.R. and D.N. Singh. 1967. Chromosome 
number in  Calamovilfa . Bulletin of the Torrey 
Botanical Club. Volume 94: 199-200. 
 
Thieret, J.W. 1966. Synopsis of the genus 
Calamovilfa  (Gramineae). Cast anea. 31:145-152. 
 
Prepared By:  
Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS  Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 Edited: 070414 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.