Plant Guide
‘SUNSHINE’ 
VETIVERGRASS  
Chrysopogon zizanioides 
(L.)Roberty  
Plant Symbo l = CHZI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pacific Islands Area Plant 
Materials Program  
Micha el Robotham, USD A NRCS Pa cific I slands Ar ea State O ffice. 
‘Sunshine’ with Bermu dagra ss u sed to sta bilize wa terwa y.  
 
Alternate Names  
Vetiveria zizanioides (L.) Nash; symbol=VEZI80   
English: kus -kus, cuscus, vetiver   
Fijian: mulimuli   
French:  chiendent odorant, vetiver   
Hindi: garara, khas khas   
Maori (Cook Islands): ai, mauku ai   
Portuguese (Brazil): patchuli -falso  
Spanish: zacate violeta, pacholi  
Tamil: vetiver  
Tongan: ahisiaina   
 
Vetivergrass  is a perennial bunch grass with many uses. 
The ‘Sunshine’ genotype is described here. Sunshine is 
the domesticated type from South India and must be 
propagated asexually because it is non -fertile. It is the 
only vetivergrass recommended by NRCS and land -grant 
universities for use in the NRCS Pacific Islands Area 
(American Samoa, Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, 
Hawaii, Marshall Islands, Northern Mariana Islands, and 
the Republic of Palau).   
  Vegetative planting material of Sunshine was received by 
the
 Hoolehua Plant Materials Center from the 
Agricultural Research Service (ARS) Plant Introduction 
Station in Griffin, Georgia. Several official germination 
tests of 400 seeds per sample were conducted by the State 
of Hawaii Department of Agriculture in 1993  and 1994 on 
seeds harvested from observational plantings at Hoolehua, 
Hawaii and Barrigada, Guam. A seed germinated in one 
of the tests; however, the seedling did not survive after 
being transplanted from the blotters to soil and taken from 
the germinator  to the greenhouse. In 1993, an unofficial 
test was also conducted by the Hawaii Department of 
Agriculture with 100 seeds in a vermiculite substratum 
and one seed germinated, but it did not survive for more 
than a week. For approximately the past 15 years,  no 
volunteer seedlings have been observed from 
conservation plantings of Sunshine in the Pacific Islands 
Area. Sunshine was evaluated for invasiveness by the 
Ha waii -Pacific Weed Risk Assessment and Pacific Island 
Ecosystems at Risk. It received a low risk  score ( -8) for 
the potential to become invasive.   
 
Uses   
Erosion control : A vegetative barrier is a dense hedge or 
row of plants growing on or near the contour. 
Vetivergrass is well adapted to the vegetative barrier 
practice used to control erosion on far m land because of 
its strong, compact root system and numerous stiff stems. 
The stiff stems slow the movement of the silt-laden  
runoff, spreading it out, trapping sediment, and causing 
deposition of the silt behind the barrier. Slowing of the 
runoff allows  more water to infiltrate into the soil. Water 
infiltration is also aided by the deep root system of the 
grass. Over time, a natural terrace -like bench is formed 
behind the barrier.  
 
The standard minimum barrier width of a vegetative 
barrier for the Veget ative Barrier Practice (Conservation 
Practice Code 601) to reduce sheet and rill erosion and 
manage water flow is 36 inches. The Pacific Islands Area 
received a variance from the standard minimum width of 
36 inches to 12 inches when using vetivergrass for 
vegetative barriers. Sunshine vetivergrass, when planted 
in a single row at the correct within -row spacing and with 
proper care, will form a functional vegetative barrier, 12 
inches wide at a height of 6 inches, within one growing 
season. A minimum amount of crop land is devoted to 
these single- row vegetative barriers and there is minimal 
competition with the crop plants because the root system 
grows essentially straight down.   
 
Other conservation uses include road bank stabilization, 
stream bank stabilizat ion, waterway stabilization, as a

supporting ridge for diversions, and rehabilitation of 
degraded lands.  
 
Phytoremediation and bioremediation: Vetivergrass has 
been shown to enhance the degradation of heavy metals 
such as aluminum, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, and 
nickel and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the soil. It 
is used for wastewater treatment and rehabilitation of old 
mines.   
 
Perfumery : Vetivergrass roots contain an essential oil that 
has been known in India since ancient times and 
consid ered a high -class perfume. Copper plate 
inscriptions have been found that list the perfume as one 
of the articles used by royalty. Vetiver oil is one of the 
ingredients in Chanel No. 5. The famous French perfume 
was introduced in 1921 and is still in production. The 
annual world trade in vetiver oil is estimated to be 
approximately 250 tons with Brazil, China, Haiti, India, 
Japan, Java, and Reunion being the main producers. 
Europe, India, Japan, and the United States are the main 
consumers. Vetiver oil is c ontained in 90% of all western 
perfumes and its greatest use is in modern perfume 
creations.   
 
Other uses: A traditional medicine; an ingredient in curry; 
the roots are woven into various articles such as baskets 
and coarse mats and screens which are fragr ant when wet; 
a biomass fuel for generating electricity; an ornamental; 
and as a potential trap crop for the stem borer ( Chilo 
partellus ).  
 
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
 
Description   
General : A densely tufted perennia l grass. The culms or 
tillers arise from aromatic rhizomes, are erect, and up to 
eight feet tall. The rhizomes are short and do not runner 
out. The tillers are strong and stiff. There is very little 
lodging. Roots are stout, strong, spongy, and aromatic. 
T he root system is massive, but quite compact and only 
grows out about 2 feet on each side of the plant. It can 
reach depths of over 8 feet. The leaves are narrow, erect, 
keeled, and the margins are rough to the touch. The 
inflorescence is a panicle (6 -16 inches long) comprised of 
numerous slender racemes in whorls on a central axis. 
The spikelets are gray green or purplish, 1/8- 1/4 inch 
long, in pairs. The spikelets are awnless.  
 
Distribution   
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
  Adaptation 
 
Vetivergrass is adapted to the tropics and subtropics. It is 
native to the tropical and subtropical areas of the Indian 
Subcontinent (India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka) and Indo -China 
(Indochina, Myanmar, Thailand). In the United States, 
vetivergrass is adapted to the USDA Plant Hardiness 
Zones 9 to 11. It is adapted throughout the Pacific Islands 
and Caribbean Areas. In Hawaii, where farmers gro w 
crops over a wide range of elevations, vetivergrass 
appears to be adapted from sea level to about 4,000 feet. 
However, in trials at locations above 2,000 feet it had 
slower growth and a lower rooting percentage of slips.   
Established vetivergrass plants  have been known to 
persist in areas with annual rainfall from approximately 
20 to 200 inches. Below 35 inches they may need 
supplemental moisture, particularly during extended dry 
seasons. Vetivergrass will grow on a wide variety of soils 
from sands to san dy loams and clays. It will grow on 
strongly acid to slightly alkaline soils with a pH range 
from 4 to 7.5; however, it prefers neutral to slightly 
alkaline soils. It tolerates saline soils and a range of heavy 
metals in the soil.   
 
Establishment   
Planting  may be done either by hand or by a machine 
similar to the tractor mounted mechanical transplanters 
used to plant vegetable seedlings. Young plants are not 
shade tolerant and should be planted in a weed -free 
seedbed in full sun. The plantlets or slips must  devel op 
new roots and, therefore, must be kept moist until they 
have a good root system and are well established. The 
time of planting should be scheduled during the rainy 
season or irrigation provided. Drip irrigation works well 
with a drip line for each  row or barrier. Anchor the drip 
tubing 12 to 18 inches to the upslope side of the row, so it 
doesn’t become entangled in the grass clumps as this may 
cause the tubing to constrict and reduce the flow of water. 
Prior to planting, keep the slips in the shad e and do not 
allow them to become dry.  
 
Fertilize according to soil test results and 
recommendations. In some locations, a soil test with  
fertilizer recommendations may be difficult to obtain. In 
lieu of a soil test, a general fertilizer recommendation is  
6.5 pounds of 15-15-15 or similar fertilizer per 100 feet of 
row. To prevent fertilizer burn, apply the fertilizer in 
narrow bands 2 to 3 inches to the side and 1 to 2 inches 
below the slips. Alternatively, apply the fertilizer before 
planting the slips. Spread it evenly over the soil in a band 
36 inches wide and thoroughly till it into the soil. 
Fertilizer is very important for normal growth, especially 
in infertile soils . Calcium in the form of lime and gypsum 
has also been shown to enhance growth.   
 
Pla nt the slips 3 to 4 inches apart in the row. In fertile 
soils, or if well-rooted plants are used, they may be 
planted up to 6 inches apart. Double rows, with the plants 
staggered and spaced 3 to 6 inches within the row by 6 
inches between rows, may be necessary in highly eroded

areas. Constructing a furrow and planting on the berm 
will give more height to the planting, as well as a place 
for water to flow or pond until the barrier establishes. 
Deposition will take place upslope of the barrier, so 
installers need to be aware of how deposition will affect 
ponding and flow of water by the barrier. Plants can back 
up water 12 to 18 inches, so installers need to be aware of 
overflow and flow to point and provide protection for 
these areas. When planting vegetativ e barriers, follow the 
procedures outlined in the Vegetative Barrier (601) 
Conservation Practice Standard and Jobsheet.  
 
Management   
Irrigate and fertilize as needed and control weeds. It’s 
important to properly care for the plants until they are 
complete ly closed-in and well established. The critical 
period for maintenance is usually during the first year. It’s 
ver y important to replace dead plants as soon as possible 
as there should be no gaps in the barrier at the end of the 
first year. A vegetative bar rier is not completely effective 
unless the plants have grown together and there are no 
gaps. When planting to fill in gaps, a new line of slips can 
be planted on the sun side of the original planting. 
Replacement slips planted in the same spot as the dead  
plants may be shaded by adjacent plants. If this occurs, 
the adjacent plants must be trimmed to prevent shading of 
the new slips. Trimming to a height of 15 to 20 inches 
when the plants reach a height of 4 feet will promote the 
development of new tillers.   
 
With proper care, the plants should reach their maximum 
height after one year’s growth. After the first year, annual 
trimming to a height of 15 to 20 inches is needed. 
Trimming can be done by hand with a hedge clippers, a 
powered hedge trimmer, or a tracto r mounted sickle bar or 
disc mower. The trimmings can be placed along the 
barrier to control weeds, help trap sediment and slow 
water, or they can be used to mulch the adjacent crop 
plants. Trimming will help prevent dead centers from 
forming in the grass clumps, reduce the severity of leaf 
diseases, and prevent a stem bending down into moist soil 
and rooting at a node. This can happen occasionally and 
the new plant that develops will cause the barrier to 
widen. When done purposely, this method of propagati on 
is called layering and can be used to advantage when 
there is a gap between plants that needs to be filled.   
 
Maintenance applications of fertilizer may be needed on 
infertile and shallow soils. Fertilizer can be applied 
broadcast, as a side dressing, o r in the irrigation water.  
 
The plants produce tillers and the row will gradually 
widen. Close tilling parallel to the vegetative barrier will 
keep it compact and should be done, so a minimum 
amount of land is taken out of crop production. Protect 
n ew pla ntings from grazing as domestic animals and 
wildlife will browse the grass in its early stages of 
growth. Vetivergrass is tolerant of fire and controlled 
burning can be used as a management tool to reduce the  incidence of insect and disease pests and accum
ulation of 
dead material.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Vetivergrass is relatively pest- free and is resistant to root-
knot nematodes ( Meloidogyne spp.). However, it is 
susceptible to attack by certain insects and diseases.   
 
Insects : Stem borers ( Chilo spp.) can attack vetivergrass. 
Stem borers are also a problem on corn, rice, and sugar 
cane in Asia and throughout east and southern Africa. 
This may actually be a potential use for vetivergrass. The 
stem borer moth ( Chilo partellus) appears to prefer 
veti vergrass for oviposition but larval survival on 
vetivergrass is quite low. Thus, vetivergrass has the 
potential as a trap crop to concentrate oviposition awa y 
from the cash crop and reduce subsequent stem borer 
population development. In certain areas, ter mites will 
attack dead or dying parts of vetivergrass. The “hills” 
created by serious attacks can smother living plants.   
 
Diseases: Vetivergrass is susceptible to the leaf blight 
caused by Curvularia trifolii .  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Vetivergrass is list ed in the Global Compendium of 
Weeds . Vetivergrass genotypes that produce viable seed 
exist in certain areas and countries, such as the Caribbean 
and Australia, and are considered invasive weeds. The 
genotype “Sierra” was selected by NRCS Caribbean Area, 
a fter an evaluation of eight genotypes, as it is also 
essentially sterile. 
Those considered invasive should 
never be used for conservation plantings and are cause for 
concern
  . A short row of a fertile strain was observed 
growing on a ditch bank on the small  island of Aunuu in 
American Samoa. The farmer uses the tops to mulch his 
taro. Although the plants have been growing for many 
years and haven’t spread, this strain should not be planted 
on the other islands in American Samoa.   
A concern is that people ma y order vetivergrass plants 
over the internet or by mail order without knowing that 
fertile strains exist, and accidentally import one of these. 
This is a real concern for most areas. Hawaii is somewhat 
unique in that plants and other vegetative material o f 
grasses entering the state must be quarantined for one full 
year in a State of Hawaii Department of Agriculture plant 
quarantine facility. The plants can not be used or out -
planted until after they have been released from 
quarantine.   
 
There is concern t hat the widespread use of a single clone, 
such as the Sunshine genotype, for conservation plantings 
could be a problem in the event of an attack by a very 
destructive insect or disease specific to the clone.   
 
Plant Production   
For large scale plant production, planting material is 
obtained mainly by splitting up older plants into plantlets

or slips. For ease of digging, splitting, and cleaning, the 
plants should not be much older than 18 months of age. 
After two years, although no viable seed is produced, the 
plants begin to produce a significant amount of seed 
heads. These “seed head” slips do take although slips 
from plants that have not gone to seed generally produce 
new roots faster. Dead material can accumulate in the 
older plants, so cleaning the slips takes longer. In 
addition, older plants are harder to dig. New plantings 
should be scheduled in succession, so the plants being 
harvested are no older than 18 months. In a production 
nursery, the plants can be spaced 12 inches  apart within 
the row. The rows can be 36 inches or more apart 
depending on the type of harvesting and planting 
equipment that will be used. For large scale production 
nurseries, the slips can be planted with a tractor mounted 
mechanical transplanter.   
 
A  front end loader, with a fork lift or similar attachment, 
or backhoe on a farm tractor can be used to lift the clumps 
out of the ground. A sharp disk plow or moldboard plow 
can also be used. The plants can also be dug by hand 
using a sharp shovel to cut th rough the rhizome tissue 
directly around the crown and approximately 4 to 6 inches 
below the surface of the soil. It’s easier to handle the 
harvested material if the tops are trimmed to between 12 
and 20 inches before digging. Separate into individual 
slip s with the rhizome tissue intact. Remove dead matter 
and trim the existing roots to approximately 1/2 inch. The 
slips are then cut to a uniform length of about 8 inches, 
washed, and packed for shipment to the planting site.   
 
The slips should be planted wi thin 48 hours after being 
dug up and prepared. They must not be allowed to 
become dry. They are similar to non- rooted cuttings in 
that they must produce new roots from the tissue at the 
base of the slip. Immersing the slips in water for a week 
until new ro ots start to develop will enhance 
establishment. The water should be changed daily or it 
may become rancid. A similar method of developing new 
roots is planting the slips in a box or bed of moist sand, 
cinders, or potting mix. The growing media should be 6  to 
8 inches deep. After they have developed a sufficient 
amount of new roots, the slips are easily removed from 
the media, washed, and ready for field planting. The 
preferred method to enhance establishment rate is to grow 
the slips in polyethylene grow b ags, dibble tubes, bamboo 
tubes, plastic pots, or similar containers. A novel type of 
container is a modified form of poly bag called planting 
strips. Instead of using individual bags, the slips are 
planted closely in polyethylene plastic lined furrows or 
troughs that are transported intact to the planting site. 
They are used when planting on difficult sites because, 
since the roots remain together, the survival rate is high. 
After 3 to 6 weeks in containers, the plants should have 
developed an adequate roo t system and be ready for 
planting in the field.   
  Other asexual propagation techniques are tissue culture, 
stem cuttings, and plantlets that develop at the stem 
nodes. Laying or inserting fresh cut pieces of stems or 
culms in moist sand under mist will cause roots and 
shoots to devel op at the nodes. Vetivergrass plants that 
haven’t been trimmed will develop aerial plantlets at 
some of the stem nodes. When these are clipped off and 
immersed in water, they will develop new roots similar to 
slips. 
 
 
Control   
Vetivergrass can be killed by glyphosate herbicide, dense 
shade, and by digging up the crown. Please
 contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely. Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method. Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information. USDA NRCS does not guarantee or   
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
It is generally accepted that there are basically two types 
of vetivergrass: the wild type from North India and the 
“domesticated” type from South India. The North Ind ia 
type produces fertile seed while the South India type is 
essentially sterile. Based on DNA fingerprinting data, it 
appears that almost all the non -fertile cultivars used for 
erosion control outside South Asia have been derived 
from the Sunshine genotype . For example, Sunshine and 
the following cultivars are genetically the same: Boucard, 
Fort Polk, Haiti, Huffman, Monto, and Vallonia.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information. Look in the phone book under “United 
States Government.” The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subhead ing “Department 
of Agriculture.”   
 
References   
Adams, R.P. 2000. DNA Analysis of the Genetic 
  Diversity of Vetiver and Future Selections for Use in 
  Erosion Control. Second International Conference on 
  Vetiver -ICV2, Thailand, January 2000. URL: 
  http://www .vetiver.org/TVN_IVC2/PL -4.PDF  
Carey, B. 2006. Monto Vetiver Grass for Soil and Water 
  Conservation. Natural Resource Sciences, 
  Queensland, Australia. Council of Scientific and 
  Industrial Research (CSIR).   
CRC for Australian Weed Management. URL: 
  http://www.weedscrc.org.au/cropweeds/crop_weeds_
  v.html   
Global Compendium of Weeds. URL: 
  http://www.hear.org/gcw/species/vetiveria_zizanioid
  es/

Greenfield, J.C. 1990. Vetiver Grass. The Hedge Again st 
  Erosion. 3
rd ed. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.   
Ha waii -Pacific Weed Risk Assessment. URL: 
  http://www.botany.hawaii.edu/faculty/daehler/WRA/
  full_table.asp   
National Research Coun cil. 1993. Vetiver Grass: A Thin 
  Green Line Against Erosion. National Academy 
  Press, Washington, D.C.   
Pacific Island Ecosystems at Risk (PIER). URL: 
  http://www.hear.org/pier/species/chrysop ogon_ziz
  anioides.htm   
Paquin, D., R. Ogoshi, S. Campbell, and Q.X. Li. 2002. 
  Bench -Scale Phytoremediation of Polycyclic 
  Aromatic Hydrocarbon -Contaminated Marine 
  Sediment with Tropical Plants, International Journal 
  of Phytoremediation, 4:4, 297- 313.  
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
  Germplasm Resources Information Network – 
  (GRIN) (Online Database). National Germplasm 
  Resources Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. URL: 
  http://www.ars -grin.gov/cgi -
  bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?424704  
(20 March 2009)  
USDA, NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database 
 (http://plants.usda.gov , 17 March): National Plant  
  Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874 -4490 USA.  
Van den Berg, J., C. Midega, L.J. Wadhams, and Z.R. 
  Kahn. 2003. Can Vetiver Grass be Used to Manage 
  Insect Pests on Crops? Third International 
  Conference on Vetiver -ICV3, Guangzhou, China, 
  October 2003. URL: http://www.vetiver.org/ICV3 -
  Proceedings/SA_stem%20borer.pdf   
Vetiveria. 1976. The Wealth of India, Vol . X. 
  Publications and Information Directorate, CSIR, New 
  Delhi, PP.451 -457.   
Vetiver Network International. URL http://vetiver.org   
 
Prepared By:  
Robert J. Joy , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Hoolehua, Hawaii   
 
Species Coordinator:   
Robert J. Joy , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Hoolehua, Hawaii   
Published  October, 2009 
Edited: 090329 isp; 090515 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Progr am Web site 
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER