Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ATLANTIC WHITE CEDAR  
Chamaecyparis thyoides  (L.) 
B.S.P.  
Plant Symbol = CHTH2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Southern white-cedar, white-cedar, swamp cedar  
 
Uses 
The wood is light, soft, close-grained, and slightly 
fragrant.  It is easily worked, resistant to decay, and 
shrinks and warps very little during seasoning.  It has 
been used for shingles, posts, woodenware, and 
interior finishes, but prim ary current uses are for 
telephone poles, piling, ties, siding, and boat railing.  
Many cultivars of Atlantic white-cedar have been 
described (see Rehder 1949).  
 
Heavy cutting for many commercial uses during this 
century has considerably reduced even the largest 
stands, but it is still considered a commercially 
important species in the major supply areas of 
southeastern Virginia, North Carolina, South 
Carolina, and northwestern Florida.   
 
Cultivars have been selected for shape and needle 
color – they are useful for naturalizing in wet areas.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.  Atlantic white-cedar is 
considered rare in Georgia, Mississippi, Maine, 
Maryland, New York, New Hampshire, and Maine.   
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General:  Cypress family (Cupressaceae).  Native 
evergreen trees growing to 20 (-28) meters tall; 
trunks to 0.8 (-1.5) meters in diameter.  Bark: 
reddish-brown, irregularly furrowed and ridged, 
peeling in long, fibrous strips, often partially twisted 
around the trunk.  Branchlets are terete or rhombic in 
cross-section, in fan-shaped sprays, covered with 
dark blue-green, overlapping scale leaves to 2 mm 
long; facial and lateral leaves similar, usually with 
circular leaf glands.  Seed cones are globose, 4-9 mm 
broad, bluish-purple to reddish-brown at maturity, 
with a somewhat crumpled  appearance; scales 5-7.  
Native.  The common name reflects its occurrence on 
the Atlantic coastal plain and its light-colored wood.   
 
Variation within the species : populations of Atlantic 
white-cedar in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi 
have been segregated as  Chamaecyparis henryae Li 
(=  C. thyoides  var. henryae  (Li) Little), based on 
differences in bark, branchle ts, leaves, and fruit, but 
the species also is variable in the Atlantic coastal 
segment of its range and the Gulf coast segregate has 
not generally been accepted.     
 
Arborvitae ( Thuja occidentalis ) can be distinguished 
from Atlantic white-cedar by its flattened branchlets 
with clearly differentiated  facial and lateral leaves 
and its ellipsoid seed cones.    
 
Distribution:  Atlantic white-cedar grows in a narrow 
coastal belt 80 to 210 km (50 to 130 miles) wide from 
southern Maine to northern Florida and west to

southern Mississippi.  The scarcity of suitable 
growing sites makes distribution of the species within 
the coastal belt very patchy.  The species is now 
classified as rare in Georgia, Mississippi, Maine, 
Maryland, New York, New Hampshire, and Maine.   
 
Adaptation  
Atlantic white-cedar is found most frequently in 
small dense stands in fresh water swamps and bogs, 
sometimes on sandy soils, but usually on acidic muck 
(peat).  The species is absent or uncommon in areas 
where muck is underlain  by clay or contains 
appreciable amounts of silt or clay.  Habitats in 
southeastern New Jersey range from about 1 meter 
elevation, where the trees border the  tidal marsh, to 
43 meters in some inland stands.  The species 
currently grows in at least one upland bog in northern 
New Jersey at an elevation of 457 meters.   
  
Establishment  
Trees of Atlantic white-ced ar in open stands start 
bearing seed at 4-5 years,  although these seeds may 
be relatively low in viability; trees in dense stands 
begin cone production at 10-20 years.  Fair to 
excellent seed crops are produced each year.   
 
Germination occurs in a variety of light conditions, 
even in very low light intensity, but relatively open 
conditions are essential for good survival and growth 
of Atlantic white-cedar seedlings in competition with 
associates of shrubs and hardwoods (especially red 
maple, blackgum, sweetbay, and others).  
Establishment in nature usually occurs following 
disturbance of the canopy.  Seedlings develop a very 
short taproot, and successful establishment requires 
not only adequate surf ace moisture for seed 
germination but also available moisture within reach 
of the shallow root systems.  Suitable seedbeds 
include moist rotting wood,  Sphagnum moss, muck, 
and moist mineral soil –  these on hummocks where 
standing water is not present all year.  Thick litter and 
slash are unfavorable for germination and 
establishment.   
 
Increases in height slow af ter about 50 years and stop 
after 100 years; increases in diameter may continue at 
a relatively even rate up to 100 years.  Stand age 
rarely exceeds 200 years, although some trees have 
apparently have reached 1000 years of age.   
 
Management 
Because of the shallow root  system, trees of Atlantic 
white-cedar are extremely  susceptible to windthrow, 
especially where they occur in permanently saturated 
sites and where stands have been opened by partial  cuttings.  Fungi and insects usually do not cause 
serious damage.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Li, H.L. 1962.  A new species of  Chamaecyparis.  
Morris Arboret. Bull. 13:43-46.   
 
Little, S. & P.W. Garrett 1990.   Chamaecyparis 
thyoides .  Pp. 103-108, in R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America . Volume 1.  
Conifers.  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Michener, D.C. 1993.   Chamaecyparis.  Pp. 408-410, 
in  Flora of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2 , 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Rehder, A.J. 1949.   Bibliography of cultivated trees 
and shrubs hardy in the cooler temperate regions of 
the Northern Hemisphere .  Jamaica Plain.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all

prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.