Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
CLEMATIS  
Clematis ligusticifolia  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = CLLI2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Alternate Names 
white clematis, virgin’s-bower, traveler’s joy, 
leatherflower 
 
Uses 
Erosion control/reclamation/landscape:  Western 
clematis has great potential to improve roadsides and 
other dryland critical areas  even though it typically 
occurs in riparian and run-on areas.  It is very drought 
tolerant and transplants have performed very well in 
trials conducted on sites that receive as little as 7 
inches of annual precipitation (Pullman PMC 1993).  
Placing plants along the top of a cut will allow the 
canopy to drape over the  bare soil and effectively 
protect the soil.  If allowed to climb fences, it will 
slow soil and catch tumbleweeds.  
 
Western clematis can provide  excellent stabilization 
of intermittent streambanks because it does not 
require as much moisture as many other riparian 
plants.  The stems develop a thick mat that 
effectively protect streambank soils and may deter 
livestock movement. 
 
The landscape value of western clematis is apparent 
in xeriscaping projects.  It remains green late  
throughout the growing season and the leaves drop in 
late-fall.  The dense leaf canopy can effectively 
shield background objects that the landscaper wishes 
to remain unseen.  The flowers are smaller then 
hybrid floral varieties but the plumed seedheads are 
very attractive.  
 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife : Western clematis has 
limited grazing value.  Sheep will utilize the young 
tender leaves.  Western clematis is occasionally 
grazed by cattle and rarely  by horses (USDA Forest  
 Linda Turrey USDA NRCS Pullman PMC 
Service Range Plant Handbook).  Use by large game 
is probably limited.  Small birds and rodents use the 
canopy for cover.     
 
Ethnobotany:  The root of western clematis was used 
as a horse stimulant by Nati ve Americans.  The root 
was scraped and placed in the nostrils of fallen, 
exhausted horses.  The fallen horse would jump to its 
feet and then be led to water. Native Americans also 
chewed the plant to remedy colds and sore throats. 
Just touching the scraped root to the tongue causes a 
burning sensation that lasts for ½ day (Geyer 1846).     
 
Status 
This is a native species.  Consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current stat us, such as state noxious 
status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Buttercup Family (Ranuculaceae). Western 
clematis is a deciduous, perennial vine.  
 
Stems grow from the crown and are numerous in 
hospitable environments.  They generally die back 
each winter, but the first 1-5 m generally persist for 
several years.  Stems may be as long as 20 m in 
length (Hitchcock et al 1964).  The leaves are 
pinnately compound and are dropped in late fall.  It is 
dioecious and the flowers are white.  Flowers first 
appear in late June and continue through August.  
Seedheads are very showy and resemble tufts of 
goose down.  A taproot effectively anchors Western 
clematis to the soil.   
 
Distribution 
Hitchcock et al. (1964) described the distribution of 
western clematis as southern British Columbia, south 
to California, east to the Dakotas and west to both 
sides of the Oregon Cascades. For current 
distribution of this species and its relatives, consult

the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation  
Cold Hardiness Zone: 5a-7a. 
Mean Annual Precipitation: 230-530mm (9-21 in.) 
Elevation: 150-1375m (500-4500 ft.) 
MLRA: 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 23, 24, 25, 43, and 44 
Soil:  Silt loams and other medium-textured soils 
 
Western clematis is common in open Ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa ) and big sage (Artemisia 
tridentata ) riparian areas.  It is also common in run-
on areas such as railroad fills that impound water for 
a few weeks during the spring.   
 
It is partially shade tolerant and can be found in 
stands of alder.  Full shade that occurs under stands 
of tall evergreen trees is less hospitable.  It grows 
well in full sun.   
 
Soils must be relatively deep with good water 
holding capacity.  Shallow soils or deep soils that 
cannot supply/retain water during the summer 
months do not support western clematis. 
        
Species often associated  with western clematis 
include the following: the big sagebrush ( Artemisia 
tridentata ) complex, Ponderosa pine ( Pinus 
ponderosa), alder ( Alnus rhombifolia), juniper 
( Juniperus  spp.), Woods rose ( Rosa woodsii.), 
Douglas hawthorn ( Crataegus Douglasii ), 
chokecherry ( Prunus virginiana ), redosier dogwood 
( Cornus stolonifera ), bluebunch wheatgrass 
( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), sand dropseed 
( Sporobolus airoides ), Snake River wheatgrass 
( Elymus wawawaiensis ), Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa 
secunda ), needle-and-thread ( Nassella comata), and 
Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis ). 
 
Establishment 
Seeding:  Western clematis is generally not seeded. 
Seeding is impractical because germination is far too 
slow in the field.  A minimum of 12 days of 
favorable moisture and temperature is required for 
good levels of germination.  Further complicating 
seeding is the long-fuzzy style, which is very difficult 
to remove from the seed.  Standard reclamation drills 
and broadcast seeders are  not capable of handling 
clematis seed with the stylus intact.  
 
Transplanting : Rooted plants are easily transplanted.  
The soil should be at least 75% of field capacity at 
planting.  Mulching or er ecting a small shade (flat 
rock turned on end or si milar structure) reduces 
evaporative loss and improves survival.  Weed  barrier cloth can be used to reduce competition and 
improve survival.  Once fu
lly established, western 
clematis is very persistent.  
 
Management 
Western clematis is a relatively low maintenance 
plant once established. Competition should be 
controlled the first year.  Observations have shown 
that plants withstand severe defoliation and even 
crown damage.  While grazing is not a major 
concern, trampling can be detrimental so plants 
should be protected until well established.  
 Mark Stannard USDA NRCS Pullman PMC Seedhead of western clematis. 
 
Mulching under the plant improves layering.  Vines 
can be cut back each year or allowed to accumulate. 
 
Digging plants is not advised because it is difficult to 
extract a large enough portion of the root to support 
the plant.  Removing plants in the wild may also 
severely disturb the site and leave it especially prone 
to weed invasion. 
 
It is a climbing vine so it should not be planted 
immediately adjacent to structures where it will be a 
problem. Unwanted plants can be controlled via 
mechanical removal and/or application of appropriate 
herbicides.  Allo w 2 years for good control because 
the plant may regrow from the root. 
 
Environmental Concerns  
Western clematis is long-lived, spreads primarily via 
seed in the wild, but also via vegetative means 
(layering).  It is not considered to be a "weedy" or 
invasive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities unde r ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions. Some consider this to be 
an undesirable trait particularly in riparian zones 
where it may cover associated shrubby vegetation.

Propagation   
Seeding:  Most clematis species generally require 60 
to 180 days of cold stratification to initiate 
germination (USDA, 1974).   However, western 
clematis seeds do not require prolonged stratification, 
and high levels of germination can be achieved by 
soaking the seeds for 48-hours in a 0.001M solution 
of giberellic acid or de-i onized water (Pullman PMC, 
1982).  Seed should be planted to containers that 
allow for long, dense roots.  Well-rooted plants 
develop in roughly 10 weeks.  
 
Softwood Propagation: Western clematis is easily 
propagated via softwood cu ttings and is the preferred 
propagation method.  Cuttings require a leaf bud and 
typically root in 15-20 days.  Cuttings are treated 
with 3000 ppm I.B.A. root ing hormone and placed in 
a misting chamber with bottom heat.  Well-rooted 
plants develop in roughly 10 weeks.     
 
Hardwood Propagation: Western clematis can be 
rooted via hardwood cuttings.  Obtaining good 
quality cuttings varies from year to year depending 
on previous year growing conditions.  Treating the 
cutting with a 3000 ppm I.B.A. rooting hormone and 
placing the cuttings in a cool-dark environment 
improves rooting.  Rooting success as high as 76% 
can be obtained.  Placing the treated cuttings in a 
misting chamber with bottom heat is an alternative 
and rooting is more rapid. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Trailar' western clematis was selected by the 
Pullman Plant Materials Center  and released in 1992.  
It was selected from native collections made in Walla 
Walla and Benton Counties, Washington.  It is 
recommended for use as a soil cover in intermittent 
dryland stream corridors; for roadside and other 
erosion prone sites; as ground cover for small 
mammals and upland birds; and as screening or 
landscape plant, particul arly where a native is 
desired.  Rooted clonal-plants are available to 
nurseries and researchers in limited quantities from 
the Pullman Plant Materials Center.  Seed is not 
available.    
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Geyer, C.A. 1846. Notes on the vegetation and 
general character of the Missouri and Oregon 
Territories, made during a botanical journey in the 
state of Missouri, across the South Pass of the Rocky 
Mountains, to the Pacific,  during the years 1843 and 
1844. London J. Bot. 5:285-310. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W. 
Thompson 1964. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of  Washington Press, Seattle, 
Washington. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  
 
USDA, Forest Service 1974. Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States. Agr. Handbook #450, 
Washington, DC. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 1982. Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Annual Technical Report, Pullman, Washington. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 1993. Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Annual Technical Report, Pullman, Washington. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2003.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 030106.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Mark Stannard and Wayne Crowder 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Stannard 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 
Edited 06jan03 dgo; 30jan03 jsp;  09jun03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.