Plant Guide

SUGARBERRY

Celtis laevigata Willd.

Plant Symbol = CELA 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Robert Mohlenbrock Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
Texas sugarberry 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Sugarberry was used by a variety of 
Native American tribes.  The Houma used a 
concentrate made from the bark to treat sore throats 
and a decoction made from the bark and ground up 
shells to treat venereal disease.  The Comanche 
would beat the fruits of sugarberry to a pulp. The 
pulp was then mixed with animal fat, rolled into 
balls, and roasted in the fire for food.  The Acoma, 
Navajo, and Tewa all consumed the berries for food. 
The Navajo boiled the leaves and branches to make 
dark brown and red dye for wool. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Elm Family (Ulmaceae).  Sugarberry is a 
tree that can become up to 30 m tall and 1m in 
diameter.  It has a broad crown formed by spreading 
branches, that are often drooped.  The bark is light 
gray in color and can be smooth or covered with 
corky warts.  The branchlets are covered with short 
hairs at first and eventually they become smooth. 
The leaves are alternated, simple, and slightly serrate.  
The leaves are 5 to 13 cm long and 3 to 5 cm wide.  
The lance-shaped leaves gradually taper to a point 
that is often curved.  They are pale green on both the 
upper and lower surfaces with conspicuous veins. 
The flowers appear just before, or with the leaves in 
the spring.  The drupes are subspherical and 5 to 8 
mm in diameter.  They have a thick skin and the pit 
surface has a netlike pattern.  The drupes range in 
color from orange to reddish-brown and are attached 
by pedicels that are 6 to 15 mm long. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: Sugarberry is found growing in sandy loam 
or rocky soils along streams, in bottomlands, and in 
woodlands. 
Adaptation 
When sugarberry is top-killed by fire it will resprout 
from the root collar. 
Establishment  
Sugarberry can be propagated by seed and cuttings, 
planted in autumn.  Sugarberry has no preference for 
a particular soil type. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, sugarberry should not be prone to debilitating 
pests. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References  
Castetter, E.F. 1935.  Ethnobiological studies in the 
American Southwest I. Uncultivated native plants 
used as sources of food. University of New Mexico 
Bulletin 4:1-44.   
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians. Papers of 
the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970. Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas. Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
Elmore, F.H. 1944. Ethnobotany of the Navajo. 
University of New Mexico Press. Albuquerque, New 
Mexico. 136 pp. 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986. Flora of the 
Great Plains. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin, & F.M. 
White 1996.  Textbook of dendrology. 8th edition. 
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, New York.  534pp. 
Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium Staff 1976.  Hortus 
Third. Macmillan Publishing Company. 1290 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.  http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
Robbins, W.W., J.P. Harrington, & B. Freire-
Marreco 1916.  Ethnobotany of the Tewa Indians. 
Unites States Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 
55.  124 pp.   
Speck, F.G. 1941. A list of plant curative obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana. Primitive 
Man 14:49-75. 
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory. 2001. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/carill/in 
dex.html 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv ; 01jun06 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.