Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN REDBUD 
Cercis canadensis L. 
Plant Symbol = CECA4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate names 
Redbud, Judas tree; this species has several varieties 
recognized in the U.S.: Cercis canadensis var. 
canadensis, Cercis canadensis  var mexicana , and 
Cercis canadensis  var. texensis. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Alabama, Cherokee, Delaware, 
Kiowa, and Oklahoma were among the Native 
American tribes that used eastern redbud for various 
purposes.  The bark was made into a tea to treat 
whooping cough.  Taking cold infusions of the roots 
and inner bark treated fevers and congestion.  An 
infusion of the bark was used to treat vomiting and 
fever.  During winters, the plants were used for 
firewood.  Because it is one of the first plants to 
flower in the spring, the blossoming branches were 
brought into the homes to “drive winter out.”  
Children were “fond of eating the blossoms” of 
eastern redbud.   
 
Wildlife/Livestock : Many birds, including bobwhite 
quails, eat the seeds.  White-tailed deer are among the 
animals that browse the foliage.  Honeybees visit the 
blossoms.  Livestock will browse on Eastern redbud. 
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Legume Family (Fabaceae).  Eastern redbud 
is a native, perennial, deciduous tree or shrub.  The 
plants may vary in form from dense and round (to 6 
m tall) when grown in sun, to an open, taller form (to 
12 m tall) when grown in the shade.  The trees 
produce hundreds of small pink pea flowers in the 
very early spring, even before other trees have leafed 
out.  The bright magenta-pink to lilac flowers, appear 
in small clusters, primarily on older stems.  The 
flowers are irregular, 9 to 12 cm long, with ten 
stamens.  The unique, broadly heart-shaped leaves 
are nearly circular (5 to 10 cm), with a long, slender 
petiole.  The leaves are alternate and have 5 to 9 
prominent veins that radiat e palmately from the base.  
New leaves are a light green that darken with age and 
finally turn yellow in the fall.  The seeds are 
contained in a flat, thin pod (4 to 10 cm long), which 
turns from green to brown. 
© William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : Eastern redbud is native to the eastern 
and south-central United States, southward to Texas.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Eastern redbud occurs in the forest 
understory in moist rich woods, along the banks of 
streams, in ravines, on bluffs, in open rocky woods, 
and abandoned farmlands. 
 
Establishment 
Eastern redbud is widely cultivated as an ornamental 
because of the plants showy springtime flowers and 
beautiful heart-shaped leaves.  The plants are 
graceful with arching branches  that look lovely as a 
specimen tree, in groupings, and in shrub borders.  
The plants do well in soils of moderate to low 
fertility and are very drought resistant.  The seeds 
have very hard seed coats that require both chilling 
and scarification for germination, unless planted in 
the fall.  Cuttings are difficult to root.  Mature plants 
do not transplant well so buy young plants that are 
balled-and-burlapped or container grown.  Transplant 
the plants in the spring or fall, in well-drained soils in 
sun to part shade.  Water the plants regularly until 
established.

Management 
These plants require very little maintenance.  The 
brown seedpods, which can cling to the branches 
until late in the year, can be somewhat unattractive. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Eastern redbud has relatively few pests.  Stem 
canker, leaf spots, and verticillium wilt may be a 
problem.  The plants may experience some insect 
damage from leaf rollers, treehoppers, scales, 
leafhoppers, aphids, and spider mites, but damage is 
rarely severe.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.  Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.  493 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants. 
Fifth Edition.  Stipes Publishing, Champaign, Illinois.  
1187 pp. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America .  Second Edition.  John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft 1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Isley, D. 1990.   Vascular flora of the Southeastern 
United States, Volume 3, Part 2, Leguminosae  (Fabaceae).  
University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  258 pp.  
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.   The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(27 June 2001). 
 
Ottensen, C. 1995.   The native plant primer.  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Rogers, D.J. & C. Rogers 1991.   Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Swanson, R.E. 1994.   A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Swanton, J.R. 2000.   Creek religion and medicine .  
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska.  
684 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern tribes . Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Whitthoft, J. 1947.   An early Cherokee 
ethnobotanical note  (Communicated by W.N. 
Fenton).  Journal of the Washington Academy of 
Sciences 37(3): 73-75. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California

Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp;  01may03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.