Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COTONEASTER 
Cotoneaster integerrimus  
Medik.  
Plant Symbol = COIN16  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Cotoneaster cotoneaster, Cotoneaster vulgaris , 
European cotoneaster, great orme berry,  Mespilus 
cotoneaster,  Ostinia cotoneaster , quan yuan xun zi 
(Chinese), skalnik obecny (C zech), wild cotoneaster, 
zwergmispel (German).  
 
Uses 
Conservation:  The USDA NRCS recommends 
cotoneaster for use in  windbreak plantings on 
farmsteads and along transportation, transmission, 
and recreation corridors. 
 
Wildlife:  Many bird species consume cotoneaster 
fruit in autumn.  The plant also offers protection and 
habitat to small wildlife species. 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae). Cotoneaster is a 
multi-branched shrub with a broad crown.  It is 2 m 
tall at maturity.  The branchlets are grayish brown, 
covered with dense hairs, becoming more glabrous at 
maturity.  Leaves are simple, alternate, broadly ovate 
to almost circular, 2 to 4 cm  long and 1 to 3 cm wide.  
They are gray-green above, gray pubescent below, 
and are untoothed.  Buds are brown to pale gray and 
less than 1 cm long.  Two to five flowers are borne  
 
on inflorescences that are 1.5 to 2.5 cm long.  The 
flowers are pinkish-white and approximately 8 mm in 
diameter.  The fruit is a dark red berry, 6 to 8 mm in 
diameter.  Cotoneaster blooms in May and June and 
sets fruit in August and September. 
 
Distribution : Cotoneaster is native to Europe and 
temperate regions of Asia.  Its native status in China 
is debated and has been documented as unknown by 
some sources.   
 D.E. Herman. 1996.  North Dakota tree handbook.
 
Habitat: The natural habitats of cotoneaster are rocky 
slopes and forests at elevations below 2500 meters. 
 
Adaptation 
The recommended USDA  hardiness zones for 
cotoneaster are 3 through 5.   Cotoneaster prefers soils 
that are moist and have a pH range of 5.0 to 7.5.  The 
“North Dakota Tree Ha ndbook” states that 
cotoneaster is not adapted to alkaline soils (as well as 
saline soils), but other sources suggest that alkaline 
soils are preferred.  It is adapted to a variety of soil 
textures.  Growth is slow on very dry and poorly 
drained soils.  Cotoneaster does well in full and 
partial sun. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Fireblight is a common problem among cotoneaster 
plants.  It is caused by the bacterium,  Erwinia 
amylovora .  New plant growth is black and curved.  
Smooth bark will crack while older growth will 
develop cankers.  The cankers may cause death.  The 
disease is prompted by heavy rainfall followed by 
warm, hazy weather.  Nitrogen fertilization, late 
season fertilization, poor soil drainage, and over-
watering promote susceptibility to fire blight. 
 
Pear slugs are common insect pests that chew 
cotoneaster leaves, giving  plants a skeletonized 
appearance.  Damaged leaves fall prematurely.  Pear 
slug infestations leave cotoneaster unattractive, but 
do not affect plant health. 
 
Management  
To reduce the risk of fireblight infection, do not plant 
cotoneaster near ornamental or orchard apple trees.  
Although there is no chemical treatment available, 
sanitary culture conditions can manage fireblight 
spread.  Prune diseased twigs and remove plants with 
large cankers.  Disinfect pruning tools.  Apply sprays 
that contain fixed copper during bloom-time to

prevent infection.  Remove suckers from the base of 
the plant.  
 
Pear slug infestation is controlled with insecticides 
labeled for caterpillars or leaf beetles, or by using a 
jet of water to remove the slugs.  Wood ashes kill 
pear slugs. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center released 
the cultivar ‘Centennial’ cotoneaster in 1987 for 
conservation use in the Great Plains. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 19 
June 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Cranshaw, W.S. and D.A. Leatherman. 1986.  Pear 
slugs (http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/IPM/ento/ 
j560.html, 23 June 2004). Colorado State University 
Cooperative Extension, Fort Collins. 
 
Devonian Botanic Garden. 2004.  Woody perennials 
(http://www.discoveredmont on.com/devonian/seedw
ood.html, 19 June 2004). University of Alberta, 
Alberta, Canada. 
 
Landscape Alberta Nurser y Trades Association, 
Alberta Agriculture, Food, and Rural Development. 
1997.  ArborCare Library 
(http://www.arborcare.com/library/fireblight.html, 23 
June 2004). Arbor CARE Tree Service Ltd., Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada. 
 
Tree Information Center. 1996.  North Dakota tree 
handbook  (http://www.ag.ndsu.nodak.edu/ 
aginfo/trees/handbook/ndhand-1.htm, 19 June 2004). 
North Dakota State University, Fargo. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2002.  NC-7 woody ornamental 
evaluation trials: 1989 accessions  (http://www.ars-
grin.gov/ars/MidWest/Ames/Ornamental_Trials/inde
x.html, 19 June 2004). North Central Regional Plant 
Introduction Station, Ames. 
 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Herman, D.E. et 
al. 1996. North Dakota tree handbook. USDA NRCS 
ND State Soil Conservation Committee; NDSU 
Extension and Western Area Power Admin., 
Bismarck.  
 
Zhengyi, W. and P. Raven. 1994.  Flora of China. 
Science Press, Bejing, Chin a, and Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 25June2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.