Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
HACKBERRY  
Celtis occidentalis  L. 
Plant Symbol = CEOC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
American hackberry, beaverwood, Celtis canina, 
Celtis occidentalis  ssp. tenuifolia, Celtis occidentalis  
var. crassifolia, Celtis occidentalis  var. georgiana, 
Celtis occidentalis  var. integrifolia, Celtis 
occidentalis  var. pumila, Celtis pumila, Celtis pumila  
var.  georgiana, Celtis tenuifolia,  false elm, 
hackberry, nettle tree, northern hackberry, sugar 
berry. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Common hackberry is included in 
windbreak plantings to control wind erosion.  
Additionally, its deep root system makes common 
hackberry useful for preventing soil erosion on 
disturbed sites.  
 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans valued common 
hackberry for medicinal, food, and ceremonial 
purposes.  Medicinally, the bark was decocted to 
serve as a gynecological  aid that could induce 
abortion, regulate menstrual cycles, and treat  
venereal diseases.  Bark decoctions were also taken 
for sore throats.   
 
The drupes of common hackberry were mixed with 
fat and corn to form porridge or crushed to add flavor 
to foods.  They were also pounded into a paste, 
molded onto a stick and baked over an open fire. 
 
Common hackberry was used as the fuel source for 
the altar fire at peyote ce remonies, prayer ceremonies 
that utilized the hallucinogenic peyote cactus.  At the 
beginning of each of the four stages of the ceremony, 
the altar fire was replenished with common hackberry 
wood. 
 E.W. Chester.  2004  University of Tennessee Herbarium 
 
Ornamental:  Although the features of common 
hackberry are not considered attractive, it is 
commonly used as a street tree because of its ability 
to withstand drought and tolerate urban 
environments.  Common hackberry is also a bonsai 
species. 
 
Wildlife:  Wild turkey, ring-necked pheasant, quail, 
grouse, lesser prairie chicken, cedar waxwing, robins, 
and other bird species consume common hackberry 
fruit, which persist throughout the winter.  Small 
mammals also consume the fruit.  Deer will browse 
common hackberry leaves in the absence of preferred 
browse species.  Common hackberry provides good 
cover for species such as mule deer, white-tailed 
deer, upland game birds, small non-game birds, and 
small mammals. 
 
Wood products: Common hackberry is most 
commonly used as firewood.  It is not valuable as a 
timber tree, but is sometimes used to produce 
inexpensive furniture.  Its wood quality is 
comparable to that of  elm and white ash. 
 
Legal Status 
Common hackberry is listed as threatened in New 
Hampshire.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Elm Family (Ulmaceae). Common 
hackberry is a large deciduous tree reaching 12 m to 
18 m in height at maturity.  It typically lives to be 
150 to 200 years old and exhibits its greatest annual 
growth between 20 and 40 years of age. The bark is 
grayish and warty, and  stems have a zigzag 
appearance.   The branches tend to droop, giving

mature trees a cylindrical shape and the appearance 
of even and equal spread of branches.  Leaves are 
alternately arranged, simple, 7 to 12 cm long, and 
sharply toothed.  They are dark green above, paler 
beneath, have asymmetrical leaf bases (oblique), and 
sometimes have a rough texture.  Flowers are small, 
greenish-yellow, and emerge in April and May with 
the leaves.  Fruit are sm all greenish drupes that 
change to dark red or black upon maturity in 
September and October. 
 
Distribution : Common hackberry is native to the 
United States.  It occurs from Maine and Quebec, 
west to North Dakota, Wyoming and Colorado, and 
south to Texas and Georgia.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Common hackberry is the dominant species 
of the green ash-western snowberry plant 
communities in Nebraska and South Dakota and in 
the plains cottonwood-western snowberry 
communities in Montana, North Dakota, South 
Dakota, and Wyoming.  Although it is primarily a 
bottomland species, it is also found within upland 
communities on slopes and bluffs, limestone 
outcrops, and rocky hillsides. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones of common hackberry 
are 2 thru 9.  Although it is difficult to determine, it is 
considered a late-successi on or climax species 
because it grows well in deep shade.  Seedlings are 
found beneath heavy canopi es, where other species 
cannot survive.   
 
Common hackberry is able to grow in a variety of 
sites and soil types.  Although it grows best in moist 
soils near stream banks and on flood plains, it will 
grow on dry, less fertile soils.  Annual height growth 
will decrease in drier soils.  Common hackberry can 
also survive long periods of drought due to its deep 
root system.  It will not occur on sites with a 
permanently high water table, but mature trees can 
survive periods of excessive flooding.   
 
In the most favorable soil conditions, growth can 
exceed 0.4 m per year within the first 6 years of 
planting.  In poor dry sites, growth is slow (less than 
2.5 cm per year) and some common hackberry plants 
appear shrub-like.  It prefers limestone soils and is 
not tolerant of salt spray or soils with a pH greater 
than 8. 
Management  
Common hackberry is susceptible to frost damage in 
the northern portions of its ra nge.  For this reason, it  is best to plant it in the second or third row of either 
the windward or leewar
d half of windbreaks. 
 
A few studies indicate that fire suppresses growth 
and regeneration of common hackberry.  Seedlings 
will not emerge in sunlight provided by a newly 
opened canopy.  Low intensity  fires will injure trees 
or reduce their reproductive potential while high 
intensity fires may kill some trees.  Wounds caused 
by fire attract insects or  fungi that can pose more 
problems for the plant. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insect and fungal infestations make common 
hackberry plants unattractive, but generally do not 
kill them.  Common hackberry is host to gall-
producing insects including the hackberry petiole gall 
psylid, hackberry nipplegall maker, hackberry bud 
gall maker, and the hackberry blistergall psyllid (all 
in the genus  Pachypsylla). 
 
Leaf spot fungi frequently occur on common 
hackberry trees.  More damaging is the witches’ 
broom disease that causes rosette formation on 
branch tips.  Witches’ broom is initiated by the 
combined infestation of a gall mite and powdery 
mildew.  Fungal infection by oak fungus ( Armillaria 
mellea ) causes root rot on injured trees, leading to 
death. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Common hackberry seeds are ready for collection in 
September and October.  They can be dried to less 
than 5% moisture content and remain viable 
throughout long storage periods.  One study showed 
no loss in viability following 5.5 years in sealed 
storage at 10
oC.  Seeds will germinate at 21oC 
following 60 to 90 days of cold stratification at 5oC.  
Germination may increase with sulfuric acid (H
2SO4) 
application.  Treat seeds with concentrated H
2SO4 for 
one hour, wash with water, and treat for another hour 
in H
2SO4. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant  Materials Program has 
released ‘Oahe’ for urban plantings in North Dakota, 
Montana, South Dakota, and Minnesota. 
 
Other cultivars available from commercial sources 
include ‘Magnifica,’ ‘Prairie Pride,’ and 
‘Chicagoland.’ These cultivars were developed for 
plant shape, straighter trunk s, drought resistance, salt 
tolerance, and adaptation to compacted soils.

Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 9 
June 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Baskin, C.J., J.M. Baskin. 2001.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container Celtis 
occidentalis L. plants.   (http://www.nativeplant 
network.org, 9 June 2004). College of Natural 
Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Brand, M. 2001.  University of Connecticut plant 
database   (http://www.hort.uconn.edu/plants/, 9 June 
2004). University of Connecticut, Storrs. 
 
Chester, E.W. 2004.  Celtis occidentalis. 
(http://tenn.bio.utk.edu/ vascular/vascular.html, 9 
June 2004). University of Tennessee, Knoxville. 
 
Floridata. 2004.  Plant encyclopedia  
(http://floridata.com, 9 June 2004). Floridata 
Marketplace, Tallahassee. 
 
Gilman, E.F. and D.G. Watson. 1993.  Celtis 
occidentalis (common hackberry).  Fact Sheet ST-
140. Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Science, University of 
Florida, Gainesville. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1913.  Some native Nebraska plants 
with their uses by the Dakota.  Collections of the 
Nebraska State Historical Society 17: 358-370. 
 
Heatley, R. 1999.  Ornamental plants plus,  Version 
3.0 (http://www.msue.msu.edu/imp/modzz/ 
masterzz.html, 9 June 2004). Michigan State 
University Extension, East Lansing. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1977.  Iroquois medical botany.  State 
University of New York, Albany. 
 
Illinois State Museum. 2003.  Celtis occidentalis 
(http://www.museum.state.il.us/muslink/forest/htmls/
tree/C-occidentalis.html, 9 June 2004). Illinois 
Department of Natural Resources, Springfield.  
 
Lindstrom, J.T. 2003. Celtis occidentalis 
(http://www.uark.edu/campus-
resources/cotinus/plants4_html/celtocci.html, 9 June  2004). Horticulture 3103 Summary Sheet. 
Department of Horticulture, University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville.  
McLemore, B.F. 1990. 
Silvics of North America: 
conifers and hardwoods  (http://www.na.fs.fed.us/ 
spfo/pubs/silvics_manual/table_of_contents.htm, 9 
June 2004) Agriculture Handbook 654. USDA Forest 
Service, Washington D.C. 
 
Rhodes, T. 2002.  Plant Facts 
(http://plantfacts.osu.edu, June 9 2004). Horticulture 
and Crop Science, The  Ohio State University, 
Columbus. 
 
Rosario, L.C. 1988.  Celtis occidentalis. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 9 June 2004). 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Missoula. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians. Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4: 175-326. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana.  Primitive Man 
14: 49-75. 
 
Swank, G.R. 1932.  The Ethnobotany of the Acoma 
and Laguna Indians.  University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque. 
 
Tweddle, J.C., R.M. Turner, and J.B. Dickie. 2003. 
Seed Information Database,  Release 5.0 
(http://www.kew.org/data/sid/, 9 June 2004). Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew. 
 
Vestal, P.A. and R.E. Schultes. 1939.  The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians.  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge. 
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 2003. 
Dendrology tree fact sheets 
(http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/factsheets.
cfm, 9 June 2004). Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 9 June 2004). Institute 
of Systematic Botany, University of South Florida, 
Tampa.

Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana  
 Edited: 23June2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.