Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
BITTERSWEET 
Celustus scandens  L. 
Plant Symbol = CESC  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate common names 
Climbing bittersweet, false bittersweet, climbing 
orange-root, fever-twig,  fever-twitch, staff-vine, 
jacob’s-ladder 
 
Uses 
American bittersweet is valued for its glossy green 
summer foliage followed by orange and red fruits and 
seeds, and several landscape cultivars are 
commercially marketed.  The  branches with colorful 
berries and arils are used in dry flower arrangements 
and winter decoration.    
 
All parts of bittersweet are reported to be poisonous, 
but songbirds, ruffed grouse, pheasant, and fox 
squirrel eat the fruits.  The Menominee, Ojibwa, and 
Potawatami tribes of North American Indians have 
used the inner bark as an emergency food.  Various 
parts of the plant have been used in decoctions and 
ointments for a variety of ailments, including cough, 
intestinal, and gynecological problems.   
 
Oil expressed from the seeds of the related species 
Celastrus paniculatus , a shrub native to India, has 
been used medicinally in In dia for centuries.  The oil 
is used to increase memory and facilitate learning.  It 
induces a feeling of well being and has reported 
aphrodisiac effects.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Bittersweet family (Celastraceae).  Native 
dioecious or partly dioecious, semi-shrubs or semi-
shrubby vines, forming low, thick stands from root 
suckers, clambering and climbing onto fences and 
trees, broadly twining and sometimes reaching nearly 
20 meters high, the older stems becoming several cm 
broad; roots long, woody, bright-orange, creeping, 
about 2-3 cm thick, with a thick, red or yellowish-red 
bark (the medicinal part).  Leaves are deciduous, 
alternate, spiral or somewhat 2-ranked by the twisting 
of the stem, glabrous, 5-12 cm long and about half as 
wide, oblong-elliptic to ovate or obovate, acuminate 
at the tip, with small, rounded teeth, the petioles 1-2 
cm long.  Flowers are uni sexual (with either the 
stamens or the ovary abortive) or rarely bisexual, 
fragrant, small (ca. 4 mm wide), greenish-white or 
greenish-yellow, in clusters at the branch tips, usually 
with 14-44 flowers per cluster.  Fruits are orange to 
yellow-orange, globose, 7-10 mm wide, with 2-4 
cells; seeds 1-2 in each cell, each seed enclosed in a 
bright scarlet fleshy aril.  
 @ PLANTS 
 
The related oriental bittersweet ( Celastrus 
orbiculatus  Thunb.) is becoming more common than 
American bittersweet and is attaining a similar 
geographic range.  The following contrast gives 
information for their separation: 
 
1. Leaves mostly oblong-elliptic to ovate, 1.8-2.6 
times longer than wide; flowers and fruits 6 or more 
in panicles (irregularly branching ) at the branch tips.    
Celastrus scandens 
 
2. Leaves mostly obicular to suborbicular or broadly 
obovate, 1.2-1.7 times longer than wide; flowers and 
fruits 2-3 in cymes  (regularly branching ) in the leaf 
axils below the branch tips.    Celastrus orbiculatus 
 
Distribution 
American bittersweet grows over the eastern two-
thirds of the US (except for Florida), on the western 
edge of the range from Texas and Oklahoma to 
Wyoming and Montana, and across southeastern 
Canada from Saskatchewan to New Brunswick.

Adaptation  
In rich or swampy woods, or appearing weedy in 
disturbed areas in thickets, roadsides, field edges, 
fences, and other disturbed sites.  This species 
flowers in late May through June and produces fruits 
in June through November.    
 
Establishment 
The seeds are widely distributed by birds, which 
accounts for the tendency of the species to occur in 
disturbed habitats.  Prechilling apparently is required 
to break dormancy -- seeds stratified for 90 days at 5º 
C., then planted in soil maintained at 20-25º, 
germinated at 71%.  
 
Management  
American bittersweet vines can girdle and kill live 
plants used for support, but the native species rarely 
presents a problem because of its relative lack of 
abundance.  Oriental bittersweet, however, is 
displacing the native species where they have begun 
to occur together, and there is some indication that 
they are hybridizing.  Th e non-native species grows 
over vegetation and kills other plants by preventing 
photosynthesis, girdling, and uprooting by force of its 
massive weight.  Its seeds are more numerous and 
more desirable by birds, thus more widely dispersed 
and they have a higher germination rate.  The non-
native species has higher pollen viability and also is 
more efficient in photosynthesis.  Further, oriental 
bittersweet has been planted along roadsides for 
erosion control, it is propagated for horticulture and 
sold commercially, and its seeds are spread to waste 
places through disposal of dried flower arrangements.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brizicky G.K. 1964.  The genera of Celastrales in the 
southeastern United States.   J. Arnold Arbor. 45:206-
234.  
 
Cromer, J.A. 1974.   American bittersweet, Celastrus 
scandens L .  IN: Shrubs and vines for northeastern 
wildlife .  USDA, Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. NE-
9.   
 
DeWolf, G. 1982.   Bittersweet.  Horticulture 
60(10):8-9.   
 
Dillingham, F.T. 1907.   The staff tree, Celastrus 
scandens, as a former food supply of starving 
Indians. Amer. Naturalist 41:391-393.  
 
Dreyer, G.D., L.M. Baird, & C. Fickler 1987.  
Celastrus scandens and Celastrus orbiculatus : 
Comparisons of reproductive potential between a 
native and an introduced species.   Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club 114:260-264.  
 
Duncan, W.H. 1969.   Celastrus (Celastraceae) in the 
southeastern United States .  Sida 3:309-310.   
 
Hou, D. 1955.  A revision of the genus Celastrus.  
Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 42:215-302.    
 
White, O.E. & W.M. Bowden 1947.  Oriental and 
American bittersweet hybrids .  J. Heredity 38:125-
127.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 10jun03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.