Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK HAWTHORN 
Crataegus douglasii Lindl. 
Plant Symbol = CRDO2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Name 
Douglas hawthorn  
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Because it tolerates a wide variety 
of sites, black hawthorn can be planted to stabilize 
banks, for shelterbelts, and for erosion control along 
ditches and highways. 
 
Timber : Although the wood is hard and strong, it has 
no commercial value exce pt for tool handles and 
other small items.  
 
Wildlife : It provides abundant food and cover for 
game birds such as the blue and sharp-tailed grouse.  
The mule deer, small mammals and other wildlife 
species feed on the leaves and twigs of young 
seedlings or trees.  Livestoc k readily eats its leaves if 
accessible. 
 
Beautification : Ideal for biological barriers between 
recreational areas and physical structures.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
It is a large shrub or small tree that can grow to 
thirty-five feet tall, with straight, strong but few 
thorns ranging from 0.5 to 1 inch long.  Stems are 
usually clustered from the base or from a point just 
above the ground surface.  Leaves are smooth, long, 
broad, dark green, shiny, and serrated at the tip.  
Flowers are globe-shaped and in small clusters 
produced in the spring.  Its fruits are dark reddish-
purple to black. 
 J.E. & Bonnie McClellan © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution: Crataegus douglasii , black hawthorn, is 
widespread in the Pacific Northwest, from 
southeastern Alaska south through British Columbia 
to northern California. 
 
Adaptation 
Black hawthorn generally occurs on deep, moist, 
fine-textured soils, at lower elevations ranging from 
2,200–5,400 ft.   Although it will su cceed in partial 
shade and different soil types, it grows best in full 
sunlight with sufficient moisture levels.  It is 
predominantly an understory species and seldom 
found in pure stands.  It is fire tolerant and will re-
sprout and produce suckers following fire 
disturbance.  
 
Establishment  
Propagation from Seed or Grafting : Black hawthorn 
can be propagated by either  seeds or grafting.  To 
increase percent germination, seeds require acid 
scarification for 0.5 to 3 hours, followed by 84 to 112 
days of cold treatment.  Seeds are planted early in the 
fall, in drill rows 8 to 12 inches apart and covered 
with 1/4 inch of soil.  Seedlings must not be kept in 
the nursery longer than a year.    Approximate seed 
per pound: 22,600. 
 
Containerized trees should be planted when they are 
no more than eight feet tall, in the fall or spring.  
Balled and burlapped trees should be planted in early 
spring. 
 
Grafting on seedling stock of  Crataegus oxyacantha 
or  Crataegus monogyna  is best carried out in the 
winter to early spring. 
 
Management 
Because it develops long taproot, it should not be 
kept in seedbeds more than one year.  Pruning should 
be done in the winter or early spring in order to 
maintain a clear shoot lead er on young trees and/or

remove the weakest branches to allow more light to 
pass through.  Suckers or stems arising from the roots 
should be removed when they become noticeable.  
Limited agriculture/livestock can help maintain and 
protect black hawthorn thickets as important source 
of food and cover for wildlife. 
 
Pest and Potential Problems 
Although pests and diseases seldom affect it, it is 
susceptible to fireblight, cedar-hawthorn rust, cedar-
quince rust, leaf blight, fruit rot, and leaf spot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Consult you local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.  Seeds and 
seedlings are commercially available at forest seed 
companies.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.  Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation and uses .  3
rd 
ed.  Stipes, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Duncan, W.H. & M.B. Duncan 1988.   Trees of the 
Southeastern United States.   University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Elias, T.S. 1989.   Field guide to North American 
trees .  Revised ed. Grolier Book Clubs Inc., Danbury, 
Connecticut. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1983.   Landscape plants for eastern North 
America .  John Wiley and Sons, Inc, New York, New 
York. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar. 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Little, E.E. 1996.   National Audubon Society field 
guide to North American trees: Eastern region .  
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1974.   Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States .  Agricultural Handbook 450. 
USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1990.   Silvics of North 
America .  Agricultural Handbook 654.  Forest 
Service, USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young. 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Revised and enlarged ed.  
Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
Alfredo "Fred" B. Lorenzo 
Formerly Southern University and A&M College, 
College of Agricultural, Family and Consumer 
Sciences, Baton Rouge, LA  70813 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.