Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BRAINERD’S HAWTHORN 
Crataegus brainerdii  Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = CRBR3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Because it tolerates a wide variety 
of sites, it can be planted to stabilize banks, for 
shelterbelts, and for erosion control. 
 
Timber : Although the wood is hard and strong, it has 
no commercial value exce pt for tool handles and 
other small items. 
 
Wildlife : It provides excellent cover and nesting sites 
for many smaller birds.  The small fruits are eaten by 
birds, rodents and other smaller mammals.  White 
tailed deer browse the young twigs and leaves. 
 
Beautification : Excellent for environmental plantings 
including small specime n tree, shrub border. 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Shrub or small tree that grows to thirty feet tall and 
seven inches in diameter at breast height, with thorns 
1.2-1.6 inches along the branchlets.  Leaves are 
broadest near the base, sometimes triangular shaped, 
shallowly lobed, hairy at first becoming smooth at 
maturity.  Flowers in clusters of three to fifteen.  
Fruits are globe-shaped to broadest above the mid-
section, usually bright red with juicy flesh.  
 from Britton & Brown (1913) by Kentucky Native Plant Society @ PLANTS 
 
Description: Brainerd’s hawthorn is a native to 
Quebec and New England to North Carolina and west 
to Michigan. 
 
Adaptation 
Although  Crataegus brainerdii  will succeed in partial 
shade and different soil types, it grows best in full 
sunlight, well-drained loamy soils.  Brainerd’s 
hawthorn will tolerate wet soils becoming drought 
tolerant once established.  It is also wind tolerant 
making it a good tree species in shelterbelt planting.  
It is also tolerant of atmospheric pollution and 
performs well in urban settings.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed or Grafting : Brainerd’s 
hawthorn can be propagated by either seeds or 
grafting.  Successful propagation using seeds requires 
acid scarification followed by warm stratification and 
prechilling.  Seeds, whose numbers per lb. varies 
with species, are planted early in the fall, in drill rows 
eight to twelve inches apart and covered with 1/4 
inch of soil.  Seedlings must not be kept in the 
nursery longer than a year.  
 
Containerized trees should be planted when they are 
no more than eight feet tall, in the fall or spring.  
Balled and burlapped trees should be planted in early 
spring. 
 
Grafting on seedling stock of  Crataegus oxyacantha 
or  Crataegus monogyna  is best carried out in the 
winter to early spring.

Management 
Pruning should be done in the winter or early spring 
in order to maintain a clear shoot leader on young 
trees and/or remove the weakest branches to allow 
more light to pass through.  Suckers or stems arising 
from the roots should be removed when they become 
noticeable. 
 
Pest and Potential Problems 
Although pests and diseases seldom affect it, it is 
susceptible to fireblight, cedar-hawthorn rust, cedar-
quince rust, leaf blight and fruit rot, and leaf spot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1913.   An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States, Canada and the British 
possessions .  Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 
New York.  Scanned by Kentucky Native Plant 
Society and made available through PLANTS. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation and uses .  3
rd 
ed.  Stipes, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Duncan, W.H. & M.B. Duncan 1988.   Trees of the 
Southeastern United States.   University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Elias, T.S. 1989.   Field guide to North American 
trees .  Revised ed. Grolier Book Clubs Inc., Danbury, 
Connecticut. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1983.   Landscape plants for eastern North 
America .  John Wiley and Sons, Inc, New York, New 
York. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar. 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Little, E.E. 1996.   National Audubon Society field 
guide to North American trees: Eastern region .  
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1974.   Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States .  Agricultural Handbook 450. 
USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1990.   Silvics of North 
America .  Agricultural Handbook 654.  Forest 
Service, USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young. 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Revised and enlarged ed.  
Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
Alfredo B. Lorenzo 
Formerly, Southern University and A&M College, 
College of Agricultural, Family and Consumer 
Sciences 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 09jan02 jsp;31jan03ahv;  09jun03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.