FIREWEED 
Chamerion angustifolium Holub 
Plant Symbol = CHAN9 
  Fireweed (Chamerion angustifolium), Ben Legler, Burke 
Museum of Natural History and Culture, University of 
Washington 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  perennial fireweed, narrow-leaved 
fireweed, great willow-herb, rosebay willow-herb, 
flowering willow. 
Scientific Names:  Epilobium angustifolium, 
Chamaenerion angustifolium 
Description 
General:  Evening primrose family (Onagraceae). Native, 
herbaceous perennial growing from spreading rootstocks. 
Plants are strongly rhizomatous with roots typically 
growing within the top few inches of the ground surface 
(Henderson et al. 1979).  Fireweed has 1 to 6 ft., 
occasionally 9 ft., tall stout erect stems that are often 
reddish, usually unbranched and usually glabrous below 
and pubescent above with small white hairs.  Leaves are 
willow-like, alternate (lower leaves often opposite), long-
lanceolate, (2) 4 to 8 inches long, deep green above, paler 
beneath, pinnately veined, with conspicuous veins on 
lower surface and united near the leaf margins.  Leaves 
are minutely and distantly toothed, or nearly entire, the 
lower narrowed into short petioles. 
Fireweed blooms from June to September and has 
magenta, deep pink or rose-colored (rarely white) flowers. 
Flowers have 4, 0.35 to 0.80 inch long petals which are 
obovate in shape and taper to a short claw.  Each flower 
has 4 narrowly lanceolate, spreading sepals, 8 stamens, a 
4-cleft stigma, a style that is hairy near base and longer 
than the stamens, and a 4-loculed ovary.  Flowers have 
long pedicels and are borne in long terminal spikes, 
racemes, or in the axils of upper foliage leaves.  Fireweed 
fruit is a slender, many seeded capsule.  Seeds have a tuft 
of fine white hair at tip (Myerscough 1980; Broderick 
1990; Hitchcock & Cronquist 1973; Gilkey and Dennis 
1980; Mitich 1999; Stubbendieck et al. 2011).    
Distribution:  Fireweed grows in northern climates 
throughout the world. It tolerates a broad spectrum of 
climatic conditions (Mosquin 1966).  It has been recorded 
from 25 to 70 degrees north, and from sea level in the 
central and northern parts of its range in Western North 
America to 15,000 ft. in the Himalayas. Fireweed is 
widespread in the northern US and Canada from Labrador 
to Alaska. In America its distribution extends south along 
the eastern mountain chain into N. Carolina (Myerscough 
and Whitehead 1966) and in the west down the 
Cordilleran range into California and New Mexico. In the 
southerly limits of its range, distribution is restricted to 
montane environments (Mosquin 1966).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Distribution of fireweed at the southern edge of its range 
is limited by water requirements, and in the northern most 
part of its range distribution appears to be restricted to 
relatively sheltered sites where plants are not exposed to 
the effects of cold, drying winds (Myerscough and 
Whitehead 1966).  
Habitat:  Fireweed can be found in a wide variety of 
environments but is most frequently associated with 
species colonizing recently disturbed ground (Dyrness 
1973).  Habitats in which  fireweed grows include burned 
or logged forests, woodland boarders, forest meadows, 
alpine meadows, mixed forests, boreal forests, roadsides, 
and moist areas along streams, lakes and bogs (Gilkey and 
Dennis 1980; Bartos and Mueggler 1981; Myerscough 
and Whitehead 1966).  In some well-established plant 
communities, widely spaced fireweed colonies with low 
stem densities may persist for long periods (Moss 1936).  
 
Adaptation 
Fireweed is predominately an early successional plant and 
is named fireweed because of its tendency to grow where 
fires have occurred (Mitich 1999).  It is adapted to fire 
because of its rhizomes and prolific production of wind-
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

dispersed seed.  It is a notably adaptable species that is 
capable of growth and survival in a wide range of plant 
communities and successional stages (Henderson et al. 
1979).  Fireweed is adapted to disturbances that reverse 
succession, such as logging and wind throw (Dyrness 
1973; Bartos and Mueggler 1981).  C. angustifolium 
colonies, through the development of an extensive and 
long-lived system of shallowly buried roots, can persist 
for many decades in areas of mature forest where no 
evidence is found for continuing recruitment of seedlings. 
Fireweed cover often decreases with decreasing sunlight 
(Lieffers and Stadt 1994).  After severe disturbance of the 
forest cover, fireweed colonies go through a phase of 
prodigious root growth and the density of shoots increases 
(Henderson et al. 1979). 
 
Fireweed can grow on a wide variety of substrates. 
However, it does not appear to occur in conditions of poor 
mineral nutrition and does not tolerate waterlogged soils.    
It is tolerant of acid as well as neutral and fairly alkaline 
soils (Myerscough and Whitehead 1966) and grows well 
in potash (Mitich 1999).  In the artic, fireweed is a 
dominant natural colonizer of oil spill sites and has been 
found on acidic coal spoils, mine wastes, and along road 
cuts (Mosquin 1966).   
 
Diploid forms of the plant are common in Europe and the 
northern part of North America while polyploids are 
distributed throughout the southern part of the continent 
of North America (Henderson et al. 1979).  Although 
mixed-ploidy populations of fireweed are common in 
North America, tetraploid plants occupy a drier climatic 
niche than diploids. Pure diploid populations occur in 
habitats that are colder than those of pure tetraploid 
populations (Thompson et al. 2014). 
 
Uses 
Wildlife Habitat: Fireweed is valued as food for wildlife. 
In some areas, shoots of fireweed are a preferred food of 
deer and cattle and are also eaten by moose, caribou, 
muskrat, and hares (Willms et al. 1980; Henderson et al. 
1979). 
 
Pollinator Habitat: A broad spectrum of insects utilize 
fireweed (Myerscough 1980).  Swales (1979) observed 
eight different species of bees and several fly and bug 
species utilizing fireweed.  Nectar is produced 
continuously beginning about one day after anthesis and 
ending when abscission of floral parts occurs, a process 
which in fertilized flowers normally requires about four or 
five days (Mosquin 1966).  Bees are the most abundant 
pollinators of fireweed (Kennedy et al. 2006) and in much 
of Canada it is an important plant for the honey industry 
(Mosquin 1966).   
 
Landscaping: Fireweed is sometimes grown as an 
ornamental but it is apt to become a bothersome weed 
(Parish et al. 1996).  
 
Reclamation: Fireweed shows great potential for use in 
forest reclamation as it is capable of germinating and 
growing on reclaimed soils. It is effective in taking up 
nutrients from the soil, promoting nutrient capture, 
accumulation, and likely nutrient cycling on newly 
reclaimed sites (Pinno et al. 2014).   
Ethnobotany 
Fireweed has been utilized in several ways by Native 
Americans and First Nations People.  Many sought out 
fireweed plants in the spring-time before they bloomed, to 
eat the sweet and succulent raw pith of the stems.  Some 
boiled or steamed the stems and served them like 
asparagus, some used the leafy stems as flavoring or as 
matting in root-cooking pits or earth ovens (Turner 1997).  
In England and Russia the leaves were used as a substitute 
for, or an additive to, tea.  In Russia it is still used for this 
purpose; the beverage is called “Kaporie tea” (Mitich 
1999).It may have a laxative effect (Parish et al.1996).    
 
Fireweed was used by Interior Peoples (Canadian First 
Nations People) externally as a medicine against eczema, 
and they sometimes mixed it with other plants. Coastal 
First Nations People dried stems peelings and twisted 
them into a type of twine used for fishing nets.  Some 
mixed the seed fluff with hair from mountain goats or 
dogs and used it for weaving or padding (Parish et al. 
1996). Extracts of fireweed reduce PG (prostaglandin) 
biosynthesis and exert anti-inflammatory effects (Juan et 
al. 1988).  More recently, Japanese-Canadians and others 
have adopted fireweed as a green vegetable (Turner 
1997). 
Status 
Although widespread across much of Canada and the 
northern US, in some areas at the southern extent of its 
range fireweed is a rare species.  In the states of Indiana, 
Ohio and North Carolina fireweed is classified as a 
Threatened or Endangered species and in Tennessee, 
because of its rarity, it’s classified as a Species of 
Concern.   
 
Fireweed is particularly abundant on recently disturbed 
ground in coniferous or mixed forest ecosystems and is a 
common weed of roadsides and waste areas.  Where 
growth is prolific, seedling establishment of commercially 
important coniferous trees can be suppressed (Broderick 
1990).  Fireweed can be a problem in perennial crops. 
  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g.,

threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
 
Planting Guidelines 
Fireweed seeds are very small and difficult to plant when 
the pappus is still attached. In a greenhouse study, seeds 
had a higher germination rate when sown on the soil 
surface than when sown at a depth of 1/12 inch or more 
(Myerscough and Whitehead 1966).  The highest rates of 
germination were obtained when seeds were sown on the 
surface under warm well lighted humid conditions 
(Myerscough and Whitehead 1966).    
 
For outdoor plantings, seed should be broadcast or drilled 
with the drop tubes disconnected at the openers to allow 
seed to land on the soil surface or be only slightly buried.  
Seed should be mixed with other seed or a carrier, such as 
rice hulls, to facilitate flow through a drill.  The ideal 
planting time for fireweed is in early fall, to allow 
germination and growth before winter, or late fall before 
the snowfall for a dormant seeding (Gilmore, personal 
com.).  Hydroseeding has been shown to be an effective 
method for seeding fireweed (Gilmore, personal com.). 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Fireweed is alternate host of the rust Pucciniastrum 
Abieti-chamenerii  (Pucciniastrum epilobii) that causes 
needle rust in Abies balsamea.  The rust fungus Puccinia 
gigantean parasitizes C. angustifolium.  Major 
infestations are reported to cause reduction in flowering, 
premature senescence of the shoot and even death of the 
entire plant (Henderson 1979). 
C. angustifolium was found to develop leaf lesions when 
exposed to Phytophthora ramorum, the cause of sudden 
oak death on the U.S. West Coast (Shishkoff 2012).     
 
There are also a variety of leaf eating insects associated 
with C. angustifolium (MacGarvin 1982). 
Environmental Concerns 
Seedling establishment of commercially important 
coniferous trees can be suppressed in areas where 
fireweed growth is prolific, and the species can be a 
problem in perennial crops (Broderick 1990).  C. 
angustifolium may act as a reservoir for root-rotting 
Armillaria spp., a serious problem for lodgepole pine 
(Pinus contorta).  
Control 
Livestock grazing early in the spring and again in the fall 
can reduce C. angustifolium populations (Ingram 1931).  
To prevent spread in a home garden, collect seed from 
plants before the seeds are able to spread to areas where 
C. angustifolium is not wanted (Gilmore, personal com.).   
 
For other control methods contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each control 
method.  Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Fireweed plants are protandrous (male reproductive 
organs mature before the female reproductive organs) and 
self-compatible (capable of self-fertilization) (Mosquin 
1966).  Flower anthers open, and disperse pollen, within 
24 hours of the flower opening while the stigmas remain 
closed and the style (connects stigma to the ovary) 
strongly reflexed away from the anthers for 2 to 3 days, a 
process that promotes cross-pollination (Mosquin 1966).  
After most of the pollen of a flower is shed, the stigma 
comes forward while the anthers become deflexed.  The 
stigma opens and now may be pollinated (Mosquin 1966).   
 
Collect fluffy seeds by hand in late summer just prior to 
dispersal.  Flowering progresses from the base to the top 
of the plant, so the first-formed lowermost capsules may 
be ripe and their seeds dispersed by the end of July, while 
flower buds are still being produced at the apex of the 
shoot.  Fireweed seeds are small (approx. 6,800,000/lb.) 
(Wiese et al. 2012), grey to black, and embedded in white 
hairs.   
 
Fireweed is a challenge to clean due to the tiny seed and 
the silky hairs that aid in wind dispersal, which makes this 
seed “flighty” and difficult to feed into the brush machine 
(Barner 2009).   Large collections can be cleaned with a 
hammermill and air column separator.  Small collections 
can be cleaned by rubbing the achenes over a screen to 
separate the pappus from the achenes (Luna and Dedekam 
2008; Gilmore, personal com.).   
 
Barner (2009) developed a successful method of cleaning 
the seed that involved using a laboratory brush machine 
with a #40 mantel at medium speed to remove seed from 
the capsules and to remove the silky hairs. Barner then 
used laboratory test sieves mesh size 50, 40, and 20 to 
remove non-seed material before air-screening the seed 
with an Office Clipper®.  The Office Clipper® was had a 
top screen of40 x 40 wire and a bottom screen of50 x 50 
wire, at low speed and low air.   
   
Seeds stored at 34 – 37o F in sealed containers remain 
viable for at least a few years (Luna and Dedekam 2008).  
Most seeds will germinate within 10 days when exposed 
to warm, moist conditions (Jobidon 1986).  
 
New shoots arise each spring from buds formed late in the 
previous growing season, along an often complex network 
of horizontal roots.  Cuttings from these roots are suitable 
for transplanting (Mitich 1999).

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
No known cultivars or selected materials.  
 
 
Literature Cited 
Barner J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of 
propagules (seeds, cuttings, poles, etc.), Chamerion 
angustifolium (L.) Holub [Online]: Native Plant Network. 
URL: http://www.NativePlantNetwork.org (accessed 
2016/01/15) University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Research Nursery, Moscow, ID.  
 
Bartos D. L. and W. F. Mueggler. 1981. Early succession 
in aspen communities following fire in western 
Wyoming.  J. of Range Manage. 34: 315-318. 
Broderick, D. H. 1990. The Biology of Canadian weeds 
93 Epilobium Angustifolium L. (Onagraceae). Can. J. 
of Plant Sci. 70: 247-259. 
Dennis, La Rea J. 1980.  Gilkey’s Weeds of the Pacific 
Northwest. Oregon State University press.  
Dyrness C. T. 1973. Early stages of plant succession 
following logging and burning in the western 
Cascades of Oregon. Ecology 54: 57-69.  
Henderson, G., P. G. Holland, G. L. Werren.  1979.  The 
natural history of a subarctic adventive Epilobium 
angustifolium L. (Onagraceae) at Schefferville, 
Quebec. Naturaliste Canadien 106: 425-437.  
Hitchcock C. L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest an Illustrated Manual. University 
of Washington Press, Seattle. 
Ingram D. C. 1931. Vegetative changes and grazing use 
on Douglas-fir cut-over land.  J. of Agric. Res. 43: 
387-417 
Jobidon R. 1986. Allelopathic potential of coniferous 
species to old-field weeds in eastern Quebec. Society 
of American Foresters. For. Sci. 32 No. 1: 112-118.  
Juan H., W. Sametz and A. Hiermann.  1988. Anti-
inflammatory effects of a substance extracted from 
Epilobium angustifolium. Agents and Actions 23: 
106-107.   
Kennedy B. F., H. A. Sabara, D. Haydon, and B. C. 
Husband. 2006. Pollinator-mediated assortative 
mating in mixed ploidy populations of Chamerion 
angustifolium (Onagraceae). Oecologia (Berlin) 
150:398-408.  
Lieffers V. J. and K. J. Stadt. 1994. Growth of understory 
Picea glauca, Calamagrostis canadensis, and 
Epilobium angustifolium in relation to overstory light 
transmission. Can. J. For. Res. 24: 1193-1198. 
Luna T. and S. Dedekam. 2008. Propagation protocol for 
production of container (plug) Chamerion 
angustifolium plants 116 ml (7 cu in) [Online]. 
Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.NativePlantNetwork.org. (accessed 
2016/01/15) Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 
MacGarvin M. 1982. Species-area relationships of insects 
on host plants:  herbivores on rosebay willowherb. J. 
Animal Ecology 51: 207-223.  
Mitich, L. W., 1999. Intriguing world of weeds, fireweed, 
Epilobium angustifolium, Weed Technology 13:191-
194. 
Mosquin T. 1966. A new taxonomy for Epilobium 
angustifolium L. (Onagraceae). Brittonia. 18: 167-
188. 
Moss E. H. 1936. The ecology of Epilobium 
angustifolium with particular reference to rings of 
periderm in the wood. Am. J. Bot. 23: 114-120.  
 
Myerscough, P. J., 1980. Biological flora of the British 
Isles.  J. Ecol. 68: 1047-1074.  
Myerscough P. J., and F. H. Whitehead. 1966. 
Comparative biology of Tussilago farfara L., 
Chamaenerion angustifolium (L.) Scop., Epilobium 
montanum L. and Epilobium adenocaulon Hausskn. I 
General biology and germination. New Phytol. 65: 
192-210.  
Parish R., R. Coupe, and D. Lloyd. 1996. Plants of 
Southern Interior British Columbia and the Inland 
Northwest. Lone Pine Publishing.  
Pinno B. D., S. M. Landhausser, P. S. Chow, S. A. 
Quideau, and M. D. MacKenzie.  2014. Nutrient 
uptake and growth of fireweed (Chamerion 
angustifolium) on reclamation soils. Can. J. For. Res. 
44: 1-7. 
Shishkoff N. 2012. Susceptibility of some common 
container weeds to Phytophthora ramorum. The 
American Phytopathological Society. Plant Dis. 96 
No. 7.  
Stubbendieck, J., Stephan L. Hatch, and Neal M. Bryan 
2011. North American Wildland Plants, 2nd ed, Field 
Guide. University of Nebraska Press. 
Swales D. E. 1979. Nectaries of certain arctic and sub-
arctic plants with notes on pollination.  Rhodora 
81:363-407.  
Thompson K. A., B. C. Husband, and H. Maherali. 2014. 
Climatic niche differences between diploid and 
tetraploid cytotypes of Chamerion angustifolium 
(Onagraceae).  Am. J. Bot. 101 (11):1868-1875. 
Turner N. J. 1997. Food plants of interior First Peoples. 
Royal British Columbia Museum Handbook. UBC 
Press, Vancouver.  
Wiese J. L., J. F. Meadow and J. A. Lapp.  2012. Seed 
weights for northern Rocky Mountain native plants, 
with an emphasis on Glacier National Park. Native 
Plants J. 13:39-49.  
Willms W., A. McLean, R. Tucker, and R. Ritcey. 1980. 
Deer and cattle diets on summer range in British 
Columbia. J. Range Manage 33: 55-59.  
 
 
Citation 
Fleenor, R., 2016. Plant Guide for Fireweed (Chamerion 
angustifolium).  USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Spokane, WA 99201

Published/Edited January 2016 
 
Edited: 1Jan2016 plsp; 14Jan2016 ac; 19Jan2016 plsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER