Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ERECT DAYFLOWER
Commelina erecta L. var. 
angustifolia  (Michx.) Fern.  
Plant Symbol = COERA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names 
whitemouth dayflower, widow’s tears, narrowleaf 
dayflower, hierba del pollo 
 
Uses 
Erect dayflower is said to be a preferred food source 
for white-tailed deer (Chamrad & Box 1968; Drawe 
1968), so it is a good plant to consider when 
establishing deer food plots.  Erect dayflower is also 
grazed by cattle (Everitt, Draw e, & Lonard 1999).  In 
addition, its seed are eaten by bobwhite quail, white-
winged doves and mourning doves (Everitt, Drawe, 
& Lonard 1999).  Erect dayflower can also be a good 
plant for native area restoration projects. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Erect dayflower ( Commelina erecta  var. 
angustifolia ) is a perennial, warm-season, herbaceous 
forb.  A member of the spiderwort (commelinaceae) 
family, erect dayflower has also been known by the 
common names of widow’s tears (Jones 1982), 
narrowleaf dayflower (Everitt, Drawe, & Lonard 
1999), and hierba del pollo (Correll & Johnston 
1996).  Erect dayflower is said to be named for the 
three Commelin brothers who were all Dutch 
botanists, although only two were productive in their 
field.  Erect dayflower’s two larger petals are said to 
represent the two Commelins who were published, 
while the third inconspicuous petal represents the 
unpublished brother (Ajilvsgi 1991).  
 
Erect dayflower has a showy blue flower that is 
attractive, but ephemeral and blooms from March to 
December in Texas (Jones 1982).  Erect dayflower 
starts out erect, becoming decumbent as it matures  (Correll & Johnston 1996). There are currently three 
varieties found in Texas: erecta, deamiana, and 
angustifolia (Correll & Johnston 1996).    The variety 
angustifolia is native to South Texas (Jones 1982).  
Erect dayflower is often considered a weed (Correll 
& Johnston 1996), especi
ally in rice fields. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Erect dayflower can grow in both sandy and 
clayey soils in almost all habitats (Ajilvsgi 1991).  It 
is found along streambanks, in gardens, on prairies, 
along roadsides, and in waste places (Jones 1982). 
 
Adaptation 
The species of erect dayflower,  Commelina erecta, 
can be found from Wisconsin south to Arizona and 
Florida, west to Wyoming, and throughout most of 
the eastern United States.  The variety  angustifolia 
grows primarily in Texas (most commonly in the 
eastern two-thirds of the state), but can be found in 
other areas of the species’ range (Correll & Johnston 
1996, Gleason & Cronquist 1991).  
 
Establishment 
Erect dayflower can be grown from cuttings or seed.  
An informal germination  test conducted in the 
greenhouse at the Kika de la Garza PMC yielded a 
germination average of 87% with approximately 
twelve hours of daylight at 75 to 85ºF and twelve 
hours of darkness at 50 to 60ºF.  Cuttings of 
dayflower had about an 80% survival rate with one 
node and three node stem cuttings.  It is 
recommended that a rooting hormone be used to 
encourage rapid rooting.  Cuttings and seedlings can 
be transplanted in 6-8 weeks.  Irrigation is 
recommended, although not critical, at drier sites to 
help the young plants get established.  It is 
recommended that young plants be at least 6 inches 
in height before transplanting. 
 
The use of plastic plant shelters is beneficial to 
protect young plants from heavy grazing, reduce 
plant competition, and create a more beneficial 
microclimate until young plants can get established. 
 
Management  
Weed control is a problem in a dayflower plot as the 
leggy plants make it difficult to remove the weeds 
without removing the plants.  A weed mat is

recommended for situations, such as seed or plant 
production plantings, where weed control is a 
necessity.  In other situations, such as deer food plots, 
weed control may not be an issue.  Irrigation is 
recommended during drier periods for seed and plant 
production plantings.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The seed of erect dayflower is easy to process once 
harvested.  However, the prostrate and indeterminate 
growth form of erect dayflower results in harvests of 
very small quantities of seed.  This makes 
commercial production of large quantities of seed 
uneconomical, and limits its use for large-scale 
seedings and plantings. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Ajilvsgi, G. 1984.  Wildflowers of Texas.   Shearer 
Publishing, Fredericksburg, TX.  
 
Chamrad, A.D. & T.W. Box 1968.   “Food habits of 
white-tailed deer in south Texas.”   Journal of Range 
Management  21: 158-164. 
 
Correll, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1996.   Manual of the 
Vascular Plants of Texas.   The University of Texas at 
Dallas, Richardson, TX. 
 
Drawe, D.L. 1968.   “Mid-summer diet of white-tailed 
deer on the Welder Wildlife Refuge.”   Journal of 
Range Management  21: 164-166. 
 
Everitt, J.H., D.L. Draw e, & R.I. Lonard 1999.  Field 
Guide to the Broad-Leaved  Herbaceous Plants of 
South Texas: Used by Livestock and Wildlife.   Texas 
Tech University Press, Lubbock, TX. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991 .  Manual of 
Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and 
Adjacent Canada, 2
nd edition.   The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY. 
 
Jones, F. B. 1982.   Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend.    
Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton, TX. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 
Edited 13Nov2003 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.