Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIBERIAN 
PEASHRUB
Caragana arborescens Lam.
Plant Symbol = CAAR18  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Ross caragana, Siberian pea tree, pea-tree 
 
Uses 
Medicinal: The plant is used for cancer of the breast, 
the orifice to the womb, and other gynecological 
problems (Kiangsu 1977). 
 
Wildlife : During World War II, the Siberian peasants 
reportedly carried their chicken flocks through the 
winter by feeding them  Caragana arborscens seeds 
(Snell 1983).  The seeds serve as valuable food for 
wild life.  It also provides cover for upland game. 
 
Agroforestry : Caragana arborscens  has been 
recommended as a nitrogen -fixing windbreaker and 
groundcover plant that binds the soil and produce 
fiber and dye.  It is often used as a single row field 
shelterbelt for borders, screen plantings, or flowering 
hedges. 
 
Other uses : Some ethnic groups have used young 
pods for vegetables.  The bark provides a fiber and 
the leaves yield an azure dye.  The wood is used for 
woodturning. 
 
Status 
Introduced into the U.S.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s cu rrent status, such as, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values. 
 
 Conservation Trees & Shrubs for Montana USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Siberian peashrub 
is an introduced, deciduo us shrub or small tree 
ranging between ten to fifteen feet tall.  The leaves 
are alternate, three to five  inches long, with each leaf 
composed of eight to twelve oval leaflets.  The 
flowers are yellow and appear early in the season 
forming pods in late June or early July.  As the pods 
ripen, they crack and burst, spreading the seeds.  The 
young bark is smooth and olive green and becomes 
less vivid in color as the bark ages. 
 
Distribution : Siberian peashrub is native to Siberia 
and Manchuria.  In the United States, its growth is  
stunted south of Nebraska.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Siberian peashrub succeeds in most well drained 
soils.  It prefers full sun but can tolerate some shade.  
This species is very tolerant of infertile soils, cold 
winter temperatures, and drought conditions.  It 
tolerates alkaline soils and deicing salt.  This plant’s 
chief value is its ability to adapt to poor sites.  It also 
requires little maintenance. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Seed is best sown as soon as it 
is ripe in a cold frame.  Stored seeds should be pre-
soaked twenty-four hours in warm water and then 
sown in a cold frame.  If th e seeds do not swell, then 
stratify them and re-soak for another twelve hours 
before sowing.  Germination should occur in two to 
three weeks at 20ºC.  Certain pesticides can increase 
germination possibly by inhibiting disease.   
 
Propagation by cuttings : Layering should be done in 
the spring.  Cuttings should consist of half ripe wood, 
three to four inches with a heel, and should be done 
between July and August.  Grafting the cultivars,

especially ‘Pendula’, ‘Lorbergii’, and ‘Walker’, are 
top worked at four to six inches height on Caragana 
arborscens seedlings (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  Root 
cuttings, layering or grafting can also propagate 
Caragana arborscens . 
 
Management 
General: Siberian peashrub is susceptible to leaf spot 
diseases, red spider mites, blister beetles, 
grasshoppers, and aphids, which leads to poor foliage 
quality in mid to late summer. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
 ‘Sutherland’, Lorbergii’, ‘Pendula’, ‘Walker’, and 
‘Nana’ are cultivars of Siberian peashrub.  
‘Sutherland’ has a narrow, upright form.  ‘Lorbergii’ 
has a graceful form with fine textured leaves.  
‘Pendula’ has a stiffly weeping form with arching 
branches.  ‘Walker’ is much like ‘Lorbergii’ in leaf 
character but strongly weep ing (Dirr 1990).  ‘Nana’ 
has a dwarf form with some what contorted branches. 
 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agriculture Handbook. 450. 1974.  Seeds of woody 
plants in the U.S.  Forest Service, USDA.  
Washington DC. 
 
Bruggen, T.V. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Bush-Brown, J. 1963.   Shrubs and trees for the home 
landscape .  Chilton Company, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association. 1986.   Flora of the 
Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawerence, Kansas. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Company, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Kiangsu-Institude of Modern Medicine. 1977.  
Encyclopedia of Chinese drugs .  2 vols.  Shanghai, 
China. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rosendahl, C.O. 1955.   Trees and shrubs of the upper 
Midwest .  University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
 
Rehder, A. 1940.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  The 
Macmillan Company, New York, New York. 
 
Snell, T. 1983.  Caragana:  The pea shrubs.  In: The 
International Permaculture Seed Yearbook.  Orange, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Taylor, N. 1965.   The guide to garden shrubs and 
trees .  Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston 
Massachusetts. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  Conservation trees and shrubs 
for Montana .  Custer County Soil Conservation 
District.  Accessed: 11jan02. 
<http://www.mt.nrcs.usda.gov/pas/forestry/caragana.
html> 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.