Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FOX SEDGE 
Carex vulpinoidea  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = CAVU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Common fox sedge, two varieties are reported for the 
U.S.: Carex vulpinoidea  var pycnocephala  and Carex 
vulpinoidea  var. vulpinoidea .
 
 
Uses 
Landscaping: Fox sedge is used as an ornamental 
grass near water gardens. 
 
Restoration:  Fox sedge is a clumping 
grass that will naturalize where planted.  
It is planted in locations that remain 
moist, near streams, springs, ponds, and 
moist woods.  It is an excellent colonizer 
of wetland mitigation sites. 
Weediness                                                        
Fox sedge spreads rapidly and may be 
weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats, displacing de sirable vegetation if 
not properly managed.   Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or agriculture  department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.        
The USDA hardiness zones fo
r fox sedge are 3-7.  It 
is a pioneer species that colonizes wet open sites soon 
after disturbance.  It grows in full sun to part shade 
and likes normal to wet soils. It is most abundant in 
clayey soils, but also does well in sand and loam.  
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Fox sedge is a 
perennial, clump-forming grass that grows to be 30 to 
100 cm tall and spreads up to 60 cm wide.  This is a 
U.S. native.  Stems are slender and firm, triangular, 
brownish at the base and have whitish, thin sheaths 
that are conspicuously cross-wrinkled near the top.  
The leaves are narrow, 0.6 cm wide, smooth with 
rough margins, clustered at the base of the plant and 
usually taller than the stem, growing up to 1.2 m tall.  
The inflorescences are made up of densely flowered 
spikes that are 4 to 10 cm long and up to 1.5 cm 
wide.  Bristle-like bracts, up to 5 cm long, are located 
at the base of each spike.   Staminate flowers are at 
the top of the spike and pistillate flowers are at the 
base.  The flowers are green and bloom from May 
through June.  The seedheads mature in late summer 
and spray out from the center of the clump, 
resembling a fox’s tail.  The distinctive inflorescence 
makes fox sedge easy to identify. 
 R.W. Freckman 2004  Wisconsin State Herbarium.  
Distribution : Fox sedge is a native species and has 
been reported in all but tw o of the continental United 
States, Nevada and Utah.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Fox sedge is found near water on moist open 
ground in swamps, prairie swales, lowland forests, 
wet ditches, ravines, and along the edges of marshes, 
springs, lakes, and ponds.  It is found with other plant 
species such as soft rush,  wool grass, bulrush, other 
sedges, brome grass, Virginia  wild rye, ox eye daisy, 
boneset, pye weed, ironw eed, golden alexanders, 
sneezewood, and monkey flower.   
 
Adaptation 
 
Establishment 
Fox sedge seedlings should be spaced 1 to 2 feet 
apart.  This converts to approximately 1000 roots per 
acre.

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are ready for collection when the 
inflorescences turn brown and the fruits can be easily 
pulled from the spikes.  Fresh seeds should be 
planted in the fall or moist-stratified and planted in 
the spring. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Fox sedge seeds and some seedlings are readily 
available from commercial sources.  The USDA-
NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released any 
fox sedge cultivars for conservation use.  Contact 
your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Freckman, R.W. 2004.  Fox sedge image. 
(http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora/, 30 July 
2004). Wisconsin State Herbarium, Madison. 
 
Haddock, M. 2004.  Kansas wildflowers and grasses 
(http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wildfl ower/, 30 July 2004). 
Kansas State University, Manhattan. 
 
Kemper Center for Home Gardening. 2004.  Kemper 
web, PlantFinder 
(http://ridgwaydb.mobot.org/k emperweb/plantfinder/
Alpha.asp, 30 July 2004). Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center. 1998. 
Wetland plants and plant communities of Minnesota 
and Wisconsin—fox sedge 
(http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1998/mnplant/
cavu.htm, 30 July 2004). USGS, Jamestown. 
 
Schneider, L. 2004.  Fox sedge—Carex vulpinoidea 
(http://www.prairienursery.com/SpeciesASP/c- vulpage.asp, 30 July 2004). Prairie Nursery, 
Westfield. 
 
Wetter, M. 2004. 
Wisconsin Botanical Information 
System  (http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora /, 30 
July 2004). Wisconsin State Herbarium, Madison. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 30 July 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 3Aug2004 sbw; 21O ct2004 rln; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.