Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
REDOSIER 
DOGWOOD  
Cornus sericea  L. 
Plant Symbol = COSE16  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Carlinville (IL) Field Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrook USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Alternative Names 
American dogwood, red willow, redstem dogwood, 
Cornus sericea ssp. sericea ; Cornus stolonifera  var. 
nevadensis  Jepson and  Cornus stolonifera  Michaux 
(Hickman 1993).  A subspecies,  Cornus sericia spp. 
occidentalis  (Torr. & Gray) Fosberg is known as 
western dogwood. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans smoke the inner 
bark of redosier dogwood in tobacco mixtures used in 
the sacred pipe ceremony.  Dreamcatchers, 
originating with the Potawotami, are made with the 
stems of the sacred redosier  dogwood.  Some tribes 
ate the white, sour berries, while others used the 
branches for arrow-making, stakes, or other tools.  In 
California, peeled twigs were used as toothbrushes 
for their whitening effect  on teeth (Strike 1994).  
Bows and arrows were made from  Cornus shoots.  
The inner bark is used for tanning or drying animal 
hides. 
 
The Apache, Cheyenne, Da kota, Montana Indians, 
Ojibwa, Potawatomi, Omaha,  Ponca, and Thompson 
Indians all use the inner bark in a tobacco mixture for  smoking the sacred pipe (Moerman 1986).  The 
leaves and/or inner bark of redosier dogwood are also 
used as a smoking mixture by the Okanagan-Colville,  
 
the Flathead, the Kootenay, 
and the Blackfeet peoples 
in the western United States and Canada (Hellson 
1974, Hart 1976, Turner 1978, Turner et al. 1980, 
Johnston 1987).  The Navaho-Kayentaf and Navaho-
Ramah used the plant ceremonially as a Mountain-
top-way emetic (Moerman 1986).  An infusion of 
redosier dogwood bark was  used as an anti-diarrheal 
by the Chippewa and the Potawatomi, an antidote for 
weak kidneys by the Shuswap, and a pediatric aid for 
children who wet the bed by the Shuswap.  The 
Chippewa used an infusion of the bark for eruptions 
caused by poison ivy.  The Chippewa and the 
Micmac used a decoction of redosier dogwood root 
for sore eyes and catarrh.  The Okanagan and the 
Thompson Indians took a decoction of the leaves.  
Other remedies treated by  redosier dogwood included 
headaches, sore throats, a wash for ulcers, a substitute 
for “larb”, and a decoction of bark was taken as an 
antidote for weakness. 
 
The Maidu of Northern California used redosier 
dogwood as a tonic, a laxa tive, emetic, and cathartic 
(Strike 1994).  Maidu women took a dogwood 
decoction after childbirth. 
 
The Indians of the Missouri region (Densmore 1974) 
ate the fruits.  The berries are known to be tart and 
bitter, but were nonethel ess eaten by all of the 
southern Interior peoples of British Columbia, 
including the Nlaka’pamux, Lillooet, Okanagan-
Colville, Shuswap, Kootenay, Blackfeet, and the 
Flathead of Alberta an d Montana (Kuhnlein and 
Turner 1991).  The fruits were gathered from August 
to October and eaten fresh, a few at a time, or, more 
commonly, were pounded and mixed with other 
fruits, such as chokecherries ( Prunus virginiana) or 
Saskatoons ( Amelanchier almifolia ).  Some people 
mashed the berries and dried them in cakes; others 
dried and stored them.  Eating a few raw fruits was 
considered to be a good tonic among the 
Nlaka’pamux and the Okanagan-Colville, who ate 
them raw as a kind of “relish” (Turner 1978; Turner 
et al. 1990).   
 
Redosier dogwood is used for basketweaving.  
Sometimes called red willow, both  Salix species and 
Cornus sericea  are used interchangeably.  
Differences in stem color  create a multi-hued design

element.  Indian people from the mid-Columbia 
River used redosier dogwood to make “ribbons” for 
basket decorations (Schlick 1994).  If gathered in the 
early spring, the bark will retain its deep red color 
when dried and could be mistaken for cherry.  The 
Hidatsa, Arikara, and Mandan made twill plaited 
burden baskets with two-toned dark and light 
designs; these baskets were made of willow ( Salix 
nigra), redosier dogwood, and boxelder ( Acer 
negundo) splints (Turnbaugh et al. 1986, Hart 1976).  
Willow and redosier dogwood were used by the 
Cheyenne, Arapaho, Kiowa, Pawnee, and Teton 
Sioux to make a coarsely coiled gambling basket for 
dice. 
 
The Ojibwa and the Chippewa used redosier 
dogwood bark as a dye.  The inner bark was mixed 
with other plants or minerals and used to make a red 
dye, a light red dye, a black dye, and an ecru or 
“khaki” colored dye (Densmore 1974).  
 
Wildlife : The fleshy fruits of dogwoods are very 
valuable to wildlife, particularly in the Northeast 
(Martin et al. 1951).  The fruit ripens in late summer, 
and besides being available through the fall, some of 
the berries may persist on the plants into the winter 
months.  Wildlife browse the twigs, foliage, and 
fruits.  Birds known to eat the fruit include: wood 
ducks, eastern bluebirds, cardinals, catbirds, long-
tailed chats, crows, purple finches, yellow-shafted 
flickers, crested flycatchers, grosbeaks, kingbirds, 
American magpies, mockingbirds, crested mynah 
birds, orioles, robins, yellow-bellied sapsuckers, 
European starlings, tree swallows, scarlet tanagers, 
brown thrashers, thrushes, vireos, pine warblers, 
cedar waxwings, and woodpeckers.  Game birds who 
eat both the fruits and buds include grouse, ring-
necked pheasants, band-tailed pigeons, greater prairie 
chickens, bobwhite quail, and wild turkeys.  The 
shrubs provide excellent nesting habitat for 
songbirds.  Mammals that eat the fruit and foliage 
include black bear, beaver, mountain beaver, 
cottontail rabbits, raccoons, eastern skunks, squirrels, 
chipmunks, mice, and rats.  Deer, elk, Mountain goat, 
and moose browse the twigs and foliage. 
 
Landscaping & ornamental : Redosier dogwood is 
often planted as an ornamental, both to beautify the 
landscape and to attract birds.  Dogwood is often 
used for landscaping and as a secondary plant in 
windbreaks. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Dogwood Family (Cornaceae).  Redosier 
dogwood is a woody deciduous shrub generally 1.4-6 
m (4.6-20 ft) tall.  The bark and twigs are reddish to 
purple and fairly smooth from autumn to late spring; 
after the leaves have fallen, the deep burgundy 
branches add color to the winter landscape.  The 
bark, twigs, and leaves ar e bright green in spring 
through summer.  The simple, opposite leaves are 5-
10 cm (2-4 in) long, dark green above and hairy and 
lighter-colored below, with smooth margins, rounded 
bases, pointed tips, and falsely parallel veins. 
Flowering occurs from June to August.  The 
inflorescence is a cyme, w ith 2-3 mm (0.08-0.12 in) 
white to cream-colored flowers.  The white berries 
are smooth on the faces, furrowed on the sides. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Redosier dogwood has a wide distribution from 
California north to Alaska and throughout the country 
to the eastern United States south to Mexico.  It 
generally grows at elevations below 2500 m. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation:  Redosier dogwood grows in soils that are 
saturated for at least a portion of the growing season.  
Redosier dogwood is common on the edges of lakes, 
ponds, within wetlands, and along streams.  Not as 
tolerant of long-term root saturation as are some 
other shrubs, dogwood seems to prefer wetland 
margins where soils are nitrogen-rich, saturated, and 
shallowly inundated in the spring, and may be 
completely dry by late summer.  It is tolerant of 
fluctuating water tables.  The “osier” in redosier 
dogwood is derived from French, meaning “willow-
like”; it is often called red willow because of its red 
stems. 
 
Propagation from cuttings:  Redosier dogwood can be 
started easily by division, french layering, and 
hardwood cuttings.  To propagate suckers by 
division: 
•   Lift a root with suckers on it without disturbing 
the parent plant.  Check that there are fibrous 
roots at the base of the suckers. 
•  Remove the suckering roots by cutting it off 
close to the parent plant.  Firm the soil around 
the parent plant. 
•  Cut the main root back to the fibrous roots, then 
divide the suckers so that each has its own roots.  
Cut back the top-growth by about half.

•  Treat each sucker or hardwood cutting at the 
base with IBA at 20,000 ppm liquid formulation 
to promote rooting.  Alternatively, treatment 
with 2 percent IBA talc; this will promote 
rooting on both suckers and stem cuttings. 
•  Replant the suckers in op en ground in prepared 
holes with good potting soil.  Firm the soil 
around the suckers and water. 
•   Before growth starts in the spring, lift the plant.  
Break the clump into sections, retaining those 
with vigorous shoots and well-developed roots. 
•  Prune any damaged roots, and cut back the top-
growth by one-third to a half to reduce water 
loss.  Replant the divisions in the open and water 
in dry weather. 
•  Ultimately, simply lift a suckering root, sever it 
from the parent plant, and then replant it in the 
open. 
 
To ensure survival of cuttings or suckers through the 
following winter in cold climates, the potted cuttings 
should be kept in heated cold frames or poly-houses 
to hold the temperature between 0-7°C (32-45°F).  
Rooted cuttings that had shoot growth in the fall, but 
were not given nitrogen, had the best over-winter 
survival in a cold frame with microfoam. 
 
French layering : Layering is a method where a stem 
is encouraged to develop roots before being removed 
from the parent plant. 
•   In spring, plant a rooted layer or young plant, 
label it, and grow it for a season.  Then, in the 
dormant season, cut back the stem to within 3 
inches (8 cm) of the ground.  
•  In the following spring, apply a balanced 
fertilizer at the rate of 2-4-oz/sq yd (60-110 g/sq 
m).  Space the stems evenly again; dropping each 
into a 2-inch (5-cm) deep  trench.  Peg down each 
stem and cover with soil, leaving the shoot tips 
exposed.  Hill up all but 2-3 inches (5-8 cm) of 
the new shoots as they develop, until the mound 
is 6 inches (15 cm) high.  Water as needed. 
•   After leaf fall, carefully  fork away the soil from 
around the new shoots until the stems that were 
laid horizontally are exposed.  Cut these flush 
with the basal area of the stems.  Then cut the 
stems to separate the rooted sections.  Pot these 
or plant them out in the open garden, and label 
them.  The same redosier dogwood basal area 
may be used to propagate further layers. 
 
Propagation by seed : Redosier dogwood is 
established easily from seed.  The best germination is 
obtained if the seeds are gathered as soon as the fruit 
starts to color or ripen, from August to October.  If  the seeds are allowed to dry out, it is best to remove 
seeds from the fruit and soak in water.  
 
The best results are obtained from fall sowing of 
freshly harvested seeds.  Fruits collected too late to 
sow in the fall should be stored, pre-chilled until the 
next season, and sown outdoors the following fall.  
To effectively condition the seed for germination, 
store for two months in moist sand at 5ºC for 90 days.  
After pre-chilling, expose the seeds to fluctuating 
temperatures from 12/72ºC for 10 days (Young and 
Young 1992).  With some species, the warm 
stratification period may be replaced by mechanical 
scarification or soaking in sulfuric acid.  Seeds sown 
in nursery beds should be covered with 0.25-0.5 in 
(0.6-1.25 cm) of soil.  Fall-sown beds should be 
mulched during the winter. 
 
Management 
Redosier dogwood is often coppiced in late fall after 
the leaves turn brown and fall off the stem.  Cut all 
stems to approximately 2-3 in (5-8 cm) from the base 
before growth begins in spring.  Apply fertilizer 
around the shrub to promote new growth, then apply 
mulch around the base.  Coppicing stimulates the 
growth of new, vigorous stems whose deep burgundy 
color is especially vivid. 
 
Traditional resource management
: Redosier 
dogwood was traditionally tended by pruning or 
burning to produce long straight stems.  
•   Often basket weavers will prune many redosier 
dogwood stems, sometimes replanting the stems, 
so there will be nice straight basketry material 
the following year. 
•   Before gathering, offerings of thanks and prayers 
for permission to gather  are given. Often tobacco 
or sage or other offerings are given before 
beginning to gather. 
•   Basket weavers process materials with their 
hands and mouths.  Herbicides sprayed along 
streams have a much higher health risk for 
humans when they are processed and used for 
traditional materials. 
 
Overgrazing, especially by livestock and big game, 
frequently changes plant species composition and 
growth form, density of stands, vigor, seed 
production of plants, and insect production.  
Livestock grazing can cause the replacement of bird 
and mammal species requiring the vertical vegetation 
structure of riparian hab itat to species, which are 
ubiquitous in their habitat preferences.  Previous 
heavy cattle grazing changed the bird and small 
mammal community composition in riparian areas 
through reduction of shrub and herbaceous cover.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Cultivars: ‘Alman’s Compacta’, ‘Allamans’, 
‘Bailey’, ‘Cardinal’, ‘Coloradensis’, ‘Flaviromea’, 
‘Isanti’, ‘Kelseyi’, ‘Lutea’, ‘Ruby’, ‘Silver’ and 
‘Gold’, and ‘White Gold’ have been planted in the 
growing range of redosier dogwood. 
 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape. 
 
References 
Beichel, C., E. McDonald, & T. Cole (eds.) 1993.  
Encyclopedia of gardening .  Dorling Kindersley.  
London, New York, Stuttgart.  648 pp. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc. 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Farley, G.H., L.M. Ellis, J.N. Stuart, & N.J. Scott, Jr. 
1994.   Avian species richness in different-aged stands 
of riparian forest along the middle Rio Grande, New 
Mexico .  Conservation Biology 8: 1098-1108. 
 
Fleishner, T.L. 1994.   Ecological costs of livestock 
grazing in western North America.  Conservation 
Biology 8: 629-644. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1977.   Uses of the plants by the Indians 
of the Missouri River Region .  University of 
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Grinnel, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 vols. 
Cooper Square Publishers. New York, New York. 
 
Hart, J.A. 1976.  Montana: native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, & F. T. Davies, Jr. 
1990 .  Plant propagation principles and practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hellson, J.C. 1974.   Ethnobotany of the Blackfeet 
Indians .  National Museum of Man, Mercury Series, 
Canadian Ethnology Service Paper No. 19. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston and London.  pp. 113-
117. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural 
library's source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries. Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Johnston, A. 1970
.  Blackfeet Indian utilization of the 
flora of the northwestern Great Plains.   Economic 
Botany 24:301-24. 
 
Kinscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  pp. 84-94. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N. J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.   
Nutrition, botany, and use.   Food and Nutrition in 
History and Anthropology Volume 8 .  Gordon and 
Breach Science Publishers.  632 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.   A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc. New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L. T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L. 1968.   The taxonomy of the genus 
Echinacea (Compositae) .  University of Kansas 
Science Bulletin 48(4): 113-142. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of native 
America .  Research reports in ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2 .  University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology.  Technical Reports, Number 19.  Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.  pp. 156-158. 
 
Schlick, M.D. 1994.   Columbia River Basketry .  Gift 
of the ancestors, gift of the earth.   A Samuel and 
Althea Strowm Book.  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London.  232 pp. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(2): 175-326. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the North 
Central Plains .  The University Press of Kansas.  530 
pp. 
 
Stevens, L.E., B.T. Brown,  J.M. Simpson, & R.R. 
Johnson 1977.   The importance of riparian habitat to 
migrating birds .  pp. 156-164.  In: Johnson, R.R. & 
D.A. Jones (tech. coords.).  Importance, preservation

and management of riparian habitat: a symposium.  
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Report RM-43. 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado.  217 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.  Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Koeltz Scientific Books. USA/Germany. 
210 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.   Food plant of British Columbia 
Indians.   Part II. Interior Peoples.   B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson & 
A.Z. York 1990 .   Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia .  Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J., R. Bouchard, & D.I.D. Kennedy 1980.  
Ethnobotany of the Okanagan-Colville Indians of 
British Columbia and Washington.  B.C. Provincial 
Museum Occasional Paper No. 21.  179 pp. 
 
Turnbaugh, S.P., & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffer Publishing Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania.  260 pp. 
 
Young, A.J. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000328.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens , Formerly USDA NRCS National 
Plant Data Center 
Ivan  Dozier , USDA NRCS, Carlinville, Illinois  
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.