Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARNOLD 
HAWTHORN  
Crataegus x anomala  Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = CRAN6  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Crataegus arnoldiana (CRAR) 
 
Uses 
Economic: Hawthorn fruits can be made into jams 
and jellies.  The wood is very hard and strong and is 
ideal for tool handles and other small items. 
 
Medicinal:  Hawthorn fruits have been shown to have 
a tonic effect on the heart.  They are often used in the 
treatment of weak heart condi tions, especially if it is 
accompanied by high blood pressure. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Crataegus arnoldiana is a 
beautiful flowering species that is suitable for 
shading patios, decorating lawns, and lining streets.  
This shrub or small tree is often used to provide 
cover and food for a variety of birds and mammals.  
The fruit is useful for wildlife as it is held late into 
the year.  
 
Agroforestry : Arnold hawthorn is used in forested 
riparian buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, 
protect water quality, and enhance aquatic  environments.  Occasionally, it is used as a single 
row shelterbelt, which is often added in with other 
varieties to create diversities. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
 Conservation Trees & Shrubs for Montana USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office 
General
: Arnold hawthorn is a very easily grown 
deciduous shrub or small tree growing fifteen to 
thirty feet tall.  The leaves are simple, oval-shaped, 
1.5 to 3 cm long with serrated edges.  The fruit is 
clusters of white flowers th at are born on the tips of 
branches in the spring and are followed by red fruit 
that ripen in mid summer and remain on twigs until 
early autumn.  The twigs are gray to brown branches 
and stems that bear large stout thorns. 
 
Distribution : Arnold hawthorn is native to Eastern 
Canada.  For current distribution, please consult the  
Plant profile page for this species is on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Adaptation 
Arnold hawthorn prefers rich, moist well-drained 
soils.  It succeeds in excessively moist soils and can 
tolerate droughty conditions for a short pirior of time.  
This species is found on th e slopes of coulees in open 
woods.  This shrub or small tree grows best in a 
location with full sunlight.  It can also be grown in 
exposed locations as well as tolerate city living.  It 
can also tolerate atmospheric pollution. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seed is best sown as soon as 
it is ripe in a cold frame.  It is important to protect the 
seeds from mice or any seed-eating creatures.  Seeds 
can be slow to germinate.  One way to reduce the 
waiting time is to harvest seeds just before it is fully 
ripe, when the embryo has fully developed but before 
the seedcoat hardens and sow it immediately in a cold 
frame.  If you are growing large quantities of plants, 
it is best to sow them directly outdoors in a seedbed 
until they are large enough to  out-plant.  If growing 
small quantities, pot the seedlings as soon as they are 
large enough to handle and grow them in individual 
pots for the first year.  Plant them in the late spring 
into nursery beds or their final positions.

Management 
Trees should be bought and planted when they are no 
more than eight feet in height.  The best time to plant 
is in the fall or spring.  Ball and burlap trees should 
be planted in the early spring.  Pruning should be 
done in the winter or very early spring. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Readily available through nurseries within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr 1981.   Michigan 
trees .  The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens, Georgia. 
 
Gleason, H.A. 1991.   Manual of vascular plants of 
northeastern United States and adjacent Canada .  2nd 
ed. The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New 
York. 
 
Nelson, R.A. 1992.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  4th ed.  Roberts Rinehart Publishers, Niwot, 
Colorado. 
 
Rehder, A. 1940.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  The 
Macmillan Company, New York, New York. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1933.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Sheat, W.G. 1948.   Propagation of trees, shrubs, and 
conifers.  MacMillan and Company. 
 
Taylor, N. 1965.   The guide to garden shrubs and 
trees .  Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 
Massachutsetts. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   Conservation trees and shrubs 
for Montana .  Custer County Soil Conservation 
District.  Accessed: 12jan02. 
<http://www.mt.nrcs.usda.g ov/pas/forestry/hawthorn.
html> 
 
Wyman, D. 1965.   Trees for American gardens .  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 24feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.