Plant Guide
 
NAVAJO SEDGE 
Carex specuicola J.T. Howell 
Plant Symbol = CASP9  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
Navajo sedge ( Carex specuicola ). Photo by  Daniela Roth, 
N avajo National Heritage Project  
Alternate Names 
None  
 
Uses  
There are no known human uses of Navajo sedge.  
The leaves are grazed by domestic livestock.  
Status 
Navajo sedge was listed by the USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service  as a threatened species in 1985, and 
was assigned critical habitat (USDI -FWS, 1985).  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Sedge  family ( Cyperaceae).  Navajo sedge is 
a perennial , grass-like sedge. The plants form 
bunches from 25 to 45 cm (10 to 18 in)  tall with long, 
slender, pale green leaves, 1 to 2 mm ( 0.04 to 0.08 in) 
wide and 12 to 20 cm (5 to 8 in) long. The stems are 
triangular in cross section, and end in 2 to 4 floral 
spikes. The terminal spike c ontains both male and 
female flowers, with the female  flowers situated 
above the male. The fruit is an achene borne within a 
perigynium ( a sack-like appendage). This species is    
unusual in that it has two types of female flowers, 
those with two
-branched styles and lentic ular (lens 
shaped) achenes, and those  with three-branched 
st yles and triangular achenes (USDI -FWS, 1987).  
 
Distribution :    
Navajo sedge  exists on lands managed by the Navajo 
Nation in Coconino, Apache and Navajo Counties, 
Arizona , and in adjacent San Juan County Utah. The 
range of Navajo sedge includes the Navajo Creek 
drainage to the Tsegi Canyon Watershed (CPC, 
2011).  
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Navajo sedge occurs in shaded seeps, springs, and 
hanging gardens  in the pink-red Navajo Sandstone 
Formation from  1,400 to 2,200 m (4,600to 7,200 ft) 
in elevation  (Roth, 2008).  Mean annual precipitation 
for the area is 19 cm (7.5 in).Navajo sedge occurs 
with other hanging garden and wetland/riparian 
species such as monke y flower (Mimulus 
eastwoodiae ), helleborine ( Epipactus  gigantea), 
water bentgrass ( Agrostis semiverticillata ), and 
common reed ( Phragmites communis ) (USDI-FWS, 
1987).  
 
 
 Navajo sedge habitat. Photo by Daniela  Roth, NNHP  
M

anagement  
P opulations  occupying low -lying accessible habitat 
are vulnerable to domestic livestock grazing. Horses, 
sheep, goats and cattle are believed to graze the 
plants.  Off-road  vehicles could also negatively 
impact Navajo sedge habitat. Water development for 
wells, troughs  and capture basins for livestock have

resulted in increased grazing in populated areas 
(USDI-FWS, 1987).  
 
The recovery plan for Navajo sedge covers the 
protection of known habitats and populations, 
inventories of potential habitat, and the reintroduction 
of plants into additional sites (USDI -FWS, 1987).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests associated with Navajo 
sedge.  
 
 
E

nvironmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns  
associated with  Navajo sedge. 
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Though this species is known to produce seed, the 
majority of reproduction appears to be vegetative 
(USDI -FWS, 1987).  No propagation information is 
available.  
References  
Center for Plant Conservation. 2011. Plant profile for 
Carex specuicola . Online at: 
http://www.centerforplantconservation.org . 
Accessed January 7, 2011.  
Roth, D. 2008. Species account for Carex specuicola.  Navajo Natural Heritage Program. Windwon 
Rock, AZ. 2p.  
USDI -Fish and Wildlife Service. 1985. Endangered 
and threatened wildl ife and plants; determination 
of  Carex specuicola  to be a threatened species 
with critical habitat. In: Federal Register 50 (89): 
19370- 19374.  USDI
-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1987. Navajo sedge 
recovery plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Albuquerque, Ne w Mexico. 39p. 
 
Prepared By : 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho.  
Citation 
Tilley, D., L.  St. John and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for  Navajo sedge ( Carex specuicola ). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID.  
Published  Jan 2011 
Edited:  07Jan2011  djt , 07jan ls ; 07Jan2011dgo  
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.go v. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER