Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAGUARO CACTUS 
Carnegiea gigantea (Engelm.) 
Britt. & Rose  
Plant Symbol = CAGI7  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
giant cactus 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The fruits and the seeds of the saguaro 
were extensively utilized for food by the Papago, 
Akimel and Tohono O'odham (also known as Pima), 
and Seri of Arizona and Mexico.  In fact, families 
established camps in specifi c cactus areas and in both 
the Papago and Pima calendars, the saguaro harvest 
marked the beginning of the new year.  The fruits 
were harvested with a special pole, often made of 
saguaro ribs with a small crosspiece.  Some families 
still harvest the fruits today.  A gruel was 
traditionally made from the saguaro fruits and used as 
a medicine by the Pima to  make a mother's milk flow 
after childbirth.  The seeds were roasted and ground 
on a metate and made into a mush.  Other parts of the 
saguaro also were useful.   The dead saguaro ribs  were used by the Pima as splints to bind injured 
limbs and as cross pieces in the manufacture of  
 
babies' cradles.  The Seri in Mexico used a piece of 
the saguaro rib to make the mainshaft or handle of a 
compound drill stick used in fire making.  The ribs 
also were used as walking canes and in the making of 
wattle and daub house walls. 
 
Wildlife
: The white-wing dove  feeds on saguaro 
seeds during the fruiting season.  Gila woodpeckers 
and gilded flickers make holes in the trunks and use 
them as nests.  After thes e are abandoned, they are 
inhabited by elf owls and starlings. 
 Plant Herbarium © Arizona State University @ Arizona Trees and Shrubs 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Cactus Family (Cactaceae).  This cactus has 
an erect, branched stem 3-16 m tall and 30-75 cm in 
diameter.  The arms sometimes number as many as 
50.  The ribs are prominent and number from 12 to 
30.  Gray spines densel y cover the stem.  The 
funnelform-campanulate flow ers are 8.5-12.5 cm and 
the outer parts are green with lighter bo rders and the 
inner parts are petal-like and white.  The nocturnal 
flowers appear singly at  the uppermost areoles and 
they smell like ripe melons.   When open, each flower 
is filled with many white stamens.  The fruit is scaly, 
25-45 mm in diameter and obovoid with a dark red 
interior and black seeds that are about 0.75 in 
diameter. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This cactus is found  on gravelly slopes, rocky 
ridges and outwash fans below 1500 m in the Lower 
Sonoran Zone, from northern Arizona and along the 
Colorado River in Riverside and Imperial Counties, 
California, to northern Sonora, Mexico. 
 
Establishment 
Saguaro cacti need well-drained soil and full sunlight 
for optimal development.  They also cannot 
withstand prolonged temperatures below freezing.  
Since saguaros grow so slowly, it is best to obtain 
nursery-grown plants.  Plant saguaros in the ground 
in October, being sure that the area selected is

sheltered from full sun with a shade cloth or by other 
means through the first summer.  Plants should be 
planted away from compacted areas that receive foot 
travel or heavy equipment.  Young plants can be 
watered once a month during extended drought, but 
established plants can survive solely upon natural 
rainfall.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CAGI7 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries and seed companies within its range.   
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, E.F. 1993.  C actaceae.  Pp. 450-458 IN: 
The Jepson manual higher plants of California .  J.C. 
Hickman (ed).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Arizona State University Plant Herbarium 2000.  
Arizona trees and shrubs .  Version: 000228.  
<http://ls.la.asu.edu/herbariu m/treeshrub/pages/plants
/cargig.html>.  ASU Life Sciences, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Castetter, E.F. & W.H. Bell 1942.   Pima and Papago 
Indian agriculture .  University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Curtin, L.S.M. 1984.   By the prophet of the earth 
ethnobotany of the Pima .  University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Felger, R.S. & M.B. Moser 1985.   People of the 
desert and sea ethnobotany of the Seri Indians .  
University of Arizona Pr ess, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Kearney, T.H. & R.H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Mielke, J. 1993.   Native plants of southwestern 
landscapes .  University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas 
 
Rea, A.M. 1997.   At the desert's green edge an 
ethnobotany of the Gila River Pima .  University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Shreve, F. & I.L. Wiggins 1964.   Vegetation and 
flora of the Sonoran Desert .  Stanford University 
Press, Palo Alto, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000229.  <http://plants.usda.gov>  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Environmental Horticulture, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.