Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINKAPIN 
Castanea pumila  (L.) P. Mill. 
Plant Symbol = CAPU9  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Allegheny chinkapin, American chinquapin, 
Castanea alnifolia, Castanea ashei, Castanea 
floridana, Castanea margaretta, Castanea nana, 
Castanea paucispina, chinquapin, dwarf chestnut, 
Fagus pumila, golden chinquapin. 
 
Uses 
Economic: Chinkapin nuts and wood are sold 
commercially.  The wood is light, hard, close-
grained, and strong.  It is used for fence posts and 
fuel although it is not tim bered because of its small 
stature and scattered occurrence.  
 
Ethnobotanic:  The Cherokee Indians used dried 
leaves as washes to alleviate headaches, fevers, 
chills, cold sweats, and fever blisters.  The Koasati 
Indians used the roots of chinkapin as a decoction for 
stomachaches. 
Food source:  Chinkapin nuts are palatable to humans 
as well as wildlife.  They have a sweet flavor and are 
often preferred over the  fruit of the American 
chestnut. 
 
Landscaping:  Chinkapin is sometimes used for 
landscaping as a small ornamental tree or shrub.  Its 
flowers are attractive but  have an unpleasant odor. 
 
 Male flowers. A.B. Russell. 1997.  NC State University.  Trees of the Maritime Forest.  
Restoration: Chinkapin can be used to rehabilitate 
disturbed sites because of its  ability to adapt to harsh 
conditions.  The threat of chestnut blight often deters 
this decision by land managers. 
 
Wildlife:  Squirrels, chipmunks, opossums, white-
tailed deer, blue jays, woodpeckers and other birds 
consume chinkapin nuts.  White-tailed deer browse 
the foliage. 
 
Legal Status 
 Female flowers. G. Nelson. 1996.  Shrubs and woody vines of Florida. 
Chinkapin is rare in its ra nge.  It is threatened in 
Kentucky, endangered in New Jersey, and has been 
extirpated from most of Alabama by chestnut blight.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Chinkapin is a 
monoecious small tree or larg e shrub that grows to be 
2 to 5 m tall.  The twigs are densely hairy 
(tomentose) when young, becoming shiny brown 
with densely reddish-hairy  buds.  The leaves are 
alternate, simple, short-stemmed, prominently 
veined, oblong with fine pointed teeth or bristles, up 
to 15 cm long, and toment ose on the lower surface.  
Male flowers are borne in  the leaf axils, elongated, 
yellow to white, clustered, and have a strong odor.  
Female flowers are rounder  with a diameter up to 3 
cm.  The fruit is a spiny bur that houses a single nut.  
Male flowers appear in May and June, female flowers 
later in the season.  Fruits mature in autumn and 
winter. 
 
Distribution : Chinkapin is native to the eastern and 
southern United States.  Its native range is from New 
Jersey and West Virginia, west to Missouri and 
Oklahoma, and south to Texas and Florida.  It has 
been planted in Wisconsin and Michigan where it has 
become a forest tree.  For current distribution, please

consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Chinkapin occurs in mixed hardwood forests 
among longleaf pine and scrub oak trees on high 
ridges and slopes that are free from limestone.  It 
grows on black sandy dunes in the Carolinas, but not 
on frontal dunes.  It is also found on well-drained 
stream terraces, dry pinelands, and disturbed sites 
such as railroad rights-of-way, power line clearings, 
fence and hedgerows, pine plantations, and old fields. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for chinkapin are 6 to 10.  
Chinkapin occurs in xeric and mesic sites on dry, 
rocky, sandy, or loamy soils.  It ranges in elevation 
from sea level to about 1,350 m (4,455 feet).  It 
occurs in open areas and is tolerant of high heat.  It is 
not tolerant of coastal salt spray or shade. 
 
Management 
Chinkapin plants form extensive clones where it has 
been burned annually.  It resprouts vigorously 
following top-kill by fire.  It will also regenerate 
upon overstory removal in stands where it had once 
been out-competed by canopy trees.  
 
Chinkapin is not resistant to herbicides such as 2,4,5-
T, bromacil, dicamba, picloram, and silvex.  It may 
resprout following herbicide treatments. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Chinkapin is moderately resistant to chestnut blight, 
but fewer trees are reported each year due to the 
inhibitory effects of the fungus.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Chinkapin plants and seeds are not commonly 
produced commercially.  It reproduces readily from 
seed.  Collect seeds immedi ately after the spiny husks 
have split open to expose the nut.  Seeds that are 
planted in the fall show good germination (>90%) 
while seeds stored over winter dry out and germinate 
at reduced rates (<50%).  Seedlings will produce nuts 
in the third growing season, with large nut crops 
occurring during the fifth and sixth season.  
Chinkapin also sprouts from rhizomes, forming dense 
colonies. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
chinkapin cultivars for conservation use.  The 
‘golden’ cultivar is produced for its wildlife value 
and adaptability to harsh sites.  Chinkapin cultivars  may be of value for breeding blight-resistant trees 
with flavorful nuts.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 9 
May 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
American Chestnut Growers Foundation. 2004. 
Genus Castanea  
(http://www.ppws.vt.edu/gri ffin/accfcast.html, 9 May 
2004). Department of Plant Pathology, Physiology 
and Weed Science, Virg inia Tech, Blacksburg. 
 
Anagnostakis, S.L. 2004.  Identification of American 
chestnut trees  
(http://www.caes.state.ct.us/ FactSheetFiles/PlantPath
ology/fspp034f.htm, 9 May 2004).  The Connecticut 
Agricultural Experiment Station, New Haven. 
 
Finical, L. 2004.  Texas native trees  (http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/ornamentals/natives/about.html 
9 May 2004). Dallas Arboretum, Texas Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Dallas. 
 
Hamel, Paul B. and M.U. Chiltoskey. 1975.  Cherokee 
plants and their uses—a 400 year history.  Herald 
Publishing, Sylva. 
 
Johnson, F.L. and B.W. Hoagland.  Catalog of the 
woody plants of Oklahoma 
(http://www.biosurvey.ou.e du/shrub/cover.htm, 9 
May 2004). Oklahoma University, Norman. 
 
Nelson, G. 1996.  Shrubs and woody vines of Florida. 
Pineapple Press Co., Sarasota. 
 
Russell, A.B. 1997.  Trees of the Maritime forest 
(http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/factsh
eets/maritime/Castapu.htm, 9 May 2004). 
Department of Horticultural Science, North Carolina 
State University, Raleigh.  
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.  Castanea pumila. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 9 May 2004). 
Fire Sciences Laboratory,  Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, USDA Forest Service, Missoula.

Taylor, L.A. 1940. Plants used as curatives by 
certain southeastern tribes.  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 9 May 2004). Institute 
of Systematic Botany, University of South Florida, 
Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 11May2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.