Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHELLBARK HICKORY  
Carya laciniosa  (Michx. f.) G. 
Don  
Plant Symbol = CALA21  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate Names 
Big shellbark, bottom she llbark, thick shellbark, 
western shellbark, shagbark  hickory, bigleaf shagbark 
hickory, kingnut  
 
Uses 
The wood of shellbark hickory is hard, heavy, strong, 
and very flexible, making it a favored wood for tool 
handles.  The hardness and beauty of the grain also 
make it desired for furniture, cabinets, and veneer.  
All hickories, however, suffer from ring shake, a 
separation of wood along the annual rings and a 
serious problem for thin veneers.  It also is prized as 
fuelwood and charcoal.  
 
The nuts of shellbark hickory are sweet and edible 
and the largest of all hickories.  They are eaten by a 
wide range of wildlife species, including ducks, 
quail, wild turkeys, squirrels, chipmunks, deer, foxes, 
raccoons, and white-footed mice.  The tree is rarely 
planted as a shade tree; it is relatively slow growing 
and difficult to move because of its taproot.  
Numerous cultivars have been selected for use in nut 
production or as grafting stock.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State  
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General:  Hickory Family (Caryaceae).  This species 
is a native tree 20-30(40) m  tall, with an open, round 
to oblong crown; twigs thick, orange-brown, rusty-
hairy when young, becoming glabrous, with a large, 
elongate terminal bud; bark initially smooth and light 
gray with shallow interlacing ridges, later developing 
long, broad, loosely attached  plates attached at the 
middle and curving away from the trunk, resulting in 
a coarsely shaggy appearance.  The leaves are 
deciduous, alternate, pinnately compound, (3)5-9 dm 
long, with a usually hairy rachis, leaflets (5)7-9(11), 
obovate to oblong-lanceolate, 9-20 cm long, the 
terminal usually much larger than the lateral, 
acuminate, coarsely toothed, without tufts of hair on 
the teeth, shiny dark green  above, paler and soft-hairy 
beneath and scaly with abundant large peltate scales 
and small round peltate scales.  The male (staminate) 
flowers are in slender, ye llow-green, pendent spikes 
(catkins) to 20 cm long, female (pistillate) flowers are 
short, in clusters of 2-5 at branch tips; male and 
female flowers borne separately but on the same tree 
(the species monoecious).   Fruits are tan to brown, 
spherical to ellipsoid, not compressed or slightly so, 
4.5-6 long, 4-5 cm wide, the husks minutely hirsute, 
7-13 mm thick, divided all the way to the base into 4 
sections; nuts large, 4-angled, cream colored, thick-
shelled (4 mm).  The common name is in reference to 
the mature bark that peels away like a shell, albeit in 
strips.  It is also called kingnut hickory, because it 
has the largest nut of all hickories.   
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species:  No variants are 
recognized within the species, but numerous cultivars 
of shellbark hickory have been named, with most 
originating in Iowa or Pennsylvannia (Grauke 1988).  
Hybrids with pecan form  C. x  nussbaumeri  Sarg. – a 
group of hybrids with large nuts.  One of them, 
'Gerardi', has been recommended as a rootstock for 
pecan.  Shellbark hickory  also hybridizes with 
shagbark hickory to produce  C. x  dunbarii .   
 
Shellbark hickory is similar to shagbark ( Carya 
ovata) in its bark that peels away in plates.  Trees of 
shellbark tend to be shorter and with heavier 
branches than shagbark, and the bark plates of

shellbark hickory are straighter (with less curve).  
Shellbark generally has 7-9 leaflets (vs. 5) and the 
leaves do not have tufts of hair at the tip of the teeth.  
The shellbark hickory prefers bottomlands and is not 
as widely distributed as the shagbark.  The flavor of 
shellbark kernels is considered by many to be inferior 
to shagbark hickory.   
 
Distribution:  Shellbark hickory grows primarily in 
the Ohio and upper Mississippi River valleys, but the 
total range is wider, from New England west to 
southeastern Iowa, then south to northeastern 
Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Kentucky, with isolated 
populations in southern Arkansas, east Texas, 
Mississippi, Alabama, and northern Georgia.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Shellbark usually occurs on deep bottomland soils of 
rivers and creeks but can less commonly occur on 
dry, sandy soils and open cedar glades in northern 
portions of its range, at elevations of 20-300 meters.  
It is a minor component of the bur oak forest and in 
the South, of the swamp chestnut oak-cherrybark oak 
forest.  It usually occurs in mixtures with various 
other bottomland species.   
 
Flowering: April-June, after the leaves have 
appeared; fruiting: September-October but some 
fruits may persist on trees until December.   
 
Establishment 
The minimum tree age for seed production in 
shellbark hickory is about 40 years, with most seed 
produced between 75-200  years.  Some seeds are 
borne every year but mast crops are produced about 
every second year or more irregularly.  Shellbark 
hickory seeds require 90-120 days of cold 
stratification to break embryo dormancy prior to 
germination.   
 
Germination and establishment occur from late April 
to early June.  The seedlings rapidly develop a long 
taproot, but shoot growth is initially slow.  Young 
plants are frequently overtopped by competition but 
they are shade-tolerant.   Shellbark hickory sprouts 
readily following fire or cutting (or other mechanical 
injury).  Oldest trees may  reach 300 years of age.   
 
Management 
Trees are late coming into leaf (usually late May to 
June) and lose their leaves early in the autumn 
(usually October).  The mature leaves cast a heavy 
shade.  This light regime makes the trees well suited  for a mixed woodland planting with shrubs and other 
trees beneath.  
 
Seeds are best sown in a cold frame, for natural 
stratification, as soon as they are ripe.  Stored seed 
should be kept moist; stratify 60-150 days at 1
° C.  
Sow 1-2 seeds in a deep pot and thin to the best 
seedling; accommodate the ta p root if necessary to 
transplant, but place into permanent positions as soon 
as possible, preferably in  the first summer.  Seed can 
also be sown  in situ, giving protection from predators 
and from cold (a plastic  bottle with the top and 
bottom removed and a top-fitted wire mesh).   
 
Shellbark hickory sprouts readily following fire or 
cutting (or other mechanical injury) and coppice 
management has been recommended.  The species 
can be propagated with good success by grafting and 
budding.  Hickories are generally self-fertile but 
larger crops of better quality seeds are produced 
following cross-pollination.  Other information on 
cultivars and cultivation of sh ellbark hickory is found 
at the website of the Northern Nut Growers 
Association (see References).     
 
Numerous insects and fungi affect hickories but 
shellbark hickory has no enemies that seriously 
threaten its development.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Grauke, L.J. 1988.  A cultivar list for hickory .  79th 
Annual Report of the Northern Nut Growers 
Association.   
 
Northern Nut Growers Association, Inc.  2000.  Web 
Site.  <http://www.icserv.com/nnga/shelhick.htm> 
 
Schlesinger, R.C. 1990.   Carya laciniosa (Michx. f.) 
Loud.  Shellbark Hickory.  Pp. 211-214, IN: R.M. 
Burns and B.H. Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of 
North America .  Volume 2.  Hardwoods .  USDA, 
Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Stone, D.E. 1993.   Carya.  Pp. 417-425, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York, New York.

<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Strang, J.G., G.R. Brown, R.T. Jones, L.A. Weston, 
R. Bessin, & J.R. Hartman 1987.  Nut tree growing in 
Kentucky .  University of Kentucky Agricultural 
Communications Services.  Web site.  
<http://www.ca.uky.edu/agc/pubs/id/id77/id77.htm>  
Accessed September 2000.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.