Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOUTHERN CATALPA  
Catalpa bignonioides  Walt. 
Plant Symbol = CABI8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center and Kansas State University 
Forestry Research 
 
 Debbie Orick and Dale Goff, NRCS, Booneville Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Catalpa, katalpa, American  catalpa, common catalpa, 
eastern catalpa, catawba, bean tree, Indian bean, 
Indian cigar tree, lady cigar, Shawnee wood, 
caterpillar tree, worm tree,  fish bait tree, fisherman’s 
tree (Little 1979;  Anonymous 2005). Catalpa is an 
old American Indian name for the plant. 
 
Warning!! The roots of this species are highly 
poisonous  (Chevallier 1996).  
 
Uses 
Industry:  Used for general construction work, interior 
finish, cabinetwork, fence posts, rails, and fuel 
(Stephens 1973).  
      
Ornamental:  Southern catalpa is primarily used today 
as a large ornamental shade tr ee.  It is widely planted 
in urban areas as a street and lawn tree. When 
flowering it has abundant showy blossoms (Pack 
1952). 
 
Ethnobotanic: In some of the older medical journals 
(19
th century) there were speculations that catalpa  gave off poisonous emanations. However, there is no 
scientific evidence to prove those speculations 
(Bailey 1939). 
 
Pioneer doctors used the seed pods and seeds to make 
a decoction for chronic bronchial affection, 
spasmodic asthma, labored breathing, and heart 
problems.  The juice from either the leaves or roots 
was used to treat swelling of an eye or cutaneous 
affections. Green leaves were crushed and placed on 
swollen lymph glands.  The bark was dried then 
ground to a powder and taken, or brewed in a tea and 
taken for swollen lymph glands (Dalby 1999). 
 
A tea made from the bark has been used as an 
antiseptic, snake bite antidote, laxative, sedative and 
vermifuge.  This tea was also used as a substitute for 
quinine in treating malaria.  A tea made from the 
seeds was used in the treatment of asthma and 
bronchitis as well as used as a rinse on wounds.  
In addition to having a sedative effect, the plant also 
is reported to have a mild narcotic action.  It was 
therefore used in preparatio
ns with other herbs for the 
treatment of whooping cough, asthma and spasmodic 
coughs in children (Felter and Lloyd 1989).  
 
Pods and seeds have been reported to possess 
antispasmodic, cardiac, and sedative properties.  The 
bark is said to have been an anthelmintic alternative.  
Modern pharmaceutical rese arch has shown catalpa 
trees have diuretic properties.  
 
 R. Alan Shadow, NRCS, East Texas Plant Materials Center

Conservation:  Planted in windbreaks and on mined 
land reclamation projects.  So me plant it to attract the 
catalpa worm, which are harvested and used as fish 
bait. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
General:   Trumpet-creeper Fa mily (Bignoniaceae).  
It is a perennial deciduous tree which readily grows 
in USDA Hardiness Zones 5 to 9.  This is a U.S. 
native (Geyer 2000; Little 1979).  At maturity, the 
height can vary from about 25 to 40 feet.  The crown 
is often forked.  Its longevity is about 40 to 50 years. 
The National Registry of Big Trees (Anonymous 
2008) reports a specimen in Mi ssissippi that is 88 feet 
tall with a circumference of 271 inches.   
 
The tree bark is separated into irregular shallow 
fissures with reddish-brown scales.  On young tree 
seedlings the bark is thin and easily damaged by 
impact, or rodents.  Twigs in winter have a unique 
identifying characteristic.  They have sunken leaf 
scars which resemble suction cups.  Their whorled 
arrangement of 3 “moon crater” scars per node is 
another trait easily identified.  They are grayish-
brown in color. Buds are small, red-brown, wider 
than long, and slightly hairy (Stephens 1973).  
 
Leaves are simple, may be opposite or whorled (3 per 
node), pinnately veined, 5 to 12 inches long, 4 to 6 
inches broad, heart shaped at the base, and have a 
long petiole with entire margins and soft pubescence 
on the underside, which is also a lighter green than 
the top surface (Harlow 1979).  
 
Flowering and Fruiting:  The flowers of catalpa are 
perfect.  Flowering takes place from May through 
July.  They occur in bell-shaped corollas of 5 lobes.   
Individual flowers are showy,  with the 5 petals in 
each flower being unequal in  size, white with purple  spots and orange stripes at the throat, in branched, 
upright clusters.  The petals are up to 1.5 inches long.
 
 
Seedpods are slender and green in the summer 
growing from 6 to 24 inches long, and ½ inch wide 
looking ‘cigar like’.  They mature in the autumn, turn 
brown, split open lengthwise to let seeds fall in the 
spring.  The seedpod genera lly stays attached to the 
tree limb over winter. 
 
Southern catalpa seeds are drawn out more to a point 
while the northern catalpa seeds are blunter at the 
end.  Seeds are about 1 inch long and 1/3 inch wide.  
They have a light brown coat and wings rounded at 
the ends terminating in a fringe of short hairs.  There 
are approximately 20,480 seeds per pound (USDA 
1948).   
 
Wood characteristics:  The wood is of moderately 
light density (specific gravity 0.42 oven dry), with 
pale gray sapwood and grayish brown heartwood. It 
has a faint, aromatic, non characteristic odor and no 
characteristic taste. It is ring porous, coarse-grained, 
soft, not strong, but very durable in contact with the 
soil (Pansion and de Zeeuw 1980).  
 
Distribution:  Originally found in the Gulf Coast 
states of Florida, Georgi a, Alabama, Mississippi and 
Louisiana, it was first cultivated in 1726.  It has since 
spread to many states east of the Rocky Mountains, 
the southwestern states, and Oregon (USDA 1948).   
 
Habitat:
 Southern catalpa is native to Alabama, 
Georgia, Florida, and Mississippi. It is widely 
naturalized from New England and New York to 
Ohio and the central and southern plains states. 
 
Catalpas prefer moist, deep, well drained soil, but 
adapts to dry or wet soils.  The soil pH may range 
from 5.5 to 7.0.  It prefers an open sunny space to 
partial shade (USDA 1948). 
 
Establishment 
When placed as an ornamental in a yard setting care 
must be taken to ensure it is not too close to a 
building, fence, property line, power line, or septic 
system.  Ample space should be provided to let it 
reach a mature height (Garman 1912).   
Management 
The biggest management problems with a catalpa tree 
used as an ornamental are litter and smell.  It will 
drop a heavy load of flow ers in the spring, then a 
plentiful supply of leaves in the fall, and finally a lot 
of large seedpods in the winter.  Green leaves give 
off a disagreeable odor when crushed.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Larvae of the catalpa sphinx moth (Ceratomia 
catalpae ) eat the trees leaves.  Almost complete 
defoliation may occur in some years.  As the catalpa 
sphinx larvae eat the leaves , significantly more nectar 
than normal seeps out of  the damaged leaves.  This 
increased nectar attracts various species of ants, 
ladybird beetles and predaceous insects.  These 
predaceous insects attack and/or remove the eggs and 
young larvae of the catalpa  sphinx. The secretion of 
the extrafloral nectar and its subsequent harvesting by 
insects is mutually benefici al to both the catalpa tree 
and the predaceous insects (Riffle and Peterson 
1986).  
 
Rabbits are especially damaging in their girdling of 
young stems. 
 
Immature seeds in the pods are often destroyed by a 
small yellow grub, the larva of a gnat.  
 
Catalpa midge ( Cecidomyia catalpae Comstock) 
causes leaf spots, injures terminal buds and branch 
tips, as well as seeds in the pods. 
 
Brown leaf spots on the l eaves are often created by 
the fungi Macrosporium catalpae . This is rarely a 
serious problem so no  chemical treatment is 
recommended. Catalpa is also susceptible to the 
decay fungus  Polystictus versicolor . It can severely 
damage catalpa trees after about 20 years of age in 
the western part of its planted range.  Powdery 
mildew cause a wh ite powdery coating on the leaves. 
When severe the leaves turn yellow and drop. 
 
Verticillium wilt will make the branches die, and can 
eventually kill trees. A hard to find symptom of 
Verticillium wilt is discoloration of the sapwood.  
  
Environmental Concerns 
It is an invasive, we edy tree which escapes 
cultivation easily.  The flowers, long seedpods and 
seeds fall down from spring through winter, and 
create a mess on the ground anywhere near the tree. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Catalpas can readily be grown from seed. Seeds 
which are collected after over wintering in the mature 
seedpod have a higher germination rate than those 
collected in the fall. Root cuttings may also be used 
to propagate trees. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two species of catalpa native to North 
America, northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa ) and southern catalpa (Catalpa bignonioides
).  They 
appear very similar but are two distinct species. Two 
varieties of  C. bignonioides  have been documented: 
‘Aurea’ and a dwarf variety named ‘Nana’. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Anonymous 2008.  American Forests, National Tree 
Register of Big Trees:  Catalpa bignonioides 
http://www.americanforests.or g/resources/bigtrees/re
gister.php [online: cited 10 June 2008].  
Anonymous 2005.  Plants For A Future: Catalpa 
bignonioides.  
(http://www.pfaf.org/database/plants.php?Catalpa+bi
gnonioides) [online:  cited 24 March 2005]. 
Bailey, L. H. 1939.  p. 684  In The Standard 
Cyclopedia of Horticulture.  Vol. I A-E. 
Chevallier. A. 1996.  The Encyclopedia of Medicinal 
Plants. Dorling Kindersley. London  ISBN 9-780751-
303148 
Dalby, R. 1999. p. 469  In The Case for Catalpa. 
American Bee Journal , June 1991. 
 
Felter, H. W. and J. U. Lloyd. 1989.  Catalpa-Cigar 
Tree. King’s American Dispensatory  
(http://www.henriettesherbal.com/eclectic/kings/catal
pa.html) [online: cited 24 March 2005]. 
 
Garman, H. 1912.  The Catalpa and Their Allies. 
Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station. Bulletin 
No. 164: 201-223. 
 
Geyer, W. A. 2000.  Catalpa Outline Data Sheet.  The 
Forestry Compendium – a silvicultural reference.  
CABI Publishing. Wellingford. Oxon. U.K. 
 
Harlow, W. H., E. S. Harrar, and F. M. White. 1979. 
Textbook of Dendrology. Sixth Ed. McGraw-Hill 
Book Co. Pp. 224-225. 
 
Little, E. L. 1979.  USDA FS. Check List of Native 
and Naturalized Trees of the United States.

Agriculture Handbook No 41. U .S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington D. C. 
 
Paclt, J. 1952.  Synopsis of the genus Catalpa 
(Bignoniaceae) III. Candolea 13: 242-285. 
 
Stephens, H. A.  1973.  Woody Plants of the North 
Central States. Univ. of Kansas Press.  
 
Pansion, A. J.  and C. de Zeeuw. 1980.  Textbook of 
Wood Technology.  Fourth Ed. McGraw-Hill Book 
Co. p. 547-549. 
 
Riffle, J. W. and G. W. Peterson. 1986.  Diseases of 
Trees in the Great Plains.  General Technical Report 
RM-129. p. 14, 44, 47, 49. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 
 
USDA FS. 1948. Woody-Plant Seed Manual. U. S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington D. C. 
 
Young, J. A. and C. G. Young. 1992.  Seeds of 
Woody Plants in North America. Revised Ed.  
 
Prepared By:  
Dr. Wayne A. Geyer , Kansas State University 
Forestry Division, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Patrick J. Broyles , F
 ormerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center Manhattan, Kansas 
 
John M. Row, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John M. Row, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 081121 jsp; 090112 jsp; 090622 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.  Read about 
Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.