Plant Guide
YELLOW STAR-
THISTLE 
Centaurea solstitialis  L.  
Plant Symbol = CESO3  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana/Wyoming  
P lant  Materials  Program  
 
Figure 1. Y ellow  star-thistle  flower heads. Photo by 
Mark Stannard, USDA-NRCS  Pullman Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington.  
Alternate Names 
Yellow  starthistle  
Uses  
Flowers provide nectar for honey bees.  
Status 
Yellow  star-thistle  is a listed noxious weed and is 
invasive in  many western states . C onsult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicato r values). 
Weediness  
Yellow  star-thistle  is one of the more invasive weeds 
of the Intermountain West and Pacific Northwest . A 
report from 2003 estimated that yellow star -thistle  
has  infested nearly 15 million acres in 17 western 
states . This plant is  weedy  and invasive in some 
regions or habitats and often  displace s desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regar ding its status and 
use . Weed information is also available from the  PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/. 
Also  
consult  related  web  sites  listed in PLANTS  for this 
species for further information.  
Description  
General:  The rosette of yellow star -thistle  lies close 
to the ground (see Figure 2) and produces six to 28 
deeply lobed leaves that range from one to eight 
inches  (2.5 to 20 centimeters)  long and are generally 
less than two inches (5 cent imeters) wide . The rigidly 
branched, winged flowering stems  (see Figure 2) 
average about two feet (60 centimeters) tall , but 
range from four inches (10 centimeters) to five feet 
(1.5 meters), depending on environmental conditions . 
The stem leaves are entir e without lobes, linear in 
shape, and are vested with woolly hairs that persist 
through the growing season.  Flower heads are 
solitary  on the ends of short stems and have many 
bright yellow flowers  (see Figure1) . The bracts of the 
flower  heads are armed with stout, straw -colored 
spines one to two inches (2.5 to 5 centimeters) long 
that radiate from the flower  head in a star shape. 
 
 
Figure 2. A yellow star -thistle rosette and flowering 
stem showing leaf shapes and  the winged stem. Photo by 
Jane Mangold, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana.