Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FRINGED REDMAIDS
Calandrinia ciliata (Ruiz & Pavon) DC.  
Plant Symbol = CACI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Red maids, desert rockpu rselane, wild portulaca 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Redmaid seeds and greens were an 
important food source for many tribes in California 
including those whose territory neighbored the 
Salinan.  Given their impor tance and their abundance, 
they were undoubtedly utilized by the Salinan as 
well.  The shiny black seeds were a major ingredient 
in pinole (from the Aztec  word for seed flour, pinolli) 
and were valued for their high oil content.  The 
Chumash called the seed x utash or pil (Timbrook 
1986).  The name  pil is reported in Onlone usage for 
redmaid seeds (Bocek 1984).  Fages (1937) names  pil 
as the seed of a plant used by the Salinan.   
 
The Miwok harvested the seeds in early summer 
(Barrett & Gifford1933).  The plants were pulled and 
spread out on a clean area to dry.  The seeds were 
separated by shaking or hitting the plants over the 
cleaned area or into a basket .  Then they were placed 
into a tightly woven winnowing basket where they 
were tossed, allowing the moving air to remove any 
chaff.  The seeds were then dried for storage or 
parched in a cooking basket along with hot coals.   The contents were kept in motion to prevent the coals 
from burning the basket.  The parched seeds were 
pulverized in bedrock mortars into an oily meal, 
which was then prepared into balls and cakes.   
 
Large quantities of 
Calandrinia ciliata seeds have 
been recovered by archaeologists in burial sites in 
Chumash territory in the Channel Islands of Southern 
California (Timbrook 1993).  Not only were the seeds 
used as ceremonial offerings, as evidenced by these 
burial sites, but also they are often mentioned in 
Chumash myths (Timbrook 1990).   
Beatrice F. Howitt © California Academy of Sciences 
@ Calflora 
 
The Luiseño ate the tend er young greens fresh 
(Sparkman 1908), which are said to taste similar to 
arugula.  Fringed redmaid greens contain oxalic acid, 
like spinach, and should be eaten sparingly.  Cooking 
reduces the amount of oxalic acid.   
 
Wildlife : Many insects, small mammals, and birds, 
including wild doves ( Zenaida spp), eat the seeds.   
 
Domestic animals : Cattle readily graze on fringed 
redmaid plants.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.    
 
Description 
General: Purslane family (Portulacaceae).  Fringed 
redmaids are annual forbs native to the Western 
United States, Central Amer ica, and northern South 
America.   
 
These low growing, spreading plants vary in height 
(15 to 33 cm) depending on environmental 
conditions.  The leaves are alternately arranged 
leaves and lance shaped  (1 to 10cm long).  The 
flowers growing in loose racemes appear in the early

spring.  The five, notched petals (4 to 15mm long) 
are rosy red with darker veins.  The fruits bear 10 to 
20 small (1 to 2.5mm wide) shiny black seeds.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Fringed redmaids thrive in open grasslands 
as well as disturbed areas and cultivated fields below 
2200m.   
 
Adaptation 
Calandrinia ciliata  is an early colonizer of disturbed 
areas.  It increases in abundance following a fire 
because of the increase in  nutrients and the decrease 
in competing grasses.  The native Californians 
burned grasslands periodica lly to increase harvests of 
redmaids as well as other fire-following species.   
 
Establishment 
Fringed redmaids look lovely when grouped with 
other low-growing wildflowers.  The plants prefer 
full sun and moderately dry to moist conditions.  
They do best in sandy to loamy soils with low to 
moderate nutrient availability.   
 
These spring annuals do  not transplant well and 
should be sown directly into prepared beds in late fall 
or very early spring.  Mix the seeds with ten parts 
moist sand to ensure even broadcasting.  Broadcast 
the sand and seed mixture over the prepared bed and 
scuff or rake the seeds lightly into the soil.  Water 
lightly and keep the soil lightly moist until the seeds 
sprout (generally within one to three weeks when 
temperatures average 20°C).  The plants are 
moderately drought tolerant once established.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
other products may be equally effective.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources  Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.  
Yosemite Association,  Yosemite National Park, 
California.  388 pp. 
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.   Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.   
 
Chartoff, K.K. 1966.   Appendix A: An ethnobotanical 
study of the Paskenta-Newvill reservoir.   In J.L. 
Chartoff & J Childress.   An archaeological survey of 
the proposed Paskenta-Newville Reservoir in Glenn 
and Tehama Counties, Northern California.  
Archives of California Archaeology Paper No. 24.   
 
Fages, P. 1937.   A historical, political, and natural 
description of California.  Translation by H.I. 
Priestley, University of  California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  83 pp.   
 
Howitt, B.F. 1999.   Calandrinia ciliata: Fringed 
redmaids.   CalFlora: Information on California 
plants for education, research and conservation  [web 
application] 2001.  Be rkeley, California: The 
CalFlora Database [a non-profit organization]. 
Available: http://www.calflor a.org/.  (Accessed: Feb. 
19, 2002) 
 
Kelley, W.A. 1993.  IN: J.D. Hickman, Editor,  The 
Jepson manual: Higher plants of California.  
University of California Pres s, Berkeley, California.  
Pp. 895-896. 
 
Lowry, J.L. 1999.   Gardening with a wild heart: 
Restoring California’s native landscapes at home.  
University of California Pres s, Berkeley, California.  
252 pp.   
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  425 
pp. 
 
Sparkman, P.S. April 7, 1908.   The culture of the 
Luiseño Indians.   University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and 
Ethnology Vol. 8, No. 4. Pp. 187-234.   
 
Timbrook, J. 1993.   Island Chumash ethnobotany .  
Reprint from: Archaeology on the Northern Channel

Islands of California.  Coyote Press Archives of 
California Prehistory NO. 34 .  Coyote Press, Salinas, 
California.  Pp 47-61.895-896.    
 
Timbrook, J. 1990 Ethnobotany  of Chumash Indians, 
California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany Vol. 44, No. 2.  Pp 
235-253.   
 
Timbrook, J. 1986.   Chia and the Chumash: A 
reconsideration of sage seeds in Southern California.   
Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology 
Vol. 8, No. 1.  Pp 50-64.   
 
Timbrook, J., J.R. Johnson & D.D. Earle 1982.  
Vegetation burning by the Chumash .  Journal of 
California and Great Basin Anthropology Vol.4, No. 
2, pp163-186. 
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California  
 Edited: 12apr02 ahv; 29a pr03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.