Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEAKED HAZELNUT
Corylus cornuta Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = COCO6  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
California hazel, California hazelnut, California 
filbert (these names applying only to the Californian 
variety) 
 
Uses 
Beaked hazelnut is commercially grown for the 
edible nuts and used in wildlife habitat plantings to 
provide cover and nuts, which are eaten by squirrels, 
deer, grouse and pheasant.  American Indians -- 
picked in early autumn, stored until fully ripe, and 
then roasted or eaten raw,  also used the nuts.  They 
were pounded into cakes with berries, meat, or 
animal fat and also boiled to extract the oil, which 
was used as flavoring.  The nut's milk was used to 
cure coughs and colds, to heal cuts, and as an 
astringent.  The wood was fashioned into arrows, 
fishing traps, hooks, and spoons and the long, flexible 
shoots were twisted into rope.    
 
Beaked hazelnut has limited ornamental value and 
cultivars apparently have not been developed.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
 
Description 
General:  Birch family (Betulaceae.:  Native shrubs or 
small trees growing 1-8(-15) meters tall, rhizomatous 
and forming colonial thickets; main stems (or trunk) 
straight, with spreading, ascending branches, the 
twigs light brown, sometime s with glandular hairs.  
Leaves are deciduous, alternate, nearly round to 
narrowly ovate or ovate-oblong, with a heart-shaped 
or rounded base, often nearly angular and slightly 
lobed near the tip, 4-10 cm long, blunt to broadly 
acute, doubly serrate, usually pubescent on major 
veins and in vein axils, the petiole with or without 
glandular hairs.  Male (staminate) and female 
(pistillate) flowers are separate, but both types 
present on each plant (the species monoecious); male 
flowers numerous in long, pendulous stalks (catkins) 
4-6 cm long, in clusters of 2-3 near branch tips, 
appearing in the fall but opening the following 
spring; female flowers: several in a scaly bud, tiny 
and inconspicuous with only bright red stigma and 
styles protruding from the otherwise gray-brown 
buds, almost completely enclosed by bracts, near the 
end of the twigs.  Fruit is an acorn-like nut about 2 
cm in diameter, completely concealed by two, leafy, 
coarsely toothed (husk-like) bracts fused at the tip 
and forming an extended tubular beak.  The common 
name refers to the bracteal beak of the fruit; “hazel” 
from the Old English name for filbert.   
 ©  William S. Justice Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species : beaked hazelnut is 
divided into two distinct entities:  
 
Corylus cornuta  Marsh. var. cornuta     
     synonym:  Corylus rostrata  Ait.  
Corylus cornuta var. californica  (A. DC.) Sharp  
    synonym:  Corylus californica  Rose 
    synonym: Corylus rostrata  var. californica A. DC. 
    synonym: Corylus cornuta  var. glandulosa Boivin 
 
Var. californica differs from var.  cornuta in habit, 
leaf shape, the presence of  glandular hairs, form and 
size of the involucre, geography, and other features, 
summarized in the contrast below.   
 
1. Small to large shrubs ; leaf blades ovate to 
narrowly elliptic, apex distinctly acuminate; twigs 
and petioles without glandular hairs; bracteal beak 2 
times or more the fruit length.  
…………..........……….. ......... var. cornuta 
1. Large shrubs or small trees; leaf blades nearly 
round or broadly elliptic, apex broadly acute to

obtuse; twigs and petioles usually with glandular 
hairs; bracteal beak less than 2 times the fruit length.  
................................................... var. californica   
 
Preliminary studies of the beaked hazelnut complex 
world-wide, one North American species with two 
varieties or subspecies and one east Asian species 
with two varieties, indicate that  Corylus cornuta var. 
cornuta is overall more similar in morphology to the 
east Asian  C. sieboldiana  Blume than to var. 
californica , suggesting that  C. cornuta  is better 
regarded as two separate species.    
 
Distribution and Adaptation  
Var.  cornuta : eastern north America from 
Alabama and Georgia (Appalachian) northward to 
Newfoundland, westward through Canada and the 
Great Lakes states to northeast British Columbia, 
with several disjunct population systems.  Open 
woods or openings, edges of woods, thickets, 
fencerows, and roadsides and other disturbed areas, 
slopes and well-drained streamsides, at 100--500 
meters elevation.  Flowering early spring, before 
leafing; fruiting fall.    
 
Var.  californica : from the northern half of 
California to Oregon, Washington, and southern 
British Columbia, along the pacific coast.  Damp 
rocky slopes and stream banks in coastal mountain 
ranges, at 1000--2500 meters elevation.  Flowering: 
very early spring, before leafing; fruiting: fall.  
 
Establishment 
No information available; probably similar to 
American hazelnut.   
 
Management 
Beaked hazelnut is removed by growers of 
commercial, closely managed forests, primarily 
because of its aggressive colonial habit and 
corresponding competition with timber trees.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brunner, F. & D.E. Fairbrothers 1979.   Serological 
investigation of the Corylaceae.   Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club 106:97-103.  
 
Buckman, R.E. 1964 .  Effects of prescribed burning 
on hazel in Minnesota.   Ecology 45:626-629.   
 
Drumke, J.S. 1965.  A systematic survey of Corylus in 
North America.   Diss. Abstr. 25:4925-4926.  
 
Furlow, J.J. 1990.   The genera of Betulaceae in the 
southeastern United States.   J. Arnold Arbor. 71:1-
67.    
 
Furlow, J.J. 1993.  Corylus .  Pp. 535-538, IN: Flora 
of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Hardin, J.W. 1952.   The Juglandaceae and 
Corylaceae of Tennessee.   Castanea 17:78-89.   
 
Hsiung, W.W.Y. 1951.  An ecological study of 
beaked hazel in the Cloquet Experimental Forest.  
Ph.D. diss., University of  Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota.   
 
Kasapligil, B. 1964.   A contribution to the 
histotaxonomy of Corylus (Betulaceae) .  Adansonia 
4:43-90.  
 
Kasapligil, B. 1972.   A bibliography on Corylus 
(Betulaceae) with annotations.   Northern Nut 
Growers Ann. Rept. 63:107-162.  
 
Kurmis, V. & E. Sucoff 1989.   Population density 
and height distribution of Corylus cornuta in 
undisturbed forests of Minnesota.   Canad. J. Bot. 
67:2409-2413.     
 
Tappeiner, J.C. 1971.   Invasion and development of 
beaked hazel in red pine stands in northern 
Minnesota.   Ecology 52:514-519.   
 
Tappeiner, J.C. 1979.   Effects of fire and 2,4-D on the 
early stages of beaked hazel (Corylus cornuta) 
understories.   Weed Science 27:162-166.   
 
Whitcher, I. & J. Wen 1999.   Morphometric analysis 
of beaked hazelnuts, the Corylus cornuta complex .  
XVI International Botani cal Congess, Abstract 
Number: 620.    
 
Wiegand, K.M. 1909.   Recognition of Corylus 
rostrata and Corylus americana.   Rhodora 11:107.   
 
Zimmerman, M.L. 1991.  Corylus cornuta var. 
californica .  IN: W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire 
effects information system  [Data base].  USDA,

Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, 
Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, 
Montana.  <http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 10jun03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.