Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOAPROOT 
Chlorogalum pomeridianum  
(D.C.) Kunth  
Plant Symbol = CHPO3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Amole, soap plant 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: This plant has multiple uses among 
many California Indian tribes.  The bulb was 
gathered historically in large quantities with a 
digging stick and it is still harvested today by various 
cultural groups.  Traditionally the bulbs were highly 
valued for soap for washing the body, hair, baskets, 
and utensils among the Luiseno, Pomo, Miwok, 
Yuki, Western Mono, Karuk, Wiyot, Western Mono, 
Tubatulabal, Foothill Yokuts, Cahuilla, and most 
other cultural groups.  It also served as an important 
fish poison--the bulb being mashed and placed into 
quiet pools of water to cause fish to become 
immobilized and float to th e water surface. The bulb 
contains saponin--which may contribute to its 
effectiveness as a soap and fish poison. 
 
If the bulb is boiled or roasted, and mashed, the paste 
is a good adhesive and is used as a glue for soaproot 
brush handles, and attaching feathers to arrows. The 
brushes are made by using the coarse "horsehair-like" 
fibrous coats for the brush bristles and the 
mucilaginous bulb makes the handle.  These brushes 
are used to sweep acorn meal into the mortar or  basket hopper when acor
ns are pounded and for 
brushing the hair. 
 
The bulb, if baked in an earth oven for a lengthy 
period, usually overnight, becomes caramelized and 
sweet-tasting and was a significant food to the Karuk, 
Coast Miwok, Washoe, Foothill Yokuts and other 
indigenous societies.  The young shoots were 
traditionally harvested by many tribes including the 
Costanoan and Sierra Miwok, before flowering, 
roasted, and eaten.  The bulb was also used 
medicinally by the Wailaki.  They rubbed the fresh 
bulb on the body for cramps and for rheumatism.  
They also used a decoction  of the bulb as a diuretic 
and laxative, and for stomachache.  The leaves were 
used to make dolls by the Sierra Miwok. 
©  M. Kat Anderson NPDC @ PLANTS Sliced bulb of soaproot. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This perennial 
herbaceous plant reproduces both by black, rounded 
seeds and bulbs.  The bulb has a brown fibrous outer 
coat and the bulb can become quite large--from 7-15 
cm across.  The leaves are linear and basal with 
strongly wavy margins.  The leaves are 2-7 dm. long 
and shrink to scarious bract s in the flowering stage.  
The flowers open in the evening and the 
inflorescence is highly branched and can grow up to 
3 m in height.  The flower s are white with green or 
purple midveins, recurved at flowering.  They have 6 
stamens and a style that is 3-cleft at the apex. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Populations of this species are found in multiple 
habitats including bluffs, grassland, chaparral, coastal 
sage scrub, and dry open oak woodland below 1500 
m elevation.  The plant is found throughout the 
western California floristic province and up into 
southwestern Oregon.  
 
Establishment 
Soaproot is a weedy species and can become easily 
established in the garden or wildland.  Dig up the 
bulbs in the summer when the plants have gone to 
seed and the bulbs are do rmant or purchase bulbs 
from local sources to maintain genetic diversity and

plants adapted to local conditions.  Make sure the 
bulbs have healthy roots.  Plant the bulbs in the fall 
(by October 1st) in the ground.  Plant them with their 
fibrous coats in any soil type and in full sun.  If you 
are planting the bulbs and plan to use them in the 
future, then plant them in a loose soil (not clay).  
Plant the bulbs shallowly with their tops showing.  
Do not water them and let the rains come.   
 
If establishing the plants by seed, plant them in the 
fall by October 1st and place the seeds in a deep 1-
gallon container (six inches deep).  Water the 
container thoroughly and let it drain.  Plant the seed 
the next day.  Scatter the seed on top of sandy soil.  
Sprinkle a light layer of soil over the top of the seeds.  
Place one-quarter inch gravel on top of this soil.  Set 
the pots outside and let the rains come.  If it is a 
drought year, supplement with hand watering.  The 
containers should get early morning and late 
afternoon sun, but shade in the middle of the day.  
After the plants are a year-old during dormancy, 
divide them to give them more space.  Plant them two 
inches or more apart.  At  the end of the second year, 
in the summer or fall, plant them out. 
 
Management 
The Pomo periodically burned areas where soaproot 
grew, probably to recycle nutrients and keep 
vegetation from encroaching into collection areas.  
Many tribes spare plants, never taking more than they 
need, leaving some for wildlife and future 
production.   Some tribes harvest soaproot bulbs after 
seeding and dump the seeds in the holes to perpetuate 
the plants.  Another potentially sustainable harvesting 
strategy practiced by the Sierra Miwok is to break the 
bulbs off, purposefully leaving some bulb and root 
tissue behind to regenerate. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CHPO3 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries throughout its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford. 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh: Cahuilla 
Indian knowledge and usage of plants . Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.  
Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington .  Economic Botany 38(2):240-255. 
 
Chestnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the United States National Herbarium, Government 
Printing Office 1900-1902.  Vol 7:295-422.  
Reprinted in 1974 by the Mendocino County 
Historical Society Inc.  Fort Bragg, California. 
 
Collier, M.E.T. & S.B. Thalman (editors).  1991.  
Interviews with Tom Smith and Maria Copa:  Isabel 
Kelly's ethnographic notes on the Coast Miwok 
Indians of Marin and southern Sonoma Counties, 
California.  Miwok Archeological Preserve of Marin 
Occasional Papers Number 6. 
 
Duncan, J.W. 1961.   Maidu ethnobotany.  
Unpublished Master's thesis.  Anthropology 
Department.  California State University, 
Sacramento, California. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.   Subsistence.  pp. 64-97 IN: 
Handbook of North American Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin . Warren L. D'azevedo [Ed.]. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Gayton, A.H. 1948.  Yokuts and Western Mono 
ethnography I: Tulare Lake, Southern Valley, and 
Central Foothill Yokuts .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California. 144 pp. 
 
Gifford, E.W. 1932.   The Northfork Mono.  Univ. of 
California Publications in Am. Arch. and Ethnology. 
Vol 31.  Univ. Of California, Berkeley, California.  
pp. 15-65. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo plants .  American Indian Monograph 
Series Number II.  Ameri can Indian Studies Center, 
University of California,  Los Angeles, California. 
 
Jernstedt, J.A. 1993.  Chlorogalum.  pp. 1189-1190 
IN:  The Jepson manual: Higher plants of California .  
J.C. Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California 
 
Kroeber, A.L.   (1976) 1925.   Handbook of the 
Indians of California .  Bureau of American 
Ethnology Bulletin 78.

Latta, F.F. 1977.  Handbook of the Yokuts Indians .  
Kern County Museum. 
 
Loud, L.L. 1918.   Ethnogeography and archaeology 
of the Wiyot Territory .  University of California Pub. 
in American Arch. and Et hnology. Vol. 14:3. pp. 
221-436. 
 
Peri, D.W., S.M. Patterson, & J.L. Goodrich. 1982.  
Ethnobotanical mitigation Warm Springs Dam-Lake 
Sonoma, California .  E. Hill and R.N. Lerner (eds.).  
Unpublished Report prepared by Elgar HIll, 
Environmental Analysis and Planning.  Penngrove, 
California for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers San 
Francisco District Contract No. DACW07-78-C-
0040. 
 
Schenck, S.M. & E.W. Gifford. 1952.   Karok 
ethnobotany .  Anthropological Records 13(6):377-
392. 
 
Sparkman, P.S. 1908.   The culture of the Luiseno 
Indians .  Univ. of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology. Vol. 
8:(4):187-234. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Voegelin, E.W.  1938.  Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records Vol 2:(1):1-84. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.