Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LEATHERLEAF 
Chamaedaphne calyculata  (L.) 
Moench  
Plant Symbol = CHCA2  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common name 
Cassandra  
 
Uses 
Leatherleaf reclaimed large  areas in raised bogs in 
the eastern United States that had been denuded by 
commercial peat removal.  The species is used for 
nesting and cover by wildlife, including mallards and 
ruffed grouse.  It is a part of browse for sharp-tailed 
grouse, white-tailed deer, caribou, and moose.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:
 Heath family (Ericaceae).   Native 
perennial, evergreen shrubs 0.3-1.5 meters tall, the 
stems covered with tiny brownish scales.  Leaves are 
alternate, oblong to elliptic, 1.5-5 cm long, finely 
toothed, the lower surface covered with tiny 
brownish scales, becoming smaller and positioned to 
the upper side of the stem  towards the branch tips.  
The flowers are white, ur n-shaped, 6-7 mm long, 
hanging and arising from one side of the terminal 
inflorescence, solitary in the axils of the small leaves.  
Fruits are depressed-globose, woody, gray-brown 
capsules, persisting through the winter.  Common 
name is in reference to the tough, evergreen leaf.   
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
  
Variation within the species : several varieties have 
been recognized within leatherleaf in North America, 
based primarily on differences in leaf size and shape 
(see Fernald 1950).  These taxa are currently 
regarded as within the limits of continuous variation 
of the species and are not  formally recognized.   
 
Distribution: Circumboreal; northern North America 
from Alaska and Yukon and all of Canada (except 
Franklin) to the easternmost provinces, in the US in 
the Great Lake states and  the Northeast, disjunct and 
rare in Maryland, North Carolina, and South 
Carolina.   
 
Adaptation  
Leatherleaf occurs in practically all boreal bogs as 
well as in swamps, lake and stream margins, sedge 
fens and meadows, black spruce muskegs, and vernal 
ponds and shrub swamps in pine barrens, usually 
growing on wet, strongly acidic sphagnum mats over 
water.  It may form thickets as a dominant species in 
shrub associations in some bogs.  It is found at 
elevations up to 1600 meters.  Flowering: April-June 
from buds formed the previous season; fruiting: June-
January.   
 
Establishment 
Leatherleaf reproduces by seed and vegetatively by 
rhizomes.  Seed set is usually high (50-95%) when 
the flowers are open-pollinated but low (1-15%) 
when flowers are self-fertilized.  After cold 
stratification to break dormancy, the seeds germinate 
on sphagnum or sedge mats.  Moist sphagnum

surrounding leatherleaf shoots, roots, and rhizomes 
causes vigorous vegetative growth.   
  
Leatherleaf is the first shrub to enter a bog after 
sphagnum is established and it is a primary species in 
extending the bog mat.  It remains characteristic of 
the mature and late stages of moss/low ericaceous 
shrub communities as open water disappears and may 
remain dominant for 50 years in some communities.  
Leatherleaf is shade intolerant and begins to thin as 
tall shrubs or bog forest species such as tamarack 
( Larix laricina ) and/or black spruce (Picea mariana ) 
establish.   
 
Persistence of leatherleaf in bogs over long periods 
has been attributed to its regeneration following 
recurrent fire, which is a primary factor in 
maintaining early successional stages in these 
communities.  Leatherleaf may show a strong 
increase in stem density following spring burning and 
may be only slightly injured by summer or autumn 
fires.  Leatherleaf probably survives severe fires 
because rhizomes are deep in water-saturated 
substrates and its root crowns and stems are matted in 
debris.    
    
Division is the most successful method of 
propagation for leatherleaf.  Plants may be divided in 
early fall, planting each rooted clump as a new shrub.  
Transplanting in summer or autumn stimulated shoot 
production more than spring transplanting.  The ends 
of shoots also may be bent down to the soil and 
layered.  Young plants should be partially shaded.   
  
Management 
Leatherleaf greatly increases  following clearcutting.  
Although leatherleaf and other shrubs can suppress 
black spruce on medium to poor sites, restocking and 
regeneration of trees may not affected by shrub 
density after harvest on other sites.  Stocking rates 
were about the same on burned and unburned cut-
over black spruce sites in  northern Minnesota.    
 
When used for rehabilitation or revegetation, natural 
growth of leatherleaf can be aided by transplants of 
sphagnum mats containing live plants.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Fernald, M.L. 1945.  Chamaedaphne calyculata  (L.) 
Moench, var.  latifolia (Ait.) comb. nov.  Rhodora 
47:390-391.  
 
Fernald, M.L. 1950.   Gray’s manual of botany .  Ed. 
8.  American Book Co., New York, New York. 
 
Luteyn, J.L. 1996.  Eri caceae of the southeastern 
United States.  Castanea 61:101-144.  
 
Pavek, D.S. 1993.   Chamaedaphne calyculata . IN: 
W.C. Fischer (compiler).  The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Reader, R.J. 1977.   Bog ericad flowers: self-
compatibility and relative attractiveness to bees .  
Canadian J. Bot. 55:2279-2287.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 17jan01 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.