DESERT WILLOW 
Chilopsis linearis (Cav.)  Sweet 
Plant Symbol = CHLI2  
 Figure 1 Close up  of  inflorescence with buds and blooms  
Photo by John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Specialist  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  Flowering -w illow,  willowleaf  catalpa, 
d esert  catalpa, Flor de Mimbre, m imbre, bow  willow  
( TAMU .edu 2013), false -willow, jano, catalpa- willow 
(Magill 1974)  
 
Description  
General :  A member of the Bignoniaceae  (trumpet vine) 
family,  desert willow is a spreading deciduous shrub or 
small tree that can surpass 16 feet in height  on the Great 
Plains  (Weedo n 1986 ) to  40 feet in the desert southwest  
( TWC Staff  2010 ), and 15 to 25 feet wide ( NMSUASC 
and NRCS 2001) .  Though not a willow, its linear leaves 
bring willow to mind, thus the name.  A native of the 
Southwest, the species can be found growing in southwest 
Kansas and western Oklahoma.  Its flowers occur in 
showy clusters at the tips of the branches on new growth 
from late spring to fall.  The trumpet -shaped, sweetly 
fragrant flowers, ranging from light pink to light violet are 
reminiscent of catalp a blossoms.  In fact this small tree is 
related to catalpa trees and trumpet vine .  The  many , 
large, long lasting, attractive flowers develop into slender 
fruits  (capsule s) 6  to 10 inches long  that persist on the 
plant into the following spring and  produc e seeds  with 
winged hairs.        
 
Distribution :  Native  from the eastern half of the Mohave 
Desert in California, south into upper  Baja California, east 
to southern Nevada, Arizona,  south to north central 
Mexico  to Nuevo Leon and Zacatecas , southern New 
Mex ico, and west Texas.  Sometimes escaped or  naturalized
 from  introduced  populations  in southwest 
Kansas and the western half of Oklahoma, subspecies 
linearis .  ( BONAP 2009; USDA, NRCS 2014; Weedon 
1993;  TWC Staff 2010).   For current distribution, please 
con sult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Common in dry washes and along riverbanks 
below 5,000 feet elevation ( Shaw 2011), in flood plains 
and ravines (Weedon 1993) in the desert southwestern US 
and northern Mexico ( Shaw 2011).   “These sites generally 
have underground water available year -round.  Plants can 
withstand seasonal flooding quite well, and often occupy 
the middle of drainage channels, sometimes covering 
broad expanses of wash areas  (Uchytil 1990).” 
 
Adaptat ion 
Desert willow likes arid climates; extremely drought  and 
heat  tolerant, performs best on well -drained sites in areas 
with less than 30″ of precipitation, and thrives best in full 
sun.   Grows on most soils ; including dry clay , loam , and 
sand;  tolerant o f acidic  and alkaline soil conditions 
(Gilman and Watson 1993).   With  “rapid growth, drought 
tolerance, and ease of maintenance,  desert willow  is  a 
sought -after plant within its range ( TWC Staff 2010 ).”  
USDA Hardiness Zones 7B  through  11 (Gilman and 
Watson 1993) , but has been grown to Zone 6 at the 
Manhattan Plant Materials  Center in Kansas ,  where 
w inter kill on young growth was overcome by new annual 
growth  (USDA, NRCS 2012).   Desert willow has been 
found to be a lot cold hardier than originally rate d, once 
established  it can withstand subzero winter  temperatures 
to Zones 5 and 6 (Salman 2014).  
 
Fire Effects:  Desert willow occurs primarily in washes 
whic h rarely burn.  It is able to produce numerous  sprouts 
from the crown following top -kill due to fire (Uchytil 
1990).  
 
Uses  
Conservation:   Desert willow may be planted in arid 
regions for e rosion control  purposes  such as buffer strips, 
windbreaks , reclamation  projects,  and for wildlife cover .   
Ornamental :  Planted as an ornamental, there are 
numerous  cultivars to choose from for courtyards, patios 
and west facing exposures .   
Wildlife :  Desert  willow is utilized by ladder -backed 
woodpecker for nesting (Jongsomjit and Arata 2008) and 
a documented occasional ash -throated flycatcher nester in 
the split tr unk of a desert willow (San Diego County 
2014).   Mourning doves use the shrubs for nesting  where 
better nest choices are unavailable in southwest Kansas  
(T. Flowers, pers. comm.) .  Hummingbirds and native 
bees, especially bumblebees,  visit the flowers for their 
nectar  and a variety of birds eats the seeds of desert 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide

willow flowers.  Desert willow is considered to be 
unpalatable to livestock and low in palatability to wildlife.  
Mule deer eat small quantities of the leaves and fruit.  
Livestock generally do not browse the plant unless other 
forage is scarce.  Tender sprouts following fire may be 
highly palatable to deer, bighorn sheep, and cottontail 
rabbits  (Uchytil 1990).     
 
Ethnobotany  
Medicine :  The flowers, leaves, and bark of d esert willow 
were used in  hot poultices and to make a soothing tea for 
coughs.  A tea concocted from the flowers “produces a 
natural anti -oxidant which promotes cardiovascular health 
and regulates glucose metabolism.”  It was also used in 
preparations to guard against yeast infecti ons, athlete’s 
foot and as a first aid for scrapes and scratches ( Rymer 
2004 ). 
Food:   the flower  blossoms and seed pods were used for 
food  (Moerman 1998).  
Fiber :  The b ark was used to make  fabrics for shirts and 
breechclouts,  and fashioned into cordage to make nets .  
Branches were stripped of their bark and used as rod 
foundations for coil  basketry .   T he wood was used in 
building house frames  and granaries  (Moerman 1998) , 
fence posts  (Gilman and Watson 1993) , and hunting 
bows.   Long limbs were used as a too l to “reach fruits and 
nuts too high to grasp by hand.”  
Other :  Desert dwellers camped under desert willow 
which provided some  shade  and shelter  (Moerman 1998) .  
 
Status  
Wetland Indicator : Arid West, Atlantic and Gulf Coastal 
Plain, and Great Plains – FACU; Western Mountains, 
Valleys, and Coast – FAC
 
Weedy or Invasive:   T his  plant may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Planting Guidelines 
Plant desert willow in sunny location s on  well -drained 
soil s, water the plants until established.  Applying 
fertilizer is beneficial during the establishment period.  
Apply sparingly as too much fertilizer promotes unruly 
growth (Daily 2007) weakening new growth that cannot 
withstand strong winds (Telsch- Williams 2010).  Once 
established, supplemental water is not required .  
 
Management  
An occasional watering during the summer months will 
contribute to a flush of growth and profuse flowering.  
Avoid over watering.  It is best to not add supplemental  water to the plants in the fall or winter when the plants are 
leafless.
  Tip dieback is a  typical  phenomenon; the dead 
twigs can be easily pruned out  in ornamental plantings  
once the plants have leafed out in the spring .  Irregular 
growth requires attention early on to promote desired 
trunk development.  Desert willow  may be pruned to form 
a t ree or shrub as desired.  Since blooms occur on new 
wood, the more it is pruned, the more it flowers  
(NMSUASC and NRCS 2001; TAMU .edu 2013; USDA, 
NRCS 1982b).   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Virtually disease and insect free.  Desert willow  “seeds 
itself into the landscape (Gilman and Watson 1993) ” and 
therefore  not recommended for planting in lawns.  
Environmental Concerns  
None known  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and co ntrol methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Collect mature pods in early fall to early spring by hand -
picking to obtain fully mature seed units.  Spread out the 
pods for drying, beat them lightly, and shake  seeds free of 
the pods.  One hundred pounds of pods yield 30 to 50 
pounds of clean seed.  The number of seeds per pound 
ranges from 40,000 to 128,000 with an average of 86,000 
seed per pound.  Store seed in a cool, dry place until 
planting , plant seed ¼ in ches deep after the soil warms up 
in the spring (Magill 1974).   Desert willow may be 
propagated from seed, hardwood cuttings (dormant) or 
softwood cuttings (mid- summer).  Seed produced plants 
may be variable in flower color and other traits.  Cuttings 
shou ld be made if plants identical to the parent plant are 
desired.   
 
No seed treatment is required, seeds planted ¼ inch deep  
in a well aerated soilless media  sprout in 1 to 3 weeks 
under warm, moist conditions.  Allow the soil to dry out 
slightly between wat ering to prevent damping off.

Figure 2.   The unique s eeds of desert willow winged with a fringe of 
hair, borne in slender pods.    
Photo by Steve Hurst, hosted by the USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
 
Asexually propagated plants ensure duplication of desired 
plant traits.  This may be carried out by taking hardwood 
cuttings, softwood cuttings, or by air layering.  Hardwood 
cuttings may be taken when the plants are dormant , late 
winter  – early spring .  Take ¼ inch stem cutt ings 6 to 12 
inches long, “brown, hardened bark will root best”, with 
leaf bud s visible the entire length.  No rooting hormone is 
required, “will root quickly.”  Stick the cuttings upright in 
the soil or  well-aerated  growing medium  with only the top 
inch o r two exposed;  keep slightly moist until  new leafy 
growth emerges.   Softwood or semi -hardwood cuttings 
are taken in the spring or early summer from the current 
year’s growth.  Select flexible leafy stems with no buds or 
flowers;  treat the bottom of the cut tings with indole-3 -
butyric acid  (concentration <5,000 ppm) .  Place in a 
sterile medium, under mist with light shade.   Air layering 
has a “higher potential for failure”, this method may be 
used in summer to propagate desert willow.  Select ¼ inch 
stems wit h leafy tips but without flowers or flower buds.  
“Strip off a 1 -inch- wide layer of bark from around the 
stem roughly 6 to 8 inches from the tip  (Leon 2014).”  
Consult a plant propagation manual if unfamiliar with air 
layering techniques.    
Cultivars,  Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
In 1978, the New Mexico State University Los Lunas 
Agricultural Science Center  (NMSU ASC) , New Mexico 
Department of Transportation, and the USDA NRCS’s 
Los Lunas Plant Materials Center (PMC)  released 
‘B arranco’ for conservation use.  Barranco  is  useful for 
windbreaks, screening, ornamental plantings, and for 
beautification plantings in highway rest areas, along 
roadsides, and in road medians  (USDA, NRCS 1982a ).  
‘Hope’  produces white flowers with a yello w throat.  It 
was  released  in 1980, by the  NMSUASC and the Los 
Lunas PMC for its low water requirement over 
commercially available trees and shrubs  (USDA, NRCS 
1982b) . ‘Regal’  was released in 1988 by the NMPMC , 
NMSU ASC , and the New Mexic o Agricultural 
Expe riment Station for its dark purple flower 
characteristic and dark green leaves .  In all, t here are at  least twenty known cultivars of desert willow (Creech 
2014) offering a range of flower colors
, leaf sizes, and 
number  of seed pods ( TWC Staff 2010)  have  been 
released by the public and private sector.  Two seedless 
cultivars, ‘Timeless Beauty ’® P.P. and  ‘Art’s Seedless’
™  
are summer long bloomers  (Salman 2014) .  Cultivars 
should be selected based on the local climate, resistance 
to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local 
land grant university, local extension or local USDA 
NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars 
for use in your  area.  
 
Literature  Cited 
BONAP. 2009.  Chilopsis linearis . Desert willow 
distribution map.  In Floristic Synthesis of North 
America  [Online]. Available at 
https://www.google.com/search?q=desert+willow+di
stribution+map&tbm=isch&imgil=  etc.  ( accessed 25 
July 2014) . Biota of Nor th America Program, Chapel 
Hill, NC.  
Creech, D. 2014. Chilopsis  linearis  –  desert willow  
[Online] . Available at 
http://sfagardens.sfasu.edu/UserFiles/FIle/PLANTS/
Chilopsis%20linearis(2).pdf  ( accessed 9 July 2014 ). 
Stephen F. Austin State  Univ., Nacogdoches, TX.  
Daily, R. 2007. Growing Desert Willow  [Online] . 
Available at https://suite.io/robert- dailey/h7x255 
( accessed 19 August 2014) . 
Gilman, E. F. and D. G. Watson.  1993. Chilopsis linearis , 
Desert -Willow  [Online] . Available at 
http://hort.ifas.u fl.edu/database/documents/pdf/tree_f
act_sheets/chilina.pdf  (accessed 9 July 2014). USDA 
FS Fact Sheet ST -159. 3p.  Florida Coop. Ext. Svc, 
Gainsville.  
Jongsomjit, D. and L. Arata. 2008. Ladder -backed 
Woodpecker ( Picoides scalaris ). In The Draft Desert 
Bird  Conservation Plan: a strategy for reversing the 
decline of desert -associated birds in California  
[Online] . Available at 
http://www.prbo.org/calpif/htmldocs/desert.html 
( accessed 25 July 2014) . California Partners in Flight.  
Leon, A. 2014. How to Propagate Chilopsis Linearis  
[Online] . Available at 
http://homeguides.sfgate.com/propagate -chilopsis -
linearis -96472.html  (accessed 9July 2014 ). Home 
Guides.  Demand Media.  Hearst Communications, 
Inc.  
Magill, A. W. 1974. CHILOPSIS LINEARIS  (Cav.) 
Sweet, Desertwillow .  In Schopmeyer, C. S. Seeds of 
Woody Plants of the United States. US Forest 
Service, Ag. Handbook No. 450. USDA. 
Washington, D. C.  
Moerman, D. E. 1998. Native American ethnobotany.   Timber Press. Portland · London.   
NMSUASC and NRCS. 2001. Desert Willow .  New 
Mexico State University Agricultural Center and Los 
Lunas Plant Materials Center, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Los Lunas.

Rymer, C. 2004. Desert Willow Indigenous Imposter 
[Online] . Available at  
http://ag.arizona.edu/maricopa/garden/html /pubs/010
4/ willow.html  (accessed 9 July 2014 ). Master 
Gardner Journal. The University of Arizona, College 
of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cooperative 
Extension in Maricopa County . 
Salman, D. 2014. The b eauty of waterwise plants.  Am. 
Nurseryman.  August 2014. p.  5 . 
San Diego County 2014. Ash- throated Flycatcher 
M yiarchus
 cinerascens [Online] . Available at  
http://sdplantatlas.org/ge_files/pdf/Ash -
throated%20Flycatcher.pdf  ( accessed 25 July 2014) . 
San Diego County Plant Atlas . 
Shaw, E. A. 2011. Desert Willow can be easily tamed  
[Online] . Available at 
http://www.ocregister.com/articles/willow -324076-
desert -tree.html  ( accessed  9 July 2014) . Orange 
County Register, Santa Ana, CA.  
TAMU .edu 2013. Desert Willow, Flowering Willow, 
Willowleaf  Catalpa, Desert Catalpa, Flor de Mimbre, 
Mimbre, Bow Willow , Chilopsis linearis  [Online] . 
Available at http://aggie -
horticulture.tamu.edu/ornamentals/natives/chilopsisli
nearis.htm  ( access ed 25 March 2013; verified 19 
August 2014) . Texas A&M Univ. , College Sta.  
Telsch -Williams, M. 2010. How to Care for a Desert 
Willow Tree  [Online] . Available at 
http://www.gardenguides.com/77481- care-desert -
willow -tree.html  ( accessed  19 August 2014) . Garden 
Guides, Demand Media, Santa Monica, CA.  
Uchytil, R. J. 1990. Chilopsis linearis. In: Fire Effects  Information System  [Online] . Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/shrub/chilin
/all.html  (accessed 7 August 2014). USDA, FS 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory.   
USDA, NRCS. 1982a . ‘Barranco’ desert willow. 
Conservation Release  Brochure. USDA, NRCS . Los 
Lunas Plant Materials Center. Los Lunas, NM . 2p. 
USDA, NRCS. 1982b . ‘Hope’ desert willow. 
Conservation Release Brochure. USDA, NRCS. Los 
Lunas Plant Materials Center. Los Lunas, NM . 2p.  
USDA, NRCS. 2012. Evaluation of miscellaneous trees  and shrubs. p . 54.  In 2012 Annual Technical Report. 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center. Manhattan, 
Kansas.   
USDA, NRCS. 2014. The PLANTS Database 
(http://plants.usda.gov,  21 July 2014) . National Plant 
D ata Team, Greensboro, NC 27401- 4901 USA. 
Weedon, R. R. 1986.  Bignoniaceae. p. 803 -805. In T. M. 
Barkley (ed.) Flora of the Great Plains. Great Plains 
Flora Association, Univ. Press of Kansas. Lawrence.  TWC Staff. 2010
.  Chilopsis  linearis  [Online] . Available 
at
 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant
=CHLI2  ( accessed 9 July 2014 ). Lady Bird Johnson 
Wildflower  C enter , Univ. of Texas,  Austin  
 
Citation  
Row, J. M. 2014. Plant Guide for desert willow  ( Chilopsis 
linearis ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Manhattan,  Kansas 66502  
Published :  August 2014    
 
Edited:  DRD; RLW ; JLD
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/  or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER