Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN REDBUD 
Cercis orbiculata Greene 
Plant Symbol = CEOR9  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Redbud, California redbud;  also recognized as Cercis 
occidentalis  Torr. ex Gray in The Jepson Manual 
(Hickman 1993) and Cercis occidentalis  var. 
orbiculata  (Greene) Tidestro m in other floras. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Western redbud is highly valued by 
Native American basket weavers in California for 
their young, wine-red branches, harvested in the fall 
and used in the warp, weft, and designs of baskets.  If 
the branches are harvested in the spring when the 
bark slips, the white inner sapwood may also be used 
as the weft or lacing in baskets. 
Brother Alfred Brousseau  ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
Other : Uses include the following: landscaping, 
furniture, browsing, and stream stabilization. Western 
redbud is a good soil stabilizer along streams, and 
can withstand periodic flooding.  The flowers provide 
nectar to bees and the  young shoots, leaves, and 
seedpods are browsed by goats, and too a limited 
extent by deer, sheep, and cattle.  The browse rating 
though for sheep and cattle is poor.  Horticulturists 
have planted redbud in informal and formal gardens 
and landscapes since 1886  and it has been called one 
of California's most attractive flowering shrubs in 
gardeners' manuals and horticultural guides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Western or 
California redbud is a leguminous shrub that grows 
from 7 to 20 feet tall with a dense rounded crown that 
almost reaches the grou nd.  Western redbud is 
recognized as  Cercis occidentalis  in older floras.  The 
leaves are simple, thick,  round or reniform, and 
cordate at the base, and have from seven to nine 
prominent veins.  They ar e winter deciduous; their 
autumn display of yellow turning to red and brown 
rivaling that of some eastern hardwoods.  The 
striking pea-shaped flowers appear before the leaves, 
in small fascicles along the branches.  Each flower 
has five petals that range in color from magenta pink 
to reddish purple.  Pollination is by bumblebees 
( Bombus  sp.) and orchard mason bees  (Osmia 
lignaria) .  Although the pink sprays can be seen from 
February through April, any one shrub will remain in 
flower only about two weeks.  In autumn the 
branches often bear many clusters of pointed, flat, 
vary thin pods, the upper suture with a conspicuous 
winged margin.  In ripening, the pods are first purple 
and then russet-brown, each  containing an average of

seven hard, bean-like seeds.  The mature pods persist 
into the next winter.  Known from the southwest U.S. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Native to California, Arizona, and Utah, redbud 
is found in at least five plant communities including 
oak woodland, chaparral, mixed conifer forest, 
riparian woodland, and closed cone forest. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It grows at elevations of 4,000 ft. or less, 
in canyons and on rather st eep slopes, in gravely, and 
rocky soils along streams, where it is never flooded.  
It also grows in the bottom of ephemeral streambeds 
in little pockets, benches, or crannies of boulder 
outcroppings.  The plant is drought tolerant, sun-
loving, and grows in a wide variety of soils, but it is 
usually found in rather harsh environments with 
course, nutrient-poor soils th at are well-drained.  It 
grows mostly singly, but sometimes, in sheltered 
situations, in shrubby clumps.  
 
If possible, gather the seed from local sources, to 
maintain genetic diversity of redbud.  The seedpods 
can be collected in the fall of the year from 
September to November from redbud branches.  
Redbud seeds are adapted for prolonged periods of 
dryness and cold and they require special 
pretreatment to germinate, owing to an impervious 
seed coat plus a dormant embryo. One method is to 
place the seeds into a container and pour boiling 
water over them and let the seeds soak overnight. 
They can then be covered with damp peat moss and 
refrigerated for two months or they can be planted 
right away.  The germination of redbud seed in the 
wild is favored by fire,  which cracks the seed coat 
and generates the heat needed to stimulate 
germination. 
 
Plant the treated seed in the fall in flats, spacing the 
seeds approximately one to two inches apart.  Use a 
slow-release fertilizer in the planting mix.  Cover 
with about a quarter-inch of soil (approximately 3 to 
4 times the width of the seed).  To reduce the 
possibility of damping off, keep the flats outdoors in 
a protected area with partial shade and little wind.  
Water the flats through the winter and the let the 
plants grow one full year before planting them out.  
The seedlings will be about three inches to one foot 
tall by the following fall.   Plant the seedlings in a 
sunny location with good drainage.  If gophers are a 
problem, plant redbud seedlings in cages.  Watering 
is not necessary until the  following summer, in a 
normal rainfall year.  Give the young plants summer  water for the first three years in the ground.  This 
amounts to once every two weeks in a hot climate 
and less in a coastal climate. Do not over water, as 
redbud will not tolerate summer water in the root 
crown area (at the soil leve
l) and will suffer crown 
rot ( Phytophthora  sp.) if over-watered.  When leaves 
first emerge in the spring, use liquid fertilizer to 
boost growth.   
 
Management 
Pruning : Periodic pruning of redbud, after it has 
reached the minimum age of 5 years, can be 
accomplished to remove dead or dying branches that 
might harbor diseases or insects.  Pruning should take 
place in the fall, winter, or early spring, after leaf 
drop and during the dormant period.  Contemporary 
Native American weavers  practice two types of 
pruning.  One technique is coppicing where the 
whole plant is cut to within several inches of the 
ground. Redbud vigorously resprouts from the 
coppice stool, sending up young straight shoots with 
a beautiful red pigment.  This can bring added color 
to gardens and also these sh oots are highly valued for 
basket weaving.  Coppicing, however, should only be 
done on mature shrubs--at least a decade old.  
Flowering will be lost, until the young sprouts are 
two to three years old and shed the red pigment and 
form true bark.  The other technique is selective 
pruning within the canopy to direct the growth of the 
plant.  This pruning, leaves some older flowering 
branches, important for bees and butterflies.   
 
Burning : Before Euro-American settlement of 
California, Native American s conducted purposeful 
burning of hillsides in the fall of the year, after 
redbud has shed its leaves,  to encourage the growth 
of young, straight shoots used extensively in 
basketry.  Redbud also resprouts vigorously after 
fires.   
 
A pathogen that infects redbud leaves is  Alternaria 
sp. while  Botrytis sp. is a gray mold that causes 
foliage or flower blight.  Two fungi that cause root 
rot in redbud include  Fusarium solani 
and 
Verticillium dahliae.  A fungus that infects old 
seedpods is  Didymella leguminis-cytisis .  Most of 
these diseases will debilitate, but not kill redbud.  
Fire is an effective tool to use to eliminate the above-
ground pathogens inhabiting redbud. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CEOR9 is readily available through most nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.

Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. 1991.  California Indian 
horticulture: management and use of redbud by the 
Southern Sierra Miwok .  Journal of Ethnobiology 
11(1):145-157. 
 
Hickman, J.C. ed. 1993.   The Jepson manual.  Higher 
plants of California .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California.  1400 p. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs.  University of California Press: 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Sampson, A.W. & B.S. Jesperson. 1963.  California 
range brushlands and browse plants.   University of 
California, Div. of Agricultural Sciences.  
Agricultural Experiment Station, Extension Service.  
Manual 33. 162 pp. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.  Growing California native 
plants.   University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 991206. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.