Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
HAZELNUT  
Corylus americana  Walt. 
Plant Symbol = COAM3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate common name  
American filbert 
 
Uses 
Hazelnuts and filberts are produced by species of  
Corylus .  Commercial filberts ( C. colurna L. and C. 
maxima  Mill.) are cultivated in various parts of the 
world, particularly Turkey,  Italy, Spain, China, and 
the US.  Nuts of the two native American species ( C. 
americana  and C. cornuta) are smaller but similar to 
the cultivated ones in flavor, and  C. cornuta also is 
commercially cultivated for nut production.  The nuts 
of both species are sweet and may be eaten raw or 
ground into flour for cake- like bread.  The nuts were 
used by American Indian s to flavor soups.   
 
The nuts of American hazel nut, which have a higher 
nutritional value than acorns and beechnuts, also are 
eaten by squirrels, foxes, deer, northern bobwhite, 
ruffed grouse, turkey, woodpeckers, pheasants, and 
deer.  The leaves, twigs, and catkins are browsed by 
rabbits, deer, and moose.  The male catkins are a 
winter food for turkey and ruffed grouse.  The dense, 
low growth habit provides cover and nesting sites for 
many wildlife species. 
 
Extractives of American haze lnut and their physically 
modified derivatives, primarily glycerides of the fatty  acids, are used for emollients.  Other derivatives, 
such as tinctures, concretes, absolutes, essential oils,  
oleoresins, terpenes, terpene-free fractions, distillates, 
and residues are used for botanicals.     
 
American hazelnut has long been valued as an 
ornamental and for planting in naturalized settings.  It 
grows in sun or partial shade and is useful for borders 
because of its colonial tendency.  The leaves turn 
orange to red or purple in the fall.  It is available from 
various commercial growers – there apparently are no 
cultivars apart from the wild type.  Cultivars of the 
European filbert (C. avellana
 L.) tend to be small 
trees and also are useful in landscaping.   
 ©  William S. Justice 
Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution 
@ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Birch family (Betulaceae).  Native shrubs 
growing 1-3(-4) meters tall, strongly rhizomatous and 
forming colonial thickets; main stems (or trunk) 
straight, with spreading, ascending branches, the 
twigs slender, zigzag, light brown, with numerous 
stiff, red-glandular hairs.  Leaves are deciduous, 
alternate, broadly oval  with a heart-shaped or 
rounded base, 8-12(-15) cm long and 12 cm wide, 
acuminate, doubly serrate, hairy beneath, the petiole 
with stiff, glandular hairs.  Male (staminate) and 
female (pistillate) flowers are separate, but both types 
present on each plant (the species monoecious); male 
flowers numerous in long, pendulous stalks (catkins) 
8-10 cm long, in clusters of two or three near branch 
tips, appearing in the fall, but opening the following 
spring. Female flowers are several in a scaly bud, tiny 
and inconspicuous with only bright red stigma and 
styles protruding from the gray-brown buds, almost 
completely enclosed by bracts, near the end of the 
twigs.  Fruit is a light br own, acorn-like nut 1-2 cm 
long, wider than long, enclosed in two, leafy, 
coarsely toothed (husk-like) bracts.  The common 
name reflects its being native to North America and 
“hazel” is from the Old Eng lish name for filbert.   
 
Variation within the species : several variants have 
been described within the species:  Corylus 
americana  var. indehiscens  Palmer & Steyermark 
(fruit bracts united along one side) from southwestern 
Missouri;  Corylus americana  forma missouriensis

(A. DC.) Fern. (petioles essentially glandless) from 
southeastern Kansas.  These have not been generally 
recognized, and the species is currently treated with 
no formal variants.   
 
Distinguished from beaked hazelnut ( Corylus 
cornuta) by absence of a horned  beak on the fruit.   
 
Distribution:  Widespread in eastern North America, 
Maine west to Saskatchewan and North Dakota, 
south to eastern Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Georgia, 
not found along the Gulf coast region.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
American hazelnut occurs  in moist to dry woods and 
thickets, forest margins, roadsides, and fencerows 
and other disturbed areas.  It grows best on rich, 
moist, well-drained soils but often may be found 
close to streamsides and al so grows on prairies.  
Open habitats are common, but it also can grow 
successfully in deep shade and is found at 0-750 at 
meters in elevation.  This species flowers in March–
May before the emergence of  leaves and fruits in 
July–September.    
 
Establishment 
Plants of American hazelnut may begin producing 
seed after the first year an d produce good seed crops 
every 2-3 years.  The seeds have a period of 
dormancy, apparently overco me by cold treatment.  
 
Management 
American hazelnut is removed by growers of 
commercial, closely managed forests, primarily 
because of its aggressive colonial habit and 
corresponding competition with timber trees.  It is 
easily top-killed by spring and summer fires.  The 
underground roots and rhizomes can survive low- to 
moderate-severity fires when the humus is moist, but 
they are relatively shallow  and vulnerable to repeated 
summer fires when the humus is dry and 
combustible. 
 
American hazelnut is not affected by any serious 
pests.  Several canker-forming fungi may result in 
girdling or breakage of stems.  Mildew may defoliate 
plants and fungi may destroy nuts.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Sun Harvest Germplasm American hazelnut was 
released from the Elsberry  Plant Materials Center in 
2007. Sun Harvest Germplasm is a composite of six 
accessions that were collected in Illinois and  Missouri. The 6 accessions that comprise Sun 
Harvest Germplasm were selected from a total of 14 
accessions for greater canopy
 symmetry, plant height, 
nut production and insect/disease resistance. Sun 
Harvest Germplasm provides excellent wildlife food 
and habit. Also, it may be useful as a medium sized 
tree component in windbreaks.    
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brunner, F. & D.E. Fairbrothers 1979.   Serological 
investigation of the Corylaceae .  Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club 106:97-103.  
 
Buckman, R.E. 1964.   Effects of prescribed burning 
on hazel in Minnesota.   Ecology 45:626-629.   
 
Coladonato, M. 1993.   Corylus americana.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Drumke, J.S. 1965.   A systematic survey of Corylus in 
North America.   Diss. Abstr. 25:4925-4926.  
 
Furlow, J.J. 1990.   The genera of Betulaceae in the 
southeastern United States.   J. Arnold Arbor. 71:1-
67.    
 
Furlow, J.J. 1993.  Corylus .  Pp. 535-538, IN: Flora 
of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 3 .  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Hardin, J.W. 1952.   The Juglandaceae and 
Corylaceae of Tennessee.   Castanea 17:78-89.   
 
Kasapligil, B. 1964.   A contribution to the 
histotaxonomy of Corylus (Betulaceae).   Adansonia 
4:43-90.  
 
Kasapligil, B. 1972.   A bibliography on Corylus 
(Betulaceae) with annotations.   Northern Nut 
Growers Ann. Rept. 63:107-162.

Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
James F. Henson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 10jun03 ahv;  05jun06 jsp; 11apr07 rlc; 
29jun07 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.