Plant Guide     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEBRASKA SEDGE  
Carex nebrascensis Dewey 
Plant symbol = CANE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho 
 Uses 
Wildlife and Livestock: Nebraska sedge is a valuable 
forage species used by big game and livestock.  The 
annual production and nutrient levels are quite high.  
It has half the protein level of alfalfa.  It provides 
cover for nesting waterfowl, seeds for small 
mammals and birds, and muskrats and geese graze 
the shoots.  It can be used as a key species to 
determine grazing pressure.  It has moderate to good 
palatability early in the season, but becomes tough as 
the temperatures grow colder.   
 
Conservation Uses : This species has utility for 
erosion control, constructed wetland system 
applications, wildlife food and cover, wetland 
creation and restoration,  and for increasing plant  diversity in wetland and riparian communities.  Its 
dense root mass (214 cm of roots/cm3 of soil) makes 
this species resistant to soil compaction and erosion.  
It also makes it an excellent choice for soil 
stabilization in wetland and riparian sites.  Nebraska 
sedge is used extensively in bioengineering 
techniques, because of its root system.  The rhizomes 
also form a matrix for ma
ny beneficial bacteria 
making this plant an excellent choice for wastewater 
treatment. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Nebraska 
sedge is a native, perennial, heavily rhizomatous 
wetland plant that is found in low valleys to mid-
elevations.  It will form dense stands, but more often, 
it is the dominant member of the wetland community.  
It grows in wet to moist meadows, marshes, swamps, 
ditches, seeps, stockwater  ponds, low to moderate 
gradient streams, riparian wetlands, and lake shores.  
It reproduces by rhizomes and seed.  However, 
seedling establishment is rare probably, because it 
needs freshly deposited, fertile, moist soil.  Shoots 
from rhizomes are produced throughout the growing 
season and into late fall. 
 
It forms a dense deep root system with root biomass 
to 3000g/m2 in the top 20 cm of the soil.  The stems 
are upright and triangular.  The plants growing in 
saturated soils will grow to about 90 cm.  The leaves 
are elongated, alternate, longer or shorter than the 
stem, up to 12 mm wide, and often with a bluish 
tinge.  The flowers are borne in spikes.  Male and 
female spikes are usually separate and on the same 
plant (monoecious).  One or two male spikes are 
found above the female spikes.  They are narrowly 
cylindrical and up to 5 cm long.  Female spikes 
number from 2-5.  They are 1-5 cm long and the 
lowest spike is subtended by a leafy bract.  Plants 
flower in June to August.   
 
The fruits are brown lentic ular achenes, up to 2 mm 
long.  Seed ripens in August to September.  They are 
surrounded by a "leathery capsule" called a 
perigynium.  Perigynia are elliptic to ovate, 3 to 4 
mm long, and yellowish brown to light brown in 
color.  The seed (if present) is found in the base of 
the perigynial cavity.   There are 2.7 million 
From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov

perigynia/kg.  The perigynia is not held tightly in the 
seed head and high winds and frost will cause the 
perigynia to drop off. 
 
Distribution: Nebraska sedge is common throughout 
the western Midwest and western United States.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
It tolerates alkaline conditions very well.  It is a 
wetland obligate plant.  Nebraska sedge grows in 
areas that are saturated.  It can handle standing water 
for long periods as long as there are periods where 
the soils dry.  The sites where it is found rarely have 
the water table drop more than 1 m below the root 
zone late in the growing season.  It can tolerate total 
inundation for about 3 months. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Collection and cleaning : Seeds may be collected by 
hand striping the seed from the plant or clipping it 
using a pair of hand shears.  A power seed harvester 
may also be used.  The perigynia is often mistaken 
for the seed.  In many cases, especially if there is a 
frost during flowering, the  seed will not fill, but the 
perigynia will still form.  It is recommended the 
collector open several perigynia to see if it actually 
contains a seed. 
 
If debris or other seed mixed in the collection, 
cleaning may be desirable.  The hammer mill is used 
to break up the large debris and knock the seed loose 
from the stem.  It may not always be needed.  
Cleaning can be accomplished using a seed cleaner 
with a No. 8 top screen and a No. 20 bottom screen.  
Screens should be sized so desired seed will fall 
through and debris and weed seed are removed.  Air 
velocity should be adjusted so chaff and empty 
perigynia is blown away.  Air flow and screen size 
may require adjustment to optimize cleaning process 
for given situation.  
 
Once the "seed" is cleaned, the perigynia must be 
removed.  It can be removed with a seed scarifier or a 
sandpaper box.  The seed is then re-cleaned using the 
top and bottom screens to separate the seed from the 
empty perigynia. 
 
Special procedures : The germination rate may be 
enhanced by removing the perigynia and by 
stratifying the seed in a mixture of water and 
sphagnum moss at 2° C for 30 days. 
 
Greenhouse  Seeds need light, moisture, and heat for 
germination. Place seeds on  surface of soil and press  in lightly to assure good soil contact. Do not cover 
seed. Soil should be kept muddy. Greenhouse should 
be kept hot (32°C to 38°C). Germination should 
begin with in about one week. Maintain moisture 
until plants are to be transplanted. 
 
Wild transplants
: Wild plants can be collected and 
transplanted directly into the desired project site.  As 
long as no more than 4 dm squared and 13 to 15 cm 
deep is removed from any 1 m2 area, the hole will fill 
in within one growing season.  Care should be taken 
not to collect plants from weedy areas as these weeds 
can be relocated to the transplant site and the hole left 
at the collection site may fill with undesirable 
species. 
 
Establishment 
Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild 
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand 
of this species.  Plug spacing of 30 to 45 cm will fill 
in within one growing season.  The soil should be 
kept saturated with no more than 2.5 to 5.1 cm of 
standing water until the plants are well established 
and the aerenchymous material (the above ground 
biomass) is about 0.3 m tall.  Fluctuating the water 
level during the establishment period may speed 
establishment and spread.  Water levels can be 
managed to enhance rhizome spread and to control 
weeds. 
 
Management  
The soil should be kept saturated.  The water table 
should rarely drop below the root zone.  This species 
can tolerate periods of drought and total inundation.  
Water levels can be managed to control terrestrial 
weeds. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few insect or disease problems have been 
encountered in the greenhouse.  Aphids will feed on 
the stems, but little or no damage has been noted and 
the vigor of the plant has not been affected. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
USDA NRCS. Wetlant plant fact sheet – creeping 
spikerush (Eleocharis palustris) . Interagency

Riparian/Wetland Project, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho. 
 Edited: 28sep05 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.