Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COASTAL SWEET PEPPERBUSH 
Clethra alnifolia  L. 
Plant Symbol = CLAL3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Clethra, Clethra alnifolia  var. tomentosa, Clethra 
angustifolia, Clethra bracteata, Clethra incana, 
Clethra michauxii, Clethra paniculata, Clethra 
pubescens, Clethra pumila, Clethra scabra, Clethra 
tomentosa, poorman’s soap, summer sweet, sweet 
pepper bush, white alder.  
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Coastal sweet pepperbush spreads 
by sending up new shoots, forming a thicket of low 
bushes.  Growth from r oot suckering will provide 
moderate erosion control  along streams and ponds. 
 
Garden and landscape: The foliage and flowers of 
coastal sweet pepperbush make it an attractive garden 
shrub.  It can be used in a mixed shrub hedge or 
border and pruned to maintain a small size.  The lush 
green leaves turn to golden yellow in autumn.  The 
fragrant flowers last up to 6 weeks or more during the 
middle of summer while other flowering shrubs are 
not blooming due to the heat. 
 
Utility right of ways:  Coastal sweet pepperbush is 
sometimes used to halt succes sion of tall trees along 
pathways.  It has been planted following herbicide  
 
 
application along electrical  transmission, telephone, 
railroad, roadside, and pipeline right of ways.  Its low  
stature does not interfere with the general operations 
around these utility areas. 
 
Wildlife:  The fragrant white flowers and nectar of 
coastal sweet pepperbush attract hummingbirds and 
butterflies.  Deer eat it only when other forage 
vegetation is limited.  Birds eat the fruit and aid in 
seed dispersal. 
 Ducey, V. 2003.  USF Herbarium Slide Collection. 
 
Legal Status 
Coastal sweet pepperbush  is listed as a special 
concern species in Maine and as threatened in 
Tennessee.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : White Alder Family (Clethraceae).  Coastal 
sweet pepperbush is a la rge deciduous shrub that 
grows to 2.5 m tall.  The bark is smooth, reddish-
orange or gray in color, and 2 to 3 mm in diameter.  
Twigs are reddish-orange covered with dense white 
hairs.  Leaves are alternate, simple, 5 to 8 cm long, 
and toothed toward their tips.  They are medium to 
dark green, turn golden yellow in the fall and have 
appressed white hairs along the midvein.  Flowers are 
up to 1 mm long and 0.8 mm wide, composed of 5 
white fused petals.  Seventeen to one hundred 
fragrant flowers form the bottlebrush-like 
inflorescences that are about 10 cm long and 2 cm 
wide.  The fruiting stalk has many miniature oval 3-
seeded capsules that are winter-persistent and are 
good identification features.  Coastal sweet 
pepperbush produces leaves in late spring, flowers in 
July and August, and sets fruit in September and 
October.  The yellow fall foliage persists for two to 
four weeks.  
 
Distribution : This is the only species in the genus 
Clethra  that is native to North America.  It occurs 
from southern Maine and New Hampshire, south to 
eastern Texas and Florida.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Coastal sweet pepperbush is found in wet 
woods, thickets, marshes, swales and bogs, along

lake and stream edges, and near rocks in water.  It is 
typically not a dominant species in plant 
communities.  Common overstory associates include 
cypress, Atlantic white cedar, coastal pine species, 
red maple, magnolias, and beech. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for coastal sweet 
pepperbush are 4 to 9.  It grows naturally in poorly 
drained, moist soils and will get larger and produce 
more suckers if provided plenty of water.  Once 
established, it can also thrive on drier, well-drained 
soils.  The optimum soil pH is approximately 4.5.  
Coastal sweet pepperbush is moderately salt tolerant 
and can be grown near, but not directly behind, 
beaches. 
 
Coastal sweet pepperbush is a shade-tolerant 
understory shrub that grows under the canopy of old-
growth trees.  It will grow in full sun, but does best in 
a light, dappled shade. 
 
Management  
Legginess occurs with age among coastal sweet 
pepperbush plants.  Aggressive root suckering also 
occurs with age, which is an asset if naturalization or 
moderate erosion control is desired. 
 
Coastal sweet pepperbush  can build up and create a 
fire hazard.  It can be  controlled with regular 
prescribed burning.  Most fires probably top-kill 
sweet pepperbush, but the plant can resprout from 
surviving stolons.  Fires severe enough to consume 
the organic soil may kill stolons. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Damage caused by spider mites can be severe on 
plants in hot, dry locations.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Coastal sweet pepperbush can be propagated by 
seeds, summer cuttings, or su cker division.  Seeds are 
cold stratified for 30 days and germinated under 
spring temperatures. 
 
Collect 10 cm long softwood cuttings at the end of 
May or the beginning of June and strip the leaves 
from the lower two-thirds of the cutting.  Wound the 
lower portion of the stem and apply a powder or 
liquid root hormone com pound.  Place cuttings in 
coarse sand that is 7 to 10  cm deep and lightly water 
at least every 2 hours.  The medium can be any well-
drained mixture that does not contain soil.  Provide 
shade to the cuttings for the first 7 to 10 days to allow 
the cuttings to harden off before exposing them to  full sun.  For best rooting 
results, place cuttings in an 
intermittent misting system.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Ma terials Program has not 
released any cultivars of coastal sweet pepperbush for 
conservation use. 
 
Several ornamental cultivars are available through 
commercial nurseries.  These cultivars include ‘Anne 
Bidwell,’ ‘Creels Calico,’ ‘Hummingbird,’ 
‘Paniculata,’ ‘Pink Spires,’  ‘Ruby Spice,’ ‘September 
Beauty,’ and ‘Summersweet Clethra.’  These 
cultivars have been developed for flower size and 
color, foliage variegation and shine, plant stature, and 
extended bloom time. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 17 
May 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Baskin, C.C. and J.M. Baskin. 2002.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container 
Clethra alnifolia 
L. plants.  (http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 17 
May 2004). Forest Research Nursery, College of 
Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Brand, M. 2001.  Clethra alnifolia 
(http://www.hort.ucon.edu/plants/index.html, 17 May 
2004). University of Connecticut Plant Database, 
Storrs. 
 
Christman, S. 2003. Clethra alnifolia 
(http://www.floridata.com/ref/c/clet_aln.cfm, 17 May 
2004). Floridata, Tallahassee. 
 
Clements, S. 1997.  New York metropolitan flora 
project  (http://www.bbg.org/sci/nymf/index.html, 17 
May 2004). Brooklyn Botanical Garden, Brooklyn. 
 
Colandonato, M. 1991.  Clethra alnifolia. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 17 May 2004). 
Fire Sciences Laboratory,  Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, USDA Forest Service, Missoula. 
 
Department of Horticulture and Crop Science. 2002. 
Plant facts (http://plantfacts.osu.edu/, 17 May 2004). 
The Ohio State University, Columbus.

Ducey, V. 2003. USF Herbarium slide collection. 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 17 May 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Evans, E. 2001.  Plant fact sheets 
(http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/factsh
eets/index.html, 17 May 2004). North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh. 
 
Koning, R.E. 1994.  Artificial plant propagation. 
(http://plantphys.info/Plants_Human/Vegprop/vegpro
pa.html, 24 May 2004).  Eastern Connecticut State 
University, Willimantic. 
 
Ultee, C.J. 2003.  Connecticut wildflowers 
(http://www.ct-botanical-society.org/galleries/ 
galleryindex.html, 17 May 2004). Connecticut 
Botanical Society, Glastonbury. 
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 2003. 
Dendrology tree fact sheets 
(http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/factsheets.
cfm, 17 May 2004). Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University, Blacksburg. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 17 May 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 24May2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.