Plant Guide       
 
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PARTRIDGE PEA  
Chamaecrista fasciculata  
(Michx.) Greene  
Plant Symbol = CHFA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas and 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas 
 
Alternate Names 
Cassia chamaecrista L., C. fasciculata , Michx., 
sleeping plant, prairie part ridge pea, showy partridge 
pea, prairie senna, larg e-flowered sensitive-pea, 
dwarf cassia, partridge pea senna, locust weed, 
golden cassia 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : The seed is one of the major food items of 
northern bobwhite and othe r quail species because it 
remains in sound condition throughout the winter and 
early spring.  Partridge pea was found to be one of 
the most important fall and winter foods of bobwhite 
quail in Alabama.  Partridge pea seeds are high in 
phosphorus content and protein value, and low in 
crude fiber and lignin making digestibility generally 
high. 
 
Seeds of this legume are also eaten by the greater and 
lesser prairie-chicken, ring-necked pheasant, mallard, 
grassland birds, and fiel d mice.  Deer can eat it 
without being poisoned (note livestock use).   Partridge pea often grows in dense stands, producing 
litter and plant stalks that furnish cover for upland 
game birds, small mammals, small non-game birds, 
and waterfowl.  
  
Partridge pea is considered an important honey plant, 
often occurring where few other honey plants are 
found.  Nectar is not av
ailable in the flowers of 
showy partridge pea but is produced by small orange 
glands at the base of each leaf.  Ants often seek the 
nectar and are frequent visitors. The common sulfur 
butterfly lays its eggs on the leaves, and the larvae 
use the leaves as a food source. 
 John M. Row, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center 
 
Erosion control : The plant can be used along road 
banks and stream banks to control erosion.  Partridge 
pea most commonly occurs as  a pioneer or colonizer 
of disturbed areas. 
 
Recreation and beautification : The flowers of this 
plant can be used to beautify areas where wildflowers 
are planted.  The foliage is somewhat sensitive and 
will partially close when touched. Partridge pea is 
commonly grown as an ornamental. The bright 
yellow flowers make it a popular choice for use in 
native gardens.   
 
Ethnobotanic:  Cherokee Drug (Sports Medicine):  
root medicine used to keep ball players from tiring. 
Cherokee Drug (Stimulant): compound infusion 
given for fainting spells.  Seminole Drug 
(Antiemetic): cold decoction of plant used for nausea.  
Seminole Other (Tools): plants used as a bed for 
ripening persimmons. 
 
Livestock:  Although partridge pea foliage is 
nutritious, it can be poisonous and should be 
considered potentially dangerous to cattle.  Partridge 
pea leaves and seeds contain a cathartic substance.  
This substance is effective either in fresh plant 
material or in dry hay.  Domestic livestock will eat 
partridge pea leaves.  However, if large quantities are 
consumed, the animal may be stressed and die.   
 
Restoration: Partridge pea is cons idered an excellent 
species for planting on di sturbed areas for erosion 
control and improving soil fertility.  It establishes 
rapidly, fixes nitrogen, reseeds, and slowly decreases 
as other species in the seeding mix begin to dominate 
the site.  Nitrogen fixation is greatest during the 
flowering stage.  To help prevent weed establishment

and control soil erosion along county roadsides in 
Iowa, partridge pea is often included in the seed mix 
with other forbs and grasses. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae). Partridge pea is an 
annual sub-erect native legu me plant that reaches a 
height of 1 to 3 feet.  The leaves consist of 10 to 15 
pairs of small, narrow le aflets that are somewhat 
delicate to the touch.  The showy yellow flowers, 
about 1 inch across, grow 2 to 4 together in clusters 
on the stem.  Flowers normally bloom July-
September.  The fruit is a straight, narrow pod 1½ to 
2½ inches long, which splits along 2 sutures as it 
dries; the pod sides spiral to expel the seeds some 
distance from the parent plant.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Partridge pea grows on prairies, bluffs, 
riverbanks and river bottoms, as well as upland 
woods of the Great Plains.  Partridge pea is common 
on sandy savannahs of the lower Gulf Coastal Plain.  
Partridge pea is most common on sandy to sandy 
loam soils.  It grows best in full sunlight but will 
survive under shady conditions.  Partridge pea has 
low water requirements and will grow and produce 
seed under stressed conditio ns.  The lower pH limit 
of showy partridge pea is 5.0. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for showy partridge pea 
are 3 to 9.  It is distributed throughout the Midwest, 
eastern, and southern United States.   
 
Establishment 
Drill seeds at 1/4 to 3/4 inch deep at a rate of 10-15 
pounds of Pure live Seed (PLS) per acre.  If 
broadcasting seeds, the rate should be increased and 
seed covered by lightly disking or by cultipacking.  
Partridge pea can be planted from late winter (March) 
to late spring (May).  Scarification will improve 
germination of seed, but it is not necessary to 
establish plantings of partridge pea.  Seed should also 
be inoculated with the correct species of rhizobium 
before planting.  Fertilizer should be applied at the 
recommended rate, based on soil samples, at time of 
planting.  Management
 
Established stands should be disked lightly in the 
spring to expose mineral soil on which the seed can 
germinate.  Partridge pea usually reseeds but will 
gradually disappear without regular maintenance.  
Light disking to remove weeds, small brush, and old 
sod is necessary for health y stands.  In areas where 
prescribed burning is permitted, controlled fire is an 
excellent method for controlling unwanted 
vegetation.  Fire or disking should be done in late 
winter for best results.  W eeds can also be controlled 
during the growing season by mowing over the top of 
partridge pea plants. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Showy partridge pea seed can be cold moist stratified 
for 56 days to improve germination.  Under 
controlled conditions germination occurs at an 
alternating cycle of 30
oC daytime and 15oC nighttime 
temperatures.  The opti mum soil temperature for 
germination is 20
oC to 30oC.  Seventy percent of 
seeds will germinate in 7 to 25 days.  The seed count 
of partridge pea is approximately 62,000 seeds per 
pound from cultivated plants. 
 
Seed for production fields should be planted ¼ to ¾ 
inches deep on raised beds 36-40  inches apart. The 
seeding rate for seed production is 2-3 pounds PLS 
per acre.  Being a legume that fixes nitrogen 
partridge pea only needs one 20-pound application of 
phosphorous applied in the spring each year.  Seeds 
are ready for harvest in late October and November.  
Partridge pea may be direct  harvested with a combine 
or plants may be swathed and combined after drying. 
Average seed production at the Knox City Plant 
Materials Center has been recorded at 550 pounds per 
acre.  About 37 percent of harvested material at 
Manhattan, Kansas, yields clean seed.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Mate rials Centers have three 
releases:  
‘Comanche’ (TX) partridge pea, a cultivar release 
from the Knox City Plant Materials Center (PMC) in 
Texas, was selected  for use as a warm-season legume 
cover crop in the re-vegetation of critical areas, 
mined lands, as a wildlife food plant, and as a plant 
for beautification. 
 
‘Riley’ (KS), a release from the Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center in Manhattan, Kansas, was 
developed to provide an adapted cultivar for use in 
wildlife habitat improvement, erosion control, and 
recreational area plantings in the Central Plains 
Region.  Riley has also been shown to be adapted for

conservation use in southwestern and southern 
Missouri, Arkansas; western Tennessee, northeastern 
Mississippi, western Louisiana, and northeast Texas. 
 
Lark Selection (AR), a select ed class release from the 
Jamie L. Whitten PMC in Coffeeville,  Mississippi, 
was selected to provide an  adapted partridge pea for 
use in critical area seedin g mixtures, wildlife food 
and cover, and beautification of roadsides in 
Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and 
western Tennessee (mid-South region). 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
“United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Ajilvsgi, G. 1991.  Wildflowers of Texas . Shear 
Publishing, Fredericksburg, Texas. 
 
Englert, J. M. et al. 1999–.  USDA-NRCS improved 
conservation plant materials released by NRCS and 
cooperators . USDA NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland. 
 
Graham, E. H . 1941. Legumes for erosion control 
and wildlife. USDA Misc. Publ. 412. (Leg ErWild)  
 
Green, D.L., Plant pollinator web site .  
(http://pollinator.com/index.html), 22 March 2006. 
 
Haddock, M. 2004.  Kansas wildflowers and grasses. 
(http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wildfl ower/, 7 March 2006). 
Kansas State University, Manhattan. 
 
Hamel, P.B. and M.U. Chiltoskey. 1975. Cherokee 
Plants and Their Uses -- A  400 Year History. Sylva, 
N.C. Herald Publishing Co. 54p. 
 
Native Plant Information Network. 2001. 
Propagation datasheets  (http://www.wildflower2. 
org/NPIN/Clearinghouse/Propagation/propsheets. 
html, 7 March 2006). Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower 
Center, Austin. 
 
Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation  Plant image 
gallery . (http://www.noble.org/WebApps/ 
PlantImageGallery/ 
Plant.aspx?PlantID=101&PlantTypeID=1) 
Accessed: 6 March 2006. Ardmore, OK. 
 
North Carolina Department of Transportation.   
Wildflowers on North Carolina Roadsides,  (http://www.ncdot.org/doh/operations/dp_eng/roadsi
de/wildflowerbook/. Raleigh. 
 
Sturtevant, W. 1954. The Mikasuki Seminole: 
Medical beliefs and practices
. Yale University, PhD 
Thesis (p. 276, 496). 
 
Tesky, J.L. 1992.  Cassia fasciculata . In: Fire Effects 
Information System, [Online]. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 7 March 2006). 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 
 
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, 1986. 
Comanche Partridge Pea. L221. 4p. Texas A&M 
University System, College Station. 
 
USDA NRCS Jamie L Whitten Plant Materials 
Center.  Notice of release: Lark selection partridge 
pea . (http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/mspmcrnchfa2.pdf) 
USDA-NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, MS. 3p. 
 
USDA NRCS James E.’Bud ’ Smith Plant Materials 
Center.  Notice of release: “Comanche” partridge 
pea . (http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/txpmcrnchfa2.pdf) 
USDA-NRCS James E.’Bud’ Smith Plant Materials 
Center, Knox City, TX, 2p. 
 
USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
Notice of release: ‘Riley’ showy partridge pea . 
(http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/kspmcrnchfa2.pdf) 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
KS. 8p. 
 
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
Germplasm Resources Info rmation Network - (GRIN) 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov2/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/tax_search.pl) [Online: cited 16 March 
2006]. National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville, MD 
 
USDA NRCS 2006.  The PLANTS database. 
( http://plants.usda.gov)
.    National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, LA. Acces sed: 22 March 2006.
 
 
Wolfe, J.A. 1991. Technical Notes: Coffeeville Plant 
Materials Center, Seed Production and Variation 
Among Selected Partridgepea Accessions. 
(http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/mspmctn21991.pdf) 
[Accessed 20 July 2007].   USDA-NRCS Jamie L. 
Whitten Plant Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS. 
Vol. 7(2). 10p.

Prepared By:  
Morris J Houck, USDA NRCS Alexandria, 
Louisiana, formerly, Plan t Materials Center, Knox 
City, Texas and  John M. Row, Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator: 
Morris J. Houck , USDA NRCS Alexandria, 
Louisiana, formerly, Plan t Materials Center, Knox 
City, Texas 
 
Edited: 22mar2006 jsp; 070823 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.