Plant Guide
BUCKBRUSH 
Ceanothus cuneatus (Hook.) Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = CECU  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, CA   
 
Figure 1: Ceanothus cuneatus branches. Photo M. DeSiervo Lockeford 
Plant Material Center.  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:   
buckbrush   
buckbrush ceanothus  
blue brush    
cune ate ceanothus  
wedgeleaf  ceanothus   
Native Amer ican traditional names  include:  
bä- käm’  (Pomo tribe)  
hit  (Waila ki tribe) (Chestnut , 1902).  
 
Uses  
Wildlife : Deer will forage on the leaves, shoots and 
berries of buckbrush, preferring the tender young 
seedlings to the mature plants. Additionally, small rodents 
and birds including the quail and mourning dove feed on 
the seeds (League, 2005). Buckbrush is also an important 
cover species for wildlife, due to its size and abundance 
of branchlets.  
  Buckbrush is also an important species for pollinators 
such as bees, butterflies and hummingbirds.   
Landscaping:  Along with other native  Ceanothus  species , 
Ceanothus cuneatus  is an aesthetically pleasing shrub 
commonly integrated in the outdoor landscape of homes,  parks and other recreational areas throughout its range. 
Due to its fast
-growing nature and nitrogen -fixing 
capabilities, buckbrush is a great pioneer species f or new 
landscapes (Las Pilitas Nursery, 2011). It is also a 
valuable shrub species for pollinator hedgerows, and 
attracts many bees with its fragrant flowers in the early 
spring. There are several cultivars of  Ceanothus cuneatus 
available at local nurseries.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Buckthorn family (Rhamnaceae).   California 
buckbrush  is an erect, perennial, evergreen shrub within 
the California lilac (Ceanothus)  genus.   The species 
ranges in size from  3  to  12 feet  tall.   As with other 
California lilac species, buckbrush shrubs are distinct 
from other woody chaparral plants with their unique 
pattern of angular, rigid branchlets of unequal sizes.   The 
twigs are round and gray colored and do not have hairs or 
spines.   The eve rgreen leaves on this species are in an 
opposite arrangement, generally 0.25  - 0.5 in long.  The 
leaves are generally smooth and entire, sometimes with a 
toothed margin near the apex.  The infl orescence, 
generally less than 1 inch, is displayed as a raceme  with 
several umbellate clusters, each containing many fragrant 
flowers.   The flowering period of this species is between 
March and May and the flower colors ranges from white 
to several shades of blue and lavender.   The fruits are 0.25 
-  0.5 in long and have 3 distinct horns near the top 
without crests or ridges.   Each fruit capsule contains two  
to  three  seeds  (McMinn, 1939 ; Hickman, 1993). 
 
Ethnobotany  
As one of the dominant species in the chaparral  
ecosystem, this shrub has bee n utilized by California 
N ative Americans  for centuries.  
Buckbrush shrubs contain a significant amount of woody 
material and several California tribes including the 
Kawaiisu and the M iwok used  this species for firewood 
(Zigmond , 1981;  Merriam, 1967 ).  The twigs were also 
collecte d for a variety of hunting and fishing purposes. 
The  Kawaiisu  used the straight twigs of this shrub as the 
foreshafts for two -piece arrows.  The arrows were created 
by stripping and sharpening the Ceanothus  twigs and 
fitting them inside sections of hollow  Carrizo grass of 
“cane” (Zigmond , 1981).   Indians of Mendocino used 
buckbrush woody material  to create fish dams (Chestnut , 
1902).