Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GOLDEN NUTSEDGE
Cyperus eragrostis Lam. 
Plant Symbol = CYER  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Nutgrass, tall nutgrass, umbrella sedge, chufa, Earth 
almond, nutgrass, zula nuts, edible galingale 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: On the rootlets of the sedge are small 
tubers, the size of dried currants.  These tubers make 
an excellent meal, either  raw or steamed.  They are 
hard and crisp when eaten raw.  These tubers taste 
between fresh coconut and raisins.  When reduced to 
meal and cooked as cereal, it is both nourishing and 
appetizing.  They can be soaked in water, then 
pounded to release the milky juice, which can be 
mixed with alcohol or water and sugar to make 
delicious drinks.  Peeled and roasted, the tubers can 
be ground to become a coffee substitute or a sweet 
flour.  The base of the stem may be eaten raw.  The 
Yokuts in California ate the grass-nut of  Cyperus 
species and the seeds of the same (Powers 1877).  
Native Americans use golden nutsedge as both 
sewing and wrapping material in coiled baskets.  
Nutsedge leaves were made into seats. 
 
Erosion Control : Nutsedge is especially good for 
stabilizing or restoring disturbed or degraded areas 
(including logged or burned areas) for erosion and 
slope control and for wildlife food and cover.  
Cyperus  species may be less suitable for general 
garden use, as these plants are also invasive.  Once  established, these plants tend to out-compete, 
displace, or overrun others. 
 
Wildlife
: The seeds are important, commonly used 
foods of ducks and of certain marshbirds and 
shorebirds.  Ducks, sandhill cranes, crow, other 
waterfowl, and small mammals such as the kangaroo 
rat eat the seeds.  The tubers are eaten in the winter 
by ducks and geese. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  This perennial 
herb has long, solid triangular stems from 10 - 90 cm 
in height.  The slender, grass-like leaves grow from 
the base of the stem, and about 2-6 involucral leaves 
exceed the inflorescence.   The flowers are golden- 
brown colored, umbellate or capitate, with the rays 
extending out from a central point with clusters of 
spikelets on the ends.  Flow ers and fruits spread out 
in feathery spikes almost like the ends of an umbrella 
(thus the name umbrella sedge).  The plant has scaly 
stolons terminating in nut-like tubers. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It occurs in many plant communities in most of 
cismontane California, north to Oregon, south to 
Mexico and temperate South America.  A related 
species, yellow nutsedge ( Cyperus esculentus) is a 
worldwide weed (Hickman 1993). 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : These sedges prefer mud flats that are 
underwater during the winter months.  Nutsedges 
grow in vernal pools, streambanks, ditches, lawns, 
gardens, and disturbed places  at elevations from 0 - 
1000 m.   Cyperus eragrostis  is common in shallow 
water and on moist ground at elevations from 0 - 700 
m. 
 
General : Cyperus species may be planted from bare 
root stock, from seedlings from container stalk, or 
directly seeded into the soil.  Seed collection is easy, 
efficient, cost-effective, an d non-destructive.  Bare 
rootstock or seedlings are preferred revegetation

methods where there is moving water.  No more than 
1/4 of the plants in an area should be collected. 
 
These plants establish extremely well from seed.  
Seed production is prolific and germination rates are 
high.  In wetland areas, revegetation of Cyperus 
occurs naturally where there is water, wind, or animal 
dispersal, or from the seed bank.  It is likely that 
Cyperus  will re-vegetate naturally; seeding or 
planting in native plant communities is not a good 
idea because of its invasive nature.  This plant grows 
in gardens that are irrigate d, or where there is some 
natural moisture. 
 
Establishment from Seed 
•   Collect nutgrass seed in the fall and broadcast 
seed in late fall or early spring.  Seeds can be 
broadcast on a moist and bare soil surface.  
Cover with a shallow layer of soil.  
•  To collect and store seed, collect when seed is 
ripe and store in a dry  and cool place.  Clean 
seed by blowing out the light seed. 
•   Plant seeds in the greenhouse in 1" x 1" x 2" 
pots, 1/4" under the soil surface.  Keep soil 
surface moist.  Put in temperature of 100 degrees 
F (plus or minus 5 degrees).  Seeds begin to 
germinate after a couple weeks in warm 
temperatures.   
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.  
•  Nutsedge  would do well grown in wild gardens 
or cultivated for its edible tubers.   Cyperus 
species tolerate disturbance, moderate grazing, 
and trampling. 
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation, success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CYER is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation  Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrows, D.P. 1967.  
Ethno-botany of the Coahuilla 
Indians .  Malki Museum Press, Banning, California.  
82 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (dd.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
University of California Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.   Tribes of California .  University of 
California Press.  480 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 199?.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Sampson, A.W. & B.S. Jespersen 1981.   California 
range brushlands and browse plants.  Division of 
Agricultural Sciences.  University of California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
Version: 990405. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Tormerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.