Plant Guide       
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE SANDREED 
Calamovilfa longifolia  (Hook.) 
Scribn.  
Plant Symbol = CALO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck, North 
Dakota and Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials 
Centers 
 
 Copyright Mike Haddock 
Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses 
 
Alternate Names  
sand reed, prairie sandgrass, big sandgrass 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland:  Prairie sandreed is a 
native, sod forming, warm season grass commonly 
found on sandy rangeland sites throughout the 
Central and Northern Plains and Great Lakes Region. 
This grass is recognized as  a key species in grazing 
programs because of its abundance, yield potential 
and distribution of herbage production during the 
growing season. Prairie sandreed begins growth 
earlier in the spring than most warm season perennial 
grasses, thus its herbage is available for livestock  grazing.  The forage value is considered fair to good 
for cattle and horses, and fair value for sheep during 
its first two months of growth, and after it cures on 
the stem for fall and wint
er grazing. Crude protein 
content and available carbohydrates are inversely 
related in this plants constitution. Crude protein drops 
from 16 percent in May to 4 percent in November 
while available carbohydrates increase from 45 
percent in May to 55 percent in November (Craig, 
2002). Prairie sandreed is usually considered a 
decreaser with grazing pr essure, but will initially 
increase under heavy grazing  use, especially if 
growing within a big bluestem/sand bluestem plant 
community. Prairie sandreed generally is seeded as a 
component of a native mix for range seeding on 
sandy sites.  
 
Wildlife Value:  Prairie sandreed provides fair forage 
for grazing and browsing wildlife in early spring and 
summer. The plant becomes more important in late 
fall and winter as the plant cures well on the stem and 
provides upright and accessible forage. Seed is used 
by songbirds and small rodents.  
 
Erosion Control:  The rhizomatous growth habit and 
extensive fibrous root syst em of prairie sandreed 
makes it an excellent species for stabilization of 
sandy sites.  On the shores of the Great Lakes it 
provides wind erosion control, dune stabilization, and 
water quality improvement.      
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae). Prairie sandreed is 
a tall, coarse, stemmy, open sod forming grass found 
on sandy soil sites in typically low precipitation 
zones. Its coarsely fibrous root system augmented by 
scaly, spreading rhizomes produces an effective sand 
binding species.  The culms are 1.0 to 1.5 meters (3-5 
feet) tall, arising singly and are attached to the stout, 
spreading rhizomes. Leaves are mostly cauline, pale 
green to straw colored. Leaf  blades are rigid, flat to 
rolled, hairless, 30 cm (12 inches) long or longer, 
tapered to a drawn out tip. The ligule is short and 
hairy and the collar is hairy inside. Inflorescence is a 
panicle 15 to 35 cm (6-13 inches) long, semi-open 
and wider in the middle. Sp ikelets are pale, shiny, 
and one flowered. The  lemmas are awnless and

densely hairy at the base. It flowers from August to 
September and, and like most grasses, is wind 
pollinated. Prairie sandreed possesses the C-4 
photosynthetic pathway for carbon fixation (Waller 
and Lewis, 1979).  
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: Prairie sandreed is native from Manitoba to 
Quebec, Canada and south to Idaho, Colorado, 
Kansas and Indiana. Optimal performance can be 
expected on a sandy textured soil in the 40 to 50 cm 
(16-20 inch) rainfall zone. It exhibits strong drought 
tolerance when well established. It is intolerant of 
high water tables and early spring flooding.  
                                
 Steve Hurst, From PLANTS, provided by ARS Systematic Botany 
and Mycology Laboratory. 
 
Adaptation 
Prairie sandreed is drought tolerant and adapted to 
mean annual precipitation of less than 25 cm up to 50 
cm (10-20 inches). It is predominately found growing 
in clumps or colonies on coarse or sandy soil types. It 
will grow on soils that are somewhat alkaline, but it 
is not tolerant to salt. Prairie sandreed occurs 
naturally in mixed native stands with sand bluestem 
Andropogon hallii , little bluestem Schizachyrium 
scoparium , and sand lovegrass Eragrostis trichodes  
on choppy sand range sites. Several shrubs, including 
yucca  Yucca glauca and sand sage  Artemisia filifolia 
and a variety of forbs occur intermixed on these sites. 
It has been found growing on blow out sites in the 
Nebraska Sandhills.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation of  Calamovilfa longifolia  is 
accomplished by seed and vegetative means. Maun 
(1981) studied germination and seedling 
establishment on Lake Huron sand dunes at Pinery 
Provincial Park, Ontario. Seedling establishment is 
considered risky on sand dunes where high soil  surface temperatures, low nutrient supply, low 
moisture availability, and erosion can limit seedling 
establishment and growth. Maun (1981) found that 
Calamovilfa longifolia 
produces large numbers of 
intermediate size seed (mean seed weight 1.64 mg + 
.14 mg standard deviation). He further noted that the 
endosperm of sandreed exhibited a dimorphic color 
scheme (brown and white) and that the brown 
endosperm types were significantly heavier than the 
white types. Maun’s (1981) seed germination studies 
indicated that the best germinations of  Calamovilfa 
were produced when growth chamber settings were 
25 degrees C (14 hours) and 10 degrees C (10 hours). 
Temperatures higher (35 and 20 degrees C) and 
lower (15 and 0 degrees C) than those reduced 
germination significantly. Stratification of sandreed 
seed did not improve total germination, but it 
produced a faster rate of germination overall.  
Maun and Riach (1981) studied sand deposition 
effects on seedling emergence at field sites and 
greenhouse plantings. They found that seedling 
emergence from greater than 8.0 cm (3 inch) depths 
was not probable. Excavation of sites with seed 
buried by more than 8 cm  (3 inch) of sand indicated 
that seed had germinated,  but failed to emerge from 
that depth. Thus seedling emergence was negatively 
correlated with planting dept h. Therefore, planting of 
prairie sandreed should be accomplished with a drill 
equipped with depth bands to better control depth of 
seeding. Seed should be planted at a depth of 2.54 cm 
(1 inch) on coarse textured soils and 1.27 cm (1/2 
inch) or less on medium to fine textured soils. 
Seedbed preparation should provide a weed free, firm 
surface on which to plant.  Seedling vigor is only fair 
and stands develop rather slowly. Stands may require 
as long as two to three years to fully develop. 
Seeding rate will vary by region and may be 
influenced by the amount of processing provided by 
the seed producer.   Some  seed vendors process the 
seed down to the bare caryopsis. This will influence 
the seeding rate that is utilized. 
 
Management  
Mullahey et al. (1991) found that a June and August 
defoliation of prairie sandreed over a three year 
period produced the greatest dry matter yield 
compare to other treatments and the control. 
Generally annual dry matter yields declined for all 
defoliation treatments and the control during the three 
year study. Burlaff (1971) concluded that the 
concentration of crude protein in prairie sandreed 
declined with increased maturity of the forage. Dry 
matter digestibility also declined with advanced 
maturity of the plants. In similar studies Cogswell 
and Kamstra (1976) found that highly lignified 
species had lower  in vitro dry matter digestibility

values. Protein content of prairie sandreed decreased 
with maturity of the plant. Aase and Wight (1973) 
proved that water infiltration rates on undisturbed 
prairie sandreed were significantly higher and 
averaged about four times those on undisturbed 
surrounding vegetation. The duo attributed the 
greater infiltration rate in prairie sandreed colonies to 
the vigorous growth and resultant residue which 
intercepts rain drops and reduces the energy with 
which the rain impacts and seals the soils surface. 
They also discussed the effect of soil texture on 
infiltration rates and noted that coarse textured soils 
had higher infiltration rates. Total water use during 
the growing season was higher by prairie sandreed 
than by the surrounding vegetation, however dry 
matter production was twice as great. Production data 
collected at Pierre, SD reported prairie sandreed 
(ND-95) production at 5,912 kg/ha (5,279 lbs/acre) of 
forage compared to 6,667 kg/ha (5,953 lbs/acre) for 
big bluestem (‘Bison’) at the same location. Prairie 
sandreed responds positively to prescribed spring 
burns.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshopper infestations can damage seedlings. 
Gophers have been known to undercut, smother and 
utilize the forage. Leaf rust ( Puccinia amphigena 
Dietel.) was identified as a potential antiquality factor 
in the forage production of prairie sandreed. Mankin 
(1969) also identified leaf mold ( Hendersonia 
calamovilfae  Petr.), leaf spot ( Septoria calamovilfae  
Petr.) and rust as plant pathogens that can affect 
prairie sandreed plants. Prairie sandreed plants with 
origins in the Great Plains are increasingly 
susceptible to rust when moved eastward.  
 
Environmental Concerns   
Prairie sandreed does not pose any known negative 
concerns to the environment. It can form dense 
colonies on coarse soils where it is well adapted. This 
attribute is often looked at as a positive trait for 
increasing ground cover which reduces both wind 
and water erosion on these sites.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Calamovilfa  is a genus native to North America and 
contains five individual species (Rogers, 1970). 
Calamovilfa  closely resembles Calamagrostis  and 
Ammophila in gross morphological characteristics, 
and was placed close to them in the trib e Agrostideae 
by Hitchcock (1951). Reeder and Ellingson (1960) 
pointed out that  Calamovilfa differs from these 
genera in several important embryo characteristics, 
types of lodicules, leaf  anatomy, and chromosome 
size and number. Calamovilfa  and Sporoblus appear 
to be more closely related and have several features  in common, including the 
peculiar fruit characteristic 
of having its pericarp free  from the seed coat, thus 
not a true caryopsis (Gould and Shaw, 1983). Reeder 
and Singh (1967) determined that the basic 
chromosome number of x=10 for  Calamovilfa. They 
reported that the chromosome number for 
Calamovilfa longifolia  determined from study of the 
meiosis in pollen mother cells in anthers revealed that 
the chromosome number is 2n=40. The average seed 
production at Bridger, Montana has been 183 kg/ha 
under irrigation in 91 cm (36 inch) rows. Seed yields 
in North Dakota range from 56 to 560 kg/ha (50 to 
500 pounds/acre) under irrigation and 56 to 168 
kg/ha (50 to 150 pounds/acre) under dry land 
conditions. It is recommended that seed production 
fields be planted in row widths of 61 to 91 
centimeters (2-3 feet).  Prairie sandreed is difficult to 
harvest in large quantities due to late maturity, seed 
shattering, lodging, and hairy seed units. Soil 
moisture on seed production fields should be kept at 
half field capacity up to flowering. No irrigation 
water should be applied during flowering and a 
minimum amount of irrigation water should follow 
flowering. Combining should be carried out during 
the hard dough stage of seed development. Seed 
processing should begin with a hammer milling and 
then re-cleaning in a fanning mill. A good seed 
quality is approximately 85 percent purity with a 75 
percent germination which produces a 64 percent 
Pure Live Seed (PLS). There are approximately 
695,960 seeds in a kilogram (2.54 pounds) of seed.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information. Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.”   
 
‘Goshen’ prairie sandreed was cooperatively named 
and released by the Soil Co nservation Service Plant 
Materials Center, Bridger, Montana and the Montana 
and Wyoming Agriculture Experiment Stations in 
1976 (Scheetz and Lohmiller, 1978). The original 
germplasm was collected near Torrington, Wyoming 
in 1959. It was released without selection and tested 
under the experimental designations WY-17 and P-
15588. 
 
 ‘Pronghorn’ prairie sandreed was released by the 
USDA-ARS, the Agriculture  Research Division of 
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and the USDA-
SCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas in 1988 (Vogel et al., 1996). An assembly of

48 accessions was collected in 1968 from Kansas, 
Nebraska, and South Dakota and established in a 
space plant nursery at Manhattan, Kansas. The top 
ranked accessions from the nursery were provided to 
L.C. Newell, ARS agronomist, for further evaluation. 
Selections from the nursery were evaluated for vigor, 
forage production and rust tolerance. Evaluation trials 
comparing Goshen and Pronghorn revealed that 
Pronghorn produced stands and forage equivalent to 
Goshen, but was significantly superior with respect to 
leaf rust resistance. 
 
ND-95 (Bowman) was sel ected at the USDA-SCS 
Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND. ND-95 is an 
informal release of materials collected in 1956 from 
southwestern North Dakota (Bowman County).  Seed 
production is average fo r the species. Forage 
production is comparable to Goshen, in the northern 
U.S., but ND-95 has demonstrated improved 
performance in parts of Canada. Its dense wiry root 
mass makes it well adapted for stabilizing sandy 
soils.  
 
Koch Germplasm prairie sandreed was released by 
USDA-NRCS Rose Lake Plan t Materials Center and 
the Michigan Association of Conservation Districts 
in 2007.  Original germ plasm was collected from 
native stands in costal zones along Lakes Michigan 
and Huron and subjected to  three cycles of recurrent 
phenotypic selection for upright growth habit, seed 
production, and general vigor.  Koch Germplasm 
prairie sandreed’s anticipated uses include wind 
erosion control, dune stabilization, and water quality 
improvement in costal zones of the Great Lakes 
Region and other sandy areas. 
 
 
References 
Aase, J.K. and J.R. Wight. 1973. Prairie Sandreed 
( Calamovilfa longifolia ): water infiltration and use. 
Journal of Range Management . 26(3): 212-214. 
 
Burzlaff, D.F. 1971. Seasonal variations of the  in 
vitro  dry-matter digestibility of three sandhill grasses. 
Journal of Range Management . 24:60-63. 
 
Cogswell, C. and L.D. Kamstra. 1976. The stage of 
maturity and its effects upon the chemical 
composition of four native range species.  Journal of 
Range Management . 29(6): 460-463. 
 
Craig, D., K. Sedivec, D. Tober, I. Russell, and T. 
Faller. 2002. Nutrient composition of selected warm-
season grasses: Preliminary Report. USDA-NRCS, 
Bismarck, ND. 
  Gould, F.W. and R.B. Shaw.1983. 
Grass Systematics 
2nd Edition. Texas A&M University Press. College 
Station, Texas.  
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1951.  Manual of the grasses of the  
United States , 2
nd ed. (Revised by Agnes Chase.) 
U.S. Dept. Agric. Misc. Publ. 200.  
 
Mankin, C.J. 1969. Diseases of Grasses and Cereals 
in South Dakota. Agriculture Experiment Station 
Technical Bulletin 35. South Dakota State 
University, Brookings, SD. 
 
Maun, M.A. 1981. Seed germination and seedling 
establishment of  Calamovilfa longifolia  on Lake 
Huron sand dunes.  Canadian Journal of Botany . 59: 
460-469. 
 
Maun, M.A. and S. Riach. 1981. Morphology of 
caryopses, seedlings, and se edling emergence of the 
grass Calamovilfa longifolia from various depths in 
sand.  Oecologia . 49:137-142. 
 
Mullahey, J.J., S.S. Waller,  and L.E. Moser. 1991. 
Defoliation effects on yield and bud and tiller 
numbers of two Sandhills grasses.  Journal of Range 
Management.  44(3): 241-245. 
 
Reeder, J.R. and M.A. Ellington. 1960. Calamovilfa, 
a misplaced genus of Gramineae.  Brittonia. 12:71-77. 
 
Reeder, J.R. and N. Singh. 1967 Chromosome 
number in Calamovilfa.  Bulletin of the Torrey 
Botanical Club . 94:199-200. 
 
Rogers, K.E. 1970. A new species of Calamovilfa 
(Gramineae) from North America.  Rhodora. 72:72-
79. 
 
Scheetz, J.G. and R.G. Lohmiller. 1978. Registration 
of Goshen Prairie Sandreed.  Crop Science. 18:693-
694. 
 
Vogel, K.P., L.C. Newell, E.T. Jacobson, J.E. 
Watkins, P.E. Reece, an d D.E. Bauer. 1996. 
Registration of Pronghorn Prairie Sandreed Grass. 
Crop Science . 36:1712. 
 
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North American 
grasses. Journal of Range Management . 32:12-28. 
 
Prepared By:  Wayne Duckwitz and Richard Wynia, 
USDA-NRCS Plant Material s Centers, Bismarck, 
ND, and Manhattan, KS with additional information

on Koch prairie sandreed provided by Rose Lake 
Plant Materials Center staff. 
 
Species Coordinator: Wayne Duckwitz, USDA-
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND. 
 
Edited: 061116 jsp; 061127 jsp; 070730 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.