Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLOWERING DOGWOOD  
Cornus florida  L. 
Plant Symbol = COFL2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
American boxwood, arrowwood,  Benthamia florida, 
boxwood, cornel, cornelian tree,  Cornus 
candidissima, Cornus florida  forma pendula, Cornus 
florida  forma pluribracteata, Cornus florida  forma 
xanthocarpa, Cornus florida  var. pendula, Cornus 
florida  var. rosea, Cornus florida  var. rubra, 
Cynoxylon floridum, dogwood, eastern flowering 
dogwood, white cornel, white dogwood. 
 
WARNING: The fruit of flowering dogwood is 
poisonous to humans. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Flowering dogwood root bark was 
used by Native Americans as a fever reducer, skin 
astringent, an antidiarrheal agent, and as a pain 
reliever for headaches, sores, and muscle 
inflammations.  It was also used to counteract the 
effects of many poisons and as a general tonic for 
unspecified ailments.  The bark was used for 
headache and backache relie f, as a throat aid for  hoarseness, and as an infusion for childhood diseases 
like worms and measles.  Flowers were infused to  
 
reduce fever and relieve colic pains.  Compound 
infusions of several plant parts were used as blood  
purifiers and as medicine for blood diseases like 
malaria.   
 
Ornamental
: The showy blossoms and attractive fall 
foliage make flowering dogwood a valuable 
ornamental species.  It is commonly used in 
landscape and street plantings.  As a garden tree, it is 
used for shade around patios, as a shrub border or 
backdrop species, or as single specimens in the lawn.  
It is best suited for plantin gs receiving less than full-
day sun. 
 C.W. Cook. 2003.  
 
Restoration: Flowering dogwood is a  soil improver 
because its leaf litter decomposes more rapidly than 
most other species.  For this reason flowering 
dogwood has been planted on abandoned strip mines 
and used for urban forestry projects. 
 
Wildlife : Flowering dogwood is a valuable food plant 
for wildlife because high calcium and fat contents 
make it palatable.  Many bird types including 
songbirds, forest edge species, and upland game birds 
(e.g. wild turkey) consume the seeds.  The eastern 
chipmunk, white-footed mouse, gray fox, gray 
squirrel, black bear, beaver, white-tailed deer, and 
skunk readily consume flowering dogwood seeds as 
well.  Beaver, rabbits, and deer browse the leaves and 
sprouts of the plant.  Flowering dogwood also 
provides shelter and habitat for many wildlife 
species. 
 
Wood production: The wood of flowering dogwood 
has been harvested for the manufacture of tool 
handles, charcoal, wheel cogs, hayforks, and pulleys.  
It is occasionally used to make specialty items like 
golf club heads, roller skate wheels, knitting needles, 
and spools.  The wood is hard, strong, and shock 
resistant, making it suitable for wood products that 
need to withstand rough use. 
 
Legal Status 
Flowering dogwood is endangered in Maine, 
exploitably vulnerable in New York, and threatened 
in Vermont.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g.

threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Dogwood Family (Cornaceae). Flowering 
dogwood is a deciduous multi-branched shrub or 
small tree, characterized  by a rounded crown and 
horizontal branches that spread wider than its height.  
Flowering dogwood is typically 5 to 15 m tall.  The 
bark on mature trees is broken into small square 
blocks that give the stem an “alligator” appearance.  
Leaves are opposite, simple , medium-green in color, 
7.6 to 15 cm long, and less than 7 cm wide.  The 
veins follow the elliptic curve of the leaf (arcuate).  
Autumn foliage turns red or purple.  The flowers are 
yellow, very small, and clustered into inflorescences 
that are surrounded by 4 large white (pink) bracts.  
Each bract has a rounded notch on the outer edge.  
The fruit are yellow to red berrylike drupes that 
contain one to two cream-colored, ellipsoid seeds.  
Flowers appear between March and June, with or 
before the leaves, and persist for 2 to 4 weeks.  Fruits 
ripen in September and October.  
 
Key characteristics of flowering dogwood are its 
opposite leaves with arcu ate venation, large showy 
flowers (bracts), onion-shap ed terminal flower buds, 
and alligator bark on mature trees. 
 
Distribution : Flowering dogwood is native to the 
northeastern and southeastern United States.  It 
occurs from Maine, south to Florida and west to 
eastern Texas, Missouri, Illinois, and southern 
Michigan.  For current dist ribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Flowering dogwood is an important 
understory species in the eastern deciduous and 
southern coniferous forests.  It is also found on 
floodplains, slopes, bluffs, ravines, gum swamps, 
along fencerows, and in old-field communities.  It is 
mentioned in 22 of the 90 Society of American 
Foresters forest cover types including jack pine, 
beech-sugar maple, eastern hemlock, oak-hickory, 
and prairie. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for flowering dogwood is 
5 to 9.  Flowering dogwood trees grow best in course 
to medium textured, well-drained soils with a pH 
range of 6 to 7.  They are sensitive to rapidly 
changing soil temperature an d are most abundant in 
temperature-consistent w oodland soils.  Although 
they are tolerant of seasonal dry periods, they are not  tolerant of severe drought or heavy, saturated soils.  
The inability to grow on extremely dry sites is 
attributed to their shallow root system.  
 
Flowering dogwood is an indicator of rich soil (mesic 
sites), but smaller trees will occur on more xeric sites.  
Trees growing in the mesic 
sites are more susceptible 
to dogwood anthracnose (see Pests and Potential 
Problems).  In the future, flowering dogwood may 
only be found on poor, dry sites. 
 
Partial or broken shade is best, but flowering 
dogwood can tolerate full sun.  It does best with some 
shade in the south and full sun in the north.  Shaded 
trees are less dense, grow  more quickly and taller, 
and have poor flowering and fall color.  Trees 
exposed to more sun are stouter, bushier, and produce 
more flowers. 
 
Flowering dogwood is not tolerant of stresses such as 
heat, drought, pollution, or salt.  These stresses make 
flowering dogwood more susceptible to disease, 
pests, and other problems. 
 
Establishment 
Flowering dogwood is intolerant of extended drought 
periods, especially during the first year after planting.  
Daily watering is necessary for the first few weeks 
following planting.  After one month, watering 
should be reduced to  two times per week and 
continue for one year.  Establishment takes 6 to 12 
months for each inch of tru nk diameter.  Larger trees 
benefit from irrigation during the second year. 
 
Management  
Flowering dogwood is moderately resistant to 
herbicides although direct application of Garlon has 
killed the plant.  Mechanically cutting stems results 
in smaller resprouts.  Midsummer-cut regeneration is 
typically smaller and shorter than regeneration from 
winter-cut. 
 
Plants commonly resprout from the root crown after 
aboveground vegetation is damaged or destroyed by 
fire.  The aboveground portions of flowering 
dogwood are readily damaged by fire because the 
thin bark allows fatal levels of heat to reach the 
cambium very quickly. Post-fire recovery is generally 
more rapid after surface fires than after crown fires. 
 
Extreme soil moisture and flooding is detrimental to 
the survival of flowering  dogwood.  The tree can be 
uprooted in saturated soil.  Excess water also leaves 
this plant susceptible to pests and diseases.

Established trees in partial or deep shade need 
irrigation only in times of drought.  Those in full sun 
will need regular irrigation throughout their lives. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Dogwood borer larvae move through openings in the 
bark and feed on the trunks of flowering dogwood.  If 
the cambium is destroyed, branches or the entire tree 
will die.  Leaves will turn red and drop early, and 
bark will slough off around holes on the trunk or 
branches.  An advantageous point of entry for larvae 
is through wounds.  For this reason, avoid hitting the 
trunk with lawn mowers or string trimmers to prevent 
infestation.  Insecticides  are preventative, but will not 
control an existing infestation. 
 
Twig borers will kill the tips of young twigs, but 
rarely kill an entire tree because they are usually 
present in small numbers.  Twig borers tunnel 
through the pith and deposit ambrosia fungi as a food 
source for larvae.  This infestation causes wilted 
leaves at the end of branches, and can be controlled 
by pruning infected twigs below the discolored pith 
area. 
 
Larvae of the dogwood club-gall midge cause twigs 
to swell at the base of flowering dogwood leaves.  An 
early symptom of club gall is a wilted, deformed leaf.  
The twig beyond the gall may die, but galls can be 
pruned and destroyed.  In early fall, larvae drop from 
the gall to over winter on the ground.  A light 
infestation is not harmful, but a heavy infestation will 
stunt the growth of the tree. 
 
Flowering dogwood is threatened by dogwood blight 
caused by the dogwood anthracnose fungus.  Tan and 
purple colored leaf spots develop in the lower canopy 
and progress up the tree.  Infection spreads into the 
shoots, main branches, and  trunk causing cankers to 
form.  Multiple cankers can girdle the trunk and kill 
the tree.  Diseased trees  produce shoots that also 
become infected on the lower trunk and leaves.  
Stressful environmental conditions like drought or 
acid rain may weaken trees, predisposing them to 
dogwood blight.  Dogwood blight can be controlled if 
the disease is detected before branch dieback begins.  
Prune and remove all dead twigs, dead limbs, and 
new shoots, and rake and remove fallen leaves.  
Remove crowding vegetation and thin the canopy to 
promote air circulation.  Avoid nitrogen fertilizer.  
Fungicides can prevent infestations of new leaves and 
flowers. 
 
Spot anthracnose attacks flowering dogwood leaves, 
stems, flowers, and buds.  Spots are usually very 
small with reddish or purplish borders.  Severe  infestations can prevent flower buds from opening, 
distort leaves, and weaken trees.  Fungicides 
containing bordeaux 4-4-100, chlorothalonil, or 
mancozeb can control spot anthracnose on new plant 
tissue.  Clean up and dispose of infected leaves on the 
ground near the tree since 
this is where the fungi 
survive the winter. 
 
Cankers form at wound s ites and allow entrance to 
harmful insects and fungi.  Initial symptoms of 
cankers are blackened or water soaked areas on the 
bark.  This area will grow and will ooze a black 
liquid.  Leaves will appear smaller and paler.  
Cankers cannot be controlled.  Prevent formation by 
avoiding trunk wounds. 
 
Root injury, over-fertilization, or lack of soil drainage 
can lead to root rot.  Powdery mildew forms on new 
growth causing reddish discoloration, premature 
defoliation, and dead patches.  Leaf scorch symptoms 
are browning and drying  leaf margins.  These 
symptoms can be caused by a lack of available soil 
moisture, transplanting shock, fertilizer or salt injury 
to roots or root rot diseases.  Raking up fallen leaves 
and improving air circulation through the canopy can 
control and prevent powdery mildew and leaf scorch. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Flowering dogwood seeds can be hand-sown into 
outdoor beds soon after collection (September to 
October).  This allows for the seeds to undergo 
natural warm stratification prior to exposure to cooler 
winter temperatures.  Imbi be seeds overnight, dust 
with fungicide, and hand-sow 5 to 6 inches apart in 
rows.  Sprinkle endomycorrhizae over the seed 
before covering with soil.  Mulch the bed with 
sawdust.  Seeds can be artificially cold stratified for 
100 to 130 days and germinated at 15 to 27
oC.  Prior 
to spring emergence (March to April), remove mulch.  
Place shade cloth above newly emerged seedlings 
and keep it in place until August.  
 
Flowering dogwood can also be propagated by 
cutting, grafting, layering, and root division.  It roots 
easily from cuttings taken in June or immediately 
after the plants bloom.  Cut 8 cm of the terminal 
shoot tip, keeping 2 to 4 leaves, and dip into a one 
part indole-butyric acid (IBA) to 250 part talc (by 
weight) mixture.  Set cuttings approximately 3 cm 
deep in rooting medium and grow under a misting 
system with a photoperiod of at least 18 hours. 
 
Plants are best suited for transplanting at the 
beginning of the third year.  Seedling survival is 
generally best on moist, rich, well-drained soils.  
Flowering dogwood may be difficult to transplant,

but seedlings with a root ball are more successful 
than bare root transplants. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Several cultivars of flowering dogwood are readily 
available from commercial sources.  These cultivars 
have been developed for leaf color and variegation, 
flower color, fruit color, plant height, growth rate, 
and disease resistance. 
 
Some examples of flowering dogwood cultivars 
include ‘Apple Blossom,’ ‘Bay Beauty,’ ‘Cherokee 
Brave,’ ‘Cherokee Chief,’ ‘Cloud 9,’ ‘First Lady,’ 
‘Mystery,’ ‘Purple Glory,’ ‘Sweetwater Red,’ and 
‘Welchii.’ 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 19 
May 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Athenic Systems. 2004.  North American Trees 
(http://www.treeguide.com/namerican_tree.asp, 19 
May 2004). Nature Hills Nursery, Omaha. 
 
Baskin, C.C. and J.M. Baskin. 2001.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container 
Cornus florida 
L. plants.  (http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 19 
May 2004). Forest Research Nursery, College of 
Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Bowen, M.S. 2003.  Louisiana ecosystems and plant 
identification  (http://rnrstreamer.lsu.edu/ecosystems/ 
webtour/, 24 May 2004). Ag Center, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge. 
 
Brand, M. 2001.  Cornus florida 
(http://www.hort.ucon.edu/plants/c/corflo/corflo1.ht
ml, 19 May 2004). University of Connecticut Plant 
Database, Storrs. 
 
Christman, S. 2004. Cornus florida 
(http://www.floridata.com/ref/C/cornus_f.cfm, 19 
May 2004). Floridata, Tallahassee. 
 
Cook, C.W. 2003.  Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
central North Carolina 
(http://www.duke.edu/~cwcook /trees/, 24 May 2004). 
Duke University, Durham. 
 
Evans, E. 2001.  Plant fact sheets 
(http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/factsh
eets/index.html, 19 May 2004). North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh. 
 
 
 
Gilman, E.F. and K.C. Ruppert. 1994.  Cornus 
florida,  Fact Sheet ENH-40 
(http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/MG267). Florida Cooperative 
Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural 
Science, University of Florida, Gainesville. 
 
Hamel, P.B. and M.U. Chiltoskey. 1975.  Cherokee 
plants and their uses—a 400 year history.  Herald 
Publishing, Sylva. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1977.  Iroquois medical botany.  State 
University of New York, Albany. 
 
Kujawski, J. and K.M. Davis. 2001.  Propagation 
protocol for production of plug and transplants of 
Cornus florida plants. 
(http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 19 May 2004). 
Forest Research Nursery, College of Natural 
Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
McLemore, B.F. 1990.  Flowering dogwood. 
(http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/pubs/silvics_manual/ta
ble_of_contents.htm, 19 May 2004). USDA Forest 
Service, Washington D.C.  
 
Tirmenstein, C.A. 1991.  Cornus florida. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 19 May 2004). 
Fire Sciences Laboratory,  Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, USDA Forest Service, Missoula. 
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 2003. 
Dendrology tree fact sheets 
(http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/factsheets.
cfm, 19 May 2004). Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University, Blacksburg. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 19 May 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 25May2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 25may06jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.