Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIAN SEAOATS 
Chasmanthium latifolium  
(Michx.) Yates  
Plant Symbol = CHLA5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Indian woodoats, broadleaf wood-oats, creek oats, 
Indian sea-oats, inland sea-oats, broadleaf uniola; 
Uniola latifolia 
 
Uses 
Chasmanthium latifolium  is best known for its 
ornamental uses.  It is a desirable ornamental grass 
because of its flower colo r, drought, moisture, salt 
and shade tolerance.  It is popular for its uses as cut 
flowers and for groundcover in partial or full shade.  
The flower heads may be cut and dried while the 
plant is green or when it has fully matured to its 
natural copper-brownish color.  The plant persists 
through winter or until snow weighs it down. 
      
The seeds have been noted as a source of food for 
birds and the leaves are a host plant for Linda’s 
Roadside Skipper ( Amblyscirtes linda), a butterfly 
native to Oklahoma.   Cattle will graze this species. 
   
Status 
In 2005, this species was  considered threatened in 
Michigan.  Please consult  the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious stat us, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Chasmanthium 
latifolium  (previously in the  Uniola genus and 
commonly called broadleaf uniola)  is a native, 
rhizomatous perennial often found in small colonies.  
The leaf shape and size are similar to many of the 
larger species of panic ( Panicum species) grasses.  
The height of this grass and the inflorescence (seed 
cluster) somewhat resemble domestic oats; thus, the 
common name “wood, creek, or sea oats.”  The 
weight of the seed heads causes the inflorescence to 
droop. 
 ©  Lee Davis USDA NRCS Nacogdoches Technical Office 
 
Stems are glabrous, relaxed and can reach heights of 
1.5 m.  Striated and glabrous leaves are found along 
the stem up to the base of the panicle.  The leaves are 
broad (0.8 to 2.0 cm) and 10-20 cm long.  Blade 
sheaths are small and glabrous.  Panicles are open 
and drooping with relaxed branching.  Spikelets have 
9-26 florets and are broad and flattened.  They range 
in lengths of 1.5-4 cm and widths of 1-2 cm.  Glumes 
and lemmas overlap; however, the glumes are smaller 
than the lemmas.  The glumes are 7-9 nerved, keels 
rough to the touch, and range in lengths of 5-8 mm.  
The lemmas are 9-15 nerv ed, keels rough to the 
touch, and range in lengths of 8-13mm.  Paleas are 6-
10 mm long with thin and dry margins.  Caryopsis is 
flat, oval in shape and range in lengths of 4-5 mm. 
 
Distribution 
Known from Arizona to Florida and Michigan to 
New Jersey.  For current di stribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation can be accomplished by allowing the 
seeds to mature and fall naturally or by plant 
division.   
 
Chasmanthium latifolium  is widely used in gardens 
throughout the United States.  They seed and spread 
readily if the spikelets are not removed before the

seeds mature.  It should be fertilized once a year, 
preferably with a slow release 3-1-2 ratio.  Since it 
may take up to three years for the plant to reach its 
optimum growth, new plantings should be spaced 
about 2 feet apart.  The new plants should be given a 
sufficient amount of water throughout the first 
growing season.  One inch of water per week is 
recommended, perhaps more during the dry, hot days 
of summer.  Mulch before the winter and mow the 
grass in the early spring.   
 
Adaptation: It inhabits areas along streams and water 
banks, shaded slopes and bottomland hardwoods.  It 
flowers from June to October and is found in 
hardiness zones 4-10.  In Te xas, this species is very 
common on loamy, terrace soils adjacent to creeks, 
bayous and rivers in eastern Texas, particularly under 
a hardwood forest canopy.  It becomes less common 
westward, although it is found under favorable 
conditions in the Edwards Plateau, Rio Grande 
Plains, and Southern Rolling Plains.  It is quite 
common in river bottoms of the Western Gulf Coast 
Prairie.  An abundance of  Chasmanthium latifolium 
is usually a good indicator of a Class I or II soil; 
though, it will grow on wet natured clayey soils.  It is 
never found on droughty sites.  Some of the literature 
suggests that it is found in marshes and mud flats.  
However, stress appears to limit the colonies to 1-3 
plants on wet sites, rath er than the 10-30 plant 
colonies commonly found on better-drained sites. 
 
General : There are 5-6 species of  Chasmanthium in 
the U.S. and three in Texas.  All are generally 
associated with forested ecosystems, but none 
resemble  Chasmanthium latifolium .  A similar 
species with regards to shade tolerance and 
vegetative growth habits, is savanna panic grass 
( Phanopyrum gymnocarpon).   Older references refer 
to this plant as  Panicum gymnocarpon .  Phanopyrum 
occurs on very wet (ponded) sites and the 
inflorescence is completely different.  Virginia 
wildrye ( Elymus virginicus)  in east Texas and Canada 
wildrye ( Elymus canadensis ) further west, commonly 
occupies similar forested sites but the seed head 
remains upright and the leaves of wildrye are 
clustered much more towards the base. 
 
Management 
Indian seaoats prefers a rich, well-drained soil and 
partial shade, approximately six hours of sun each 
day.  If spikelets are not removed before they mature, 
they propagate rapidly by seed.  Indian seaoats have 
no known diseases associated with it.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None known, though it is commonly available from 
selected seed companies and nurseries. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allen, C.M. 1992. Grasses of Louisiana . 2nd ed. 
Cajun Prairie Habitat Preservation Society, 
Louisiana. 74 p. 
 
Davis, L. 2000.  Texas plant fact sheet:  
Chasmanthium latifolium .  USDA, NRCS, 
Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, Nacogdoches, 
Texas. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten. 1979.  Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States – 
Monocotyledons . University of Georgia Press, 
Athens. 234 p. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.  Manual of the Grasses of the 
United States . 2nd ed. (revised by Agnes Chases.) 
U.S. Dept. of Agr. Misc. Publ. 200, 181 p. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2005.  The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Accessed: 050928. 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
USDI Geological Survey. 2002.  Butterflies of North 
America-butterflies of Oklahoma. Linda’s roadside 
skipper .  Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center.   
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/ resource/distr/lepid/BFL
YUSA/ok/6255.htm
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA NRCS Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas and Marya Gates, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited 08jan01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.