Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW MARIPOSA LILY 
Calochortus luteus  Dougl. ex 
Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = CALU9  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Mariposa, sego lily, yellow calochortus 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The bulbs were gathered for food with 
a digging stick by the southern Paiute and the Sierra 
Miwok.  The Miwok dug the bulbs when buds 
appeared on the plants in April or later in flowering.  
The bulbs were roasted for about 20 minutes in ashes 
of a fire that had died down.  When retrieved they 
were soft, like boiled potatoes.  The bulbs also were 
baked in an earth oven. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  Populations of this 
species are found in heavy soils in grassland, 
woodland, and mixed-evergreen forest below 700 m.  
The leaves are basal, 10-20 cm long, and linear.  The  showy flowers have 1-7 per stem.  The yellow petals 
are bell-shaped and often have a central red-brown  
 
blotch inside, sparsely slender-hairy near the base 
and the crescent-shaped nectary is not depressed.  
The fruit is an angled capsule, 3-6 cm long. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. The plant is found in the Sierra Nevada foothills, 
Sacramento Valley, centr al-western California, 
northwestern California, northern Channel Islands. 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College  @ CalPhotos 
 
Establishment 
Collect or buy seed from  local sources.  Place the 
seeds in a paper bag until you are ready to plant 
them.  Plant them in a 5 inch or deeper pot in a soil 
that has excellent drainage.  Scatter the seeds at least 
one-quarter inch apart.  Sprinkle a light layer of soil 
on top and then place quarte r-inch gravel on top of 
the soil.  The seed should be planted in the fall and 
requires no stratification.  Let the pots sit outside 
during the winter in partial shade.  Water the pots, 
keeping them slightly damp.  Germination is 
generally about February.  Fertilize the plants in a 
weak solution about once a month during active 
growth until April.  When the tips of the leaves turn 
yellow, stop watering and fertilizing (about the end of 
April).  The bulbs are dormant by flowering time.  In 
the fall start watering again.  Give the plants more 
room in the fall of the second or third year by 
transplanting them and spacing them 1-2 inches 
apart.  Plant the plants outside in the ground in the 
third or fourth year.  Plant them in full sun in summer 
or fall.  Start watering them in September.  After they 
have bloomed for the first time, they should be 
established. 
 
Management 
Weed around the plants re gularly and protect them 
from insects, birds, mammals, and other animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CALU9 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation

Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford. 1933.  Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Fiedler, P. & B. Ness 1993.   Calochortus.  pp. 1183-
1189 IN: The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of 
California.  J.C. Hickman  (ed.).  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 18sep00 jsp; 29a pr03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.