Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PECAN 
Carya illinoinensis  (Wangenh.) 
K. Koch  
Plant Symbol = CAIL2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Sweet pecan, Illinois nut, faux hickory, pecan 
hickory, pecan nut, pecan tree 
 
Uses 
Economic: Pecan trees produce edible nuts that have 
a high percentage of fat and are used extensively in 
candies and cookies (Stephens 1973).  These nuts are 
sweet and delicious and are often added to bread, 
cake, and ice cream.  The oil from the rejected nuts is 
used for cooking and cosmetics.  Milk can be made 
from the seed and is used to thicken soups and season 
corn cakes (Facciola  1990).  The wood has  occasionally been used for flooring, furniture, 
cabinetry, paneling, and agriculture implements.   
 
Medicinal
: Pecan was used by the Comanche as a 
treatment for ringworm.  They would pulverize the 
leaves and rubbed them on  the infected part of the 
ringworm.  The Kiowa would consume a decoction 
made from the bark of pecan for tuberculosis 
(Moerman 1998). 
 
Wildlife : Seedling and lower branches of older pecan 
trees are browsed heavily by white-tailed deer.  Many 
birds, opossums, raccoons, and squirrels eat pecan 
nuts.  This tree provides cover for a variety of birds 
and mammals in the forests of southeastern United 
States.   
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Agroforestry : Pecan trees are valuable species in 
alley cropping systems.  An agricultural crop is 
grown simultaneously with a long-term tree crop to 
provide annual income while the tree crop matures.  
Fine hardwoods, such as pecan trees, are planted side 
by side in alleys, or strips in alley cropping systems 
and can potentially provide high value logs for 
lumber or veneer.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Walnut Family (Junglandaceae).  Pecan is a 
native, medium to large sized deciduous tree ranging 
from 100-140 feet.  The leaves are alternate, 
pinnately compound, ten to twenty inches long, 
eleven to seventeen leaflets that are four to eight 
inches long (Harrar & Harrar 1962).  The flowers are 
unisexual, both sexes are borne in separate clusters 
on the same tree.  The fruit is thin-shelled nuts; four 
winged from base to apex, borne in clusters of three 
to twelve (Ibid.).  A ridge is formed where the two 
halves of the outer fruit come together.  The fruit is 
dark brown in color and covered with yellow scales.  
The husk is thin and brittle.  The husk often persists 
on the branch into the winter  after dropping the nut.  
The nut is thin shelled with a reddish-brown color 
and pointed at both ends.  The bark is grayish brown 
or light brown and is flat ridged and shallowly 
furrowed.

Distribution: Pecan is native from Iowa to Indiana to 
Alabama, Texas and Mexico  (Dirr 1990).  This tree 
follows the river basins very closely, principally 
along the Mississippi and its tributaries, the Colorado 
River in Texas, and along some of its tributaries in 
Mexico.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Pecan trees commonly grow on rich, moist, well-
drained soils that are not subject to prolonged 
flooding.  It appears near river bottoms and on heavy 
textured soil.  This species grows in a humid climate 
usually appearing with sweet gum, water oak, 
poplars, honey locust, and American elm.  It grows 
best where summer temperatures average 24-30º C. 
Pecan is susceptible to fire damage due to the low 
insulating capacity of the bark.  Post-fire re-
colonization occurs via seeds carried to the site by 
animals and water. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seeds are best sown in a cold 
frame as soon as they are ripe.  Pecan seeds show 
delayed germination and require a period of cold 
stratification.  Seeds should be stratified at 36-41º F 
for thirty to sixty days and then followed by 
incubation at room temperature.  The seedlings 
should be transplanted when  they are large enough to 
handle and planted in deep pots to accommodate the 
taproot.  Put the plants in their permanent positions as 
soon as possible, preferable during the first summer, 
and give them some protection from the cold for the 
first winter (Sheat 1948).   Pecan requires a frost-free 
period of 6 to 9 months for nuts to be produced and 
mature.  The trees require 1 to 2 inches of rain per 
week during the growing season. 
 
Propogation by root sprouting : Nuts sown in the fall 
are subjected to the necessary cold stratification and 
will germinate in the spring  in moist soils.  Pecan can 
also be propagated through root sprouting, but does 
not respond well to transplan ting.  Pecan trees prefer 
deep, moist soils, in full sun. 
 
Management 
The best time to plant pecan trees is during the 
months of December, January, and February.  The 
hole should preferable be dug six or eight inches 
wider than extended lateral roots and eight inches 
deeper than the length of the taproot.  Very little 
pruning is needed since pecan trees form a natural, 
vase shaped canopy.  Remove only diseased, dead, or 
broken limbs on a regular basis.   
 
Pecan trees are susceptible to a variety of insects, 
pests and diseases.  It is best to establish a good 
disease and insect control program to protect this 
species.  Grown in its native habitat and using local 
seed stock, pecan should not be prone to debilitating 
pests.  Pecan often suffers from zinc deficiency.  To 
compensate for this the trees should be sprayed every 
2 to 4 weeks in the spring and early summer with 
zinc sulfate.  Soil tests w ill ensure the proper amount 
of zinc sulfate is applied. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
 Materials are readily ava ilable for commercial seed 
sources.   Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Brown, C.A. 1965.  Louisiana trees and shrubs .  
Claitor’s Bookstore, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Brown, C.L. & L.K. Kirkman 1990.   Trees of 
Georgia and adjacent states .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians . Papers of 
the Michigan Acad emy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas . Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas. 1881 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Inc., 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Floridata.com LC. 2002. www.floridata.com
 
Facciola, S. 1990.   Cornucopia-a source book of 
edible plants .  Kampong Publications.

Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of the 
Great Plains.  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas.  1392 pp. 
 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin, & F.M. 
White 1996.   Textbook of dendrology .  8th edition.  
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, New York.  534pp. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Hunter, C.G. 1995.   Trees, shrubs, and vines of 
Arkansas .  2nd ed.  The Ozark Society Foundation, 
Little Rock, Arkansas. 
 
Lemmon, R.S. 1952.   The best loved trees of 
America .  The American Garden Guild and 
Doubleday & Company, Inc., Garden City, New 
York. 
 
Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium Staff 1976.  Hortus 
Third .  Macmillan Publishing Company.  1290 pp. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1989.   North American trees.  4th ed.  
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sheat, W.G. 1948.   Propagation of trees, shrubs, and 
conifers.  MacMillan & Company. 
 
USDA Forest Service 2001.   Fire effects information 
system. Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Boise, Idaho. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/databas e/feis/plants/tree/carill/in
dex.html
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Matthew Hurteau 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, Davis, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.