Plant Guide
CHRIST’S INDIAN 
PAINTBRUSH  
Castilleja christii  N.H. Holmgren 
Plant Symbol = CACH19 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program   
 
Figure 1 Carol Dawson, Center of Plant Conservation 
 
Alternate Names   
None known.   
   
Uses   
Christ’s Indian paintbrush is one of Idaho’s rarest plants.  
A single population occurs in the Albion Mountains of 
Cassia County, Idaho.  It was named after John H. Christ, 
t he first botanist to collect the species (Center for Plant 
Conservation 2006).  This species has no known 
agricultural, economic, or other human uses at this time.  
This species may have scientific significance due to its 
evolutionary isolation which is an  important subject in 
conservation biology research.   Status 
 
Christ’s Indian paintbrush is currently a Candidate for 
listing under the Endangered Species Act and is on the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service Notice of Review list.  It is also 
a Sensitive plant species on the Regional Foresters 
Sensitive List for the Intermountain Region of the USDA 
Forest Service.    
   
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species , state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Description   
General : Perennial herb, 5 to 15 inches tall; stems erect to 
ascending, usually unbranched, several to a cluster; 
herbage glabrous to hispid with some hairs gland -tipped 
near  the inflorescence.  The leaves are 2 -5 inches long, 
narrowly to broadly lanceolate, with 1 or maybe 2 pairs of 
lateral lobes, although sometimes all entire.  The 
inflorescence is glandular, yellow to yellow orange, the 
bracts lanceolate to ovate, with 1 o r 2 pairs of narrow 
lateral lobes; the calyx is 0.5 to 1 inch long, the primary 
lobes more deeply cleft in front than behind; the corolla is 
approximately 1 to 1.5 inches long, the galea about 0.5 
inch and the lower lip much reduced with incurved teeth, 
th e tube 0.5 to 0.75 inch long (Mosley 1993).  This and 
other paintbrush species are often believed to be purely 
parasitic, meaning that they survive by using resources 
produced in another plant host.  However, Christ’s Indian 
paintbrush is actually hemi -par asitic in that it is capable 
of independent production of nutrients but gains 
additional nutrients through root attachment with 
surrounding plants (Center for Plant Conservation 2006).   
   
Distribution : Known from one population on Mount 
Harrison, Cassia Co unty, Idaho.  For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : Christ’s Indian paintbrush is found in grassy 
upper sub -alpine meadows along the crest and slope of 
Mount Harrison in loamy gravel and  occurs most often in 
areas where snowdrifts remain into early summer.  It is 
found among stands of Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa 
secunda), Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis), alpine 
goldenrod ( Solidago multiraciata), western yarrow 
( Achillea millefolium ) and coiled-beak lousewort 
(Pedicularis contorta) (Center for Plant Conservation 
2006).   
   
Adaptation   
Christ’s Indian paintbrush occurs almost exclusively on 
gentle, northerly facing slopes (9,100 feet elevation) of