Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TRUMPET CREEPER
Campsis radicans (L.) Seem. 
ex Bureau  
Plant Symbol = CARA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warning: Contact with the leaves and flowers of 
trumpet creeper results in skin redness and 
swelling among mammals.  It is also slightly toxic 
if ingested. 
 
Alternate Names  
Bignonia radicans, cow-itch,  Gelseminum radicans, 
Tecoma radicans, Tecoma speciosa, trumpet flower, 
trumpet vine . 
 
Uses 
Ornamental:  The showy flowers of trumpet creeper 
make this plant appropriate for some gardening and 
landscaping needs. It is often used as a cover for 
fences, arbors, walls, pillars or large trellises and as a 
groundcover. The cigar-like fruit may be considered 
decorative during winter.  
 
Wildlife:  The tubular flowers and large quantities of 
nectar produced by trumpet  creeper are attractants for  
hummingbirds and butterflies. The vines also provide 
habitat to ants. 
 
Legal Status 
Trumpet creeper is an invasive weed. Please consult 
the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov) and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered  species, state noxious stat
us, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 J.R. Manhart. 2004 Texas A & M University Herbarium
 
Description 
General: Bignonia Family (Bignoniaceae). Trumpet 
creeper is a deciduous or partly evergreen vine that 
climbs by aerial rootlets and twining stems.  This is a 
U.S. native.  Stems can grow up to 12 m long and 
have numerous aerial rootlets. Leaves are opposite, 
pinnately compound and coarsely toothed, composed 
of 7, 9, or 11 leaflets. Leaflets are somewhat shiny 
and dark green.  Flowers are yellow-orange to red, 
tubular, and up to 8 cm long and 4 cm wide at the 
mouth.  Flowers are born in clusters of four to a 
dozen and bloom from July through August. The fruit 
is a flat, tapered capsule, 8-13 cm long with seeds 
that are flat and winged.  
 
Distinguishing characters of trumpet creeper include 
its U-shaped bundle scars  on the stem, abundant root-
like aerial stems, opposite compound leaves that are 
coarsely toothed, large trumpet-shaped flowers, and 
its light tan bark that appears flaky on mature stems.  
 
Distribution : Trumpet creeper is native to eastern, 
north-central, and south-central portions of the 
United States and has become naturalized in New 
England.  Its natural range occurs from New Jersey to 
Ontario and Iowa, and south to Florida and Texas. 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Trumpet creeper is found in thickets, dry 
woods, waste grounds, railroads, disturbed sites, 
clearings, and along roadsides and fencerows. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones  for trumpet creeper are 
4-10. It grows in wet to dry soils and sand, loam, or 
clay soil types with a pH range of 3.7 to 6.8. Trumpet 
creeper prefers full sun for best flowering.

Management 
If not controlled, rampant growth will become a 
problem.  Vines should be thinned throughout the 
growing season and cut back in winter to prevent 
aggressive spread. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Planthoppers may occasionally feed on trumpet vine 
but generally do not cause serious damage. Leaf spots 
caused by various fungi may be seen but are not 
serious.  Mildew causes  a white powdery growth on 
the leaves. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Trumpet creeper is typically propagated by cuttings. 
It readily roots and develops new suckers that allow 
the species to grow rapidly. 
 
Seeds are prepared for ge rmination by stratifying 
them in moist sand for 60 days at 4oC and 30% 
relative humidity.  Fungicide should be added to the 
sand to prevent mildew formation.  For spring 
outplanting, seeds are sown in early fall.  Sixty 
percent germination will occur within two weeks of 
removal from stratification conditions.  There is no 
special treatment required for establishment other 
than monitoring for water needs. 
 
During the active growth phase, plants will need to 
be cutback to encourage root growth and prevent the 
tangling of foliage.  Seedlings will need to harden in 
winter-like temperatures  before outplanting. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
any cultivars of trumpet creeper for conservation use.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Ornamental cultivars of trumpet creeper include 
‘Atropurpurea,’ ‘Crimson Trumpet,’ ‘Flamenco,’ 
‘Flava,’ ‘Madame Galen,’ ‘Minor,’ ‘Praecox,’ 
‘Speciosa,’ and ‘Variegata.’  These cultivars have 
been bred for flower and foliage color and for rapid 
growth. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.   
 
References 
Brand, M. 2001.  University of Connecticut plants 
database , 
(http://www.hort.uconn.edu/plants/index.html, 30 
April 2004). University of Connecticut, Storrs. 
 
Davis, K.M. and J.L. Kujawski. 2001.  Propagation 
protocol for vegetative production of container 
Campsis radicans plants.  
(http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 3 May 2004). 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery, Moscow.   
 
Gilman, E.F. 1999. Campsis radicans. Fact Sheet 
FPS-99. Florida Cooperative Extension Service, 
Institute of Food and Agricultural Science, University 
of Florida, Gainsville. 
 
Michigan State University Extension. 2004. 
Ornamental plants plus,  version 3.0 
(http://www.msue.msu.edu/imp/modzz/masterzz. 
html, 30 April 2004). Michig an State University, East 
Lansing. 
 
North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service. 2004 
Consumer horticulture  
(http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/, 30 
April 2004). North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh.  
 
Stevenson, R. 1998. Conservation New England  
(http://site.www.umb.edu/conne/index.html, 30 April 
2004). University of Massachusetts, Boston. 
 
Virginia Cooperative Extension Service. 2004.  VCE 
resources 
(http://www.ext.vt.edu/departments/envirohort/factsh
eets/vines/trmptcr.html, 30 April 2004). Virginia 
Tech, Blacksburg. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants  
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 30 April 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS, National Plant Data Center  
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 10May2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.