Plant Guide  
 
 
JONES’ WAXY 
DOGBANE  
Cycladenia humilis  Benth. var. 
jonesii  (Eastw.) S.L. Welsh & 
N.D. Atwood  
Plant Symbol = CYHUJ  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho  and Utah Plant 
Materials Program  
 
 
Jones’ waxy dogbanec ( Cycladenia humilis var. jonesii ). Photo 
from  USDI -NPS  
 
Alternate Names  
Cycladenia jonesii  
Jones’  cycladenia  
 
Uses  
There are no known uses associated with Jones’ 
waxy dogbane .  
 
Status  
Jones’  waxy dogbane  was listed  as a threatened 
species by the US DI Fish and Wildlife Service in 
1986 (USDI -FWS, 1986).  In 2008 the US DI FWS 
published a recovery outline assigning Jones’  waxy 
dogbane  a priority of 12C, moderate threat to a 
subspecies (USDI -FWS, 2008).  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland ind icator values). 
 
 
  Description
 
General : Dogbane  family ( Apocynaceae).  Jones’ 
waxy dogbane is  a long lived herbaceous perennial 
forb. At maturity , plants are 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 in) 
tall with wide, oval or elliptical leaves . The flowers 
are trumpet shaped,  whitish pink to purp le, and 
somewhat  resemble morning glory flowers . The plant 
forms an underground woody crown extending to a 
deep taproot. The plants are clonal and  may spread 
via rhizomes and stolons  (Sipes and Wolf, 1997; 
Wolf et al., 1992) . 
 
Distribu tion: 
Jones’  waxy dogbane  has been found in Emery, 
Grand, Garfield and Kane Counties Utah and in 
Mohave County, Arizona.  For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Jones’  waxy dogbane  grows in arid sites at 1,300 to 
1,800 m (4,300 to 6,000 ft) elevation in desert scrub  
and  juniper plant communities  receiving 6 to 9 inches 
of mean annual precipitation . 
 
Adaptation  
This species is endemic to g ypsiferous, saline soils of 
the Cutler, Summe rville, and Chinle geologic 
formations.  It is adapted to the arid desert scrub 
environment due to its deep taproot (Welsh et al., 
2003).  
 
Management  
Jones’  waxy dogbane  has extremely limited fruiting 
and seed set. No seedling germination has been 
observed  in multiple surveys. It is believed that the 
species has a complex pollination system and that 
suitable pollinators may have been lost (Sipes and 
Tepidino,  1996). Lack of recruitment puts this 
species at serious risk to habitat disturbances.  
 
The major thr eats to Jones’  waxy dogbane  habitat are 
off -highway vehicle (OHV) use, and oil, gas, and 
mineral exploration. Additional threats include 
mountain biking and livestock grazing.  
 
It has r ecently  been determined that Jones’  waxy 
dogbane  i s g enetically similar  to California 
populations  of Cycladenia humilis  and  has therefore 
been  recommended  for delisting (Last, 2009).