Plant Guide
RUSH SKELETONWEED 
Chondrilla  juncea L.  
Plant Symbol = CHJU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana  State Office  
 
Rush skeletonweed rosette and flowering stem .  Photo by Tim 
Prather , University of Idaho
 
 
Caution:  This plant  may be weedy  or invasive
  .
 
Alternate Names
 
skeletonweed, naked weed, gum succory . 
 
Uses    
Rush skeletonweed is palatable and nutritious in the 
rosette and early bolting stages and makes good sheep and 
goat  fodder.    
 
Honey bees use it for pol len and honey. 
  Status
   
Rush skeletonweed  is a non -native, invasive terrestrial 
forb listed as noxious, prohibited, or banned in nine 
western  states.  
 
Weediness  
This plant may be weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  C onsult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.   Additional weed informatio n is available 
from the P LANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov.  C onsult 
o the r r elated  web  sites on the Plant Profile for this species 
for further information.  
 
Description  
Rush skeletonweed forms a rosette of prostrate, glabrous  
leaves 1 .6 to 24.7 inches (4- 12 centimeters ) long, 0.6 to 
1.8 inches (1.5 to 4.5 c entimeters) wide, and oblanceolate 
in shape .  The leaf margins are deeply and irregularly 
toothed with lobes pointing backward toward the leaf base 
(runcinate)  similar to the rosette  leaves of dandelion 
( Taraxacum  spp).  The leaf base narrows to a short, 
winged petiole.   Normally, one flowering stem grows per 
rosette.  Flowering  stems reach heights of 1.6 to 3.3 feet 
(50 -100 c entimeters ) and have numerous spreading or 
ascending branches.  They are glabrous except for short, 
rigid, downward -pointing hairs near the base, similar to 
prickly lettuce ( Lactuca sirriola ).  Generally, the stems 
are leafless, they may have long -linear, bract -like leaves, 
or they may have leaves similar to the r osette leaves but 
smaller and only on the lower part of the stem.  The 
rosette leaves die at flowering leaving a skeleton -like 
stem.  
 
The flowerheads (capitula) are solitary or in groups of 
two to five in the stem branch axils, along the branches, 
and at t he branch ends.  The cylindrical involucre has two 
rows of bracts; the outer row is very short and crown -like, 
the inner row has seven to nine linear -lanceolate bracts 
with either no hairs, sparsely tomentose, or sometimes a 
row of rigid hairs on the media n line.  Each capitulum 
bears nine to 12 bright yellow, ligulate florets.  The florets 
produce achenes (small fruits) three to four millimeters 
long and with numerous ribs.  At the tip of the achene is a 
beak five to six millimeters long that bears a pappu s of 
numerous soft bristles.  The pappus facilitates wind 
dispersal.  
 
The taproot of rush skeletonweed is small in diameter but 
penetrates deeply into the soil.  Lateral roots are produced 
along  its entire length.  Rosettes can grow from 
adventitious bud s at the top of the tap root and along