Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON CAMAS 
Camassia quamash (Pursh) 
Greene ssp.  beviflora Gould 
Plant Symbol = CAQUB2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Corvallis (OR) Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternative Names 
small camas, blue camas; Camassia esculenta. 
 
Warning: Death camas (Zigadenus venenosus ) can 
be confused with edible camas bulbs and is toxic.  Be 
sure of your identification of camas bulbs before 
eating them! 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Camas was and continues to be one of 
the most important "root" foods of western North 
American indigenous peoples, from southwestern 
British Columbia to Montana, and south to California 
(Kuhnlein and Turner 1991).  The part of the plant 
that was relished is actually a bulb.  Camas was used  by Northwest Coast peoples, the Coast Salish of 
Vancouver Island, western Washington groups,  
 
Squamish, Sechelt, Comox, and Kwak-waka'wakw of 
the British Columbia coast.  Camas was considered to 
be one of the most important bulbs to local California 
natives.  The Maidu particularly valued great camas.  
 
Except for choice varieties of dried salmon, no other 
food item was more widely traded (Gunther 1973).  
People traveled great dist
ances to harvest the bulbs 
and there is some suggestion that plants were 
dispersed beyond their range by transplanting (Turner 
and Efrat 1982; Turner et al. 1983).  To the Nez 
Perce people, camas is still the most important root in 
trade, and trading is traditionally impossible without 
camas bulbs (Harbinger 1964).  Dried camas is the 
most expensive form of camas, with baked and then 
raw camas being less expensive.  At marriage trades, 
the girl’s family gives roots in corn husk bags.  At 
funeral trades, the widow gives camas roots to friends 
and relatives.  The Nez Per ce traded camas roots with 
the Warm Springs, Umatilla, Cayuse, Walla Walla, 
Nespelem, Yakama, Crows, and Flatheads. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
The bulbs were usually dug after flowering, in 
summer, although some peoples dug them in spring.  
Harvesting the bulbs traditionally took weeks or 
months among the Nez Perce.  Each family group 
"owned" its own camping spot and harvesting spot.  
These were passed down in families from generation 
to generation.  Turf was lifted out systematically in 
small sections and then replaced after only larger 
bulbs had been removed.  The bulbs were dug with a 
pointed digging stick.  Bulbs were broken up and 
replanted.  Annual controlled burning was used to 
maintain an open prairie-like habitat for optimum 
camas production.  Areas were harvested only every 
few years. 
 
Traditionally, camas bulbs were almost always pit-
cooked.  Within the past 100  years, camas bulbs have 
also been cooked by stovetop methods (Turner and 
Kuhnlein 1983).  The bulbs are allowed to cook for 
24-36 hours when pit-cooked (Turner and Bell 1971).  
It is probable that lengthy cooking is necessary for 
maximum conversion of the inulin in  Camassia to 
fructose.  The sweetness of cooked camas gave it 
utility as a sweetener and enhancer of other foods. 
Before sugar, European traders introduced molasses, 
and honey.  Sweetening agents were in short supply 
among native peoples, and camas was highly valued

in this capacity.  Sometimes other foods, such as the 
rhizomes of springbank clover (Trifolium 
wormskioldii) and the roots of Pacific silverweed 
( Potentilla anserina  ssp. pacifica ) were cooked with 
the camas bulbs.  The Kalapuyan of the Willamette 
Valley in Oregon used to flavor camas with tarweed 
( Madia elegans ).  Bulbs don’t keep well fresh.  They 
were cooked or sun-dried and stored for later use. 
Sometimes camas bulbs were pressed flat and made 
into camas cakes the size of biscuits before being 
dried (Turner et al. 1983).  Dried bulbs were re-
constituted by soaking in water, usually overnight. 
 
Many of the traditional camas gathering sites, such as 
Weippe Prairie and Camas Prairie in Idaho and the 
Willamette Valley in Oregon, have been converted to 
agriculture.  The average size of a camas patch 
needed to feed a five person family was 2.7 ha 
(Thoms 1989).  Camas roots are hard to find now. 
Restoration of camas prairies and access to camas 
bulbs are priorities of many Indian people.  At one 
time, “When camas was in bloom in wet meadows, 
the flowers grow so thickly that they look like a blue 
lake” (Murphey 1959).  
 
Camas stalks and leaves were used for making 
mattresses.  It was sometimes used in place of grass 
when baking camas in pits.  Camas is used by the 
Nez Perce as a cough medicine .  It is boiled, and the 
juice is strained and mixed with honey. 
 
Ornamental : Horticulturally, this plant is used for cut 
flowers, beds, borders, ground cover, rock gardens, 
and prairie restoration. 
 
Wildlife : Elk, deer, and moose reportedly graze 
camas early in the spring (Craighead, Craighead, and 
Davis 1963).  Gophers eat camas and move the bulbs 
to another area where they sprout and grow the next 
year (Watson 1988).  Indian women in Oregon’s 
Umpqua Valley robbed camas bulbs from gopher 
caches (Piper 1916).  Herb ivorous insects also eat 
camas leaves.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  Common camas 
( Camassia quamash  ssp. breviflora ) is a stout, robust, 
12-28 inches (30-70 cm) tall plant with a dense 
inflorescence.  Camases are liliaceous, perennial 
herbs that grow from an edible bulb.  The leaves are  long and narrow, grass-like, and emerge from the 
base.  Common camas flowers are light to deep blue; 
more than 3 flowers in an 
inflorescence may be open 
at one time.  Camas flowers have 6 tepals, 6 stamens, 
and 3 stigmas.  The inflorescence is a spike-like 
cluster borne on a leafless stem that is held above the 
leaves.  Common camas is distinguished from great 
camas ( Camassia quamash  ssp.quamash) by the 
following: the flowers are slightly irregular, with the 
lowest tepal curving outward away from the stem; the 
anthers are bright yellow; the plant is relatively short 
and stout, with shorter flower stalks and smaller 
bulbs; and there is no waxy powder on the leaves.   
Common camas blooms from April through June.  
The fruits are barrel-shaped to three-angled capsules, 
splitting into three parts to release many black, 
angled seeds. 
 
Distribution 
Common camas grows in wet meadows, wet prairies, 
swales, depressions, annual floodplains, moist 
hillsides, and streamside areas.  Camas habitat is 
often ephemeral, drying out by late spring.  Common 
camas grows throughout the American West to 
southwest Alberta, Montana, Wyoming, and Utah at 
elevations below 3300 meters.  The southern limit of 
its range in California is the high Sierra Nevada 
Mountains and Modoc Plateau.  In British Columbia, 
common camas is found in moist meadows, rocky 
outcrops, bluffs, and islands in southwestern British 
Columbia, mainly on southwestern Vancouver Island 
and the Gulf Islands.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Common camas can be propagated from seeds or 
bulbs.  Common camas generally prefers full sun to 
partial shade, with bulb depth ranging from 2-8 
inches (most commonly 4-6 inches deep).  The bulbs 
of common camas can be substantially smaller in size 
and occur at more shallow soil depths than great 
camas.  Bulb depth appears limited by shallow water 
tables, anoxic conditions, or restrictive layers.  The 
occasional occurrence of a large, thick root beneath a 
bulb may aid in re-locating or re-establishing it at a 
greater depth.  Plants require irrigation or moist soil 
conditions to become established, and camas can be 
difficult to establish in California. 
 
Live Plant (Bulb) Collections 
Common camas is readily established by 
transplanting wild or commercially grown bulbs.  
Wild harvests should be restricted to salvage sites 
with appropriate approvals or permits.  Due to loss of 
wetland habitat throughout the United States,

harvesting plants from the wild is rarely appropriate 
or legal except under salvage situations.  Use of bulbs 
or seeds from local nurseries or greenhouses is 
strongly recommended. 
 
The best time to excavate bulbs is from early summer 
through mid-fall.  This is the “quiescent” period that 
follows seed maturation, foliar senescence, and 
development of the daughter bulb.  However, 
commercial bulb harvest ta kes place when the leaves 
are still green and must be done carefully to avoid 
damage.  The bulb tunic or covering is very thin (De 
Hertogh and Le Nard 1993).  Given that camas 
commonly occupies sites high in silt and clay that dry 
out in summer, windows for digging are often 
narrow.  There is a brief pe riod when soils are moist 
after flowering in the spring; the next time to harvest 
is in the fall after the rains begin.  Store the bulbs in a 
dry, dark, cool, well ventilated place in a potting 
medium such as dry peat moss, similar to 
recommendations for fall planted/spring flowering 
bulbs (such as daffodils and tulips).  Keep the bulbs 
from completely drying out and transport or store at 
63-68° F (De Hertogh, Noone and Lutman 1990).  
Common camas reproduces vegetatively by offset 
bulblets (De Hertogh et. al. 1993).  However, much 
less than one percent of a wild population may 
produce offsets and bulbs may be stimulated to do so 
only as the result of a wound (Thoms 1989).  
 
Plant camas outdoors in the fall or early winter, when 
soils are moist enough to dig and prevailing soil 
temperatures are cool.  This is generally below 60°F.  
Fall planting allows for better root development and 
fulfillment of any chilling requirement for flowering 
(De Hertogh et. al. 1993).  Bulbs, bulblets, and 
offsets can be utilized.  However, if flowering is 
desired the following spring, bulbs must be of 
sufficient age (3-5 years old with 3-4 bulb leaves or 
scales) and size (Thoms 1989).  Bulb leaves are 
laminate concentric layers that comprise much of the 
bulb, reminiscent of an onion.  Bulbs with just two 
bulb leaves never flower, those with three routinely 
flower, and those with four almost always flower.  
Older bulbs will be found deeper in the ground, and 
bulbs which flower will probably be at least 0.6-0.8 
inch (1.5-2.0 cm) wide (Thoms 1989).  In the 
commercial bulb trade, the minimum size for export 
and thus flowering is a circumference of 2.4 inches (6 
cm) (De Hertogh and Le Nard 1993).  This is roughly 
equivalent to a diameter of 0.75 inch and about one-
half the diameter and circumference of great camas. 
 
The larger the bulb, the greater the planting depth can 
be.  Planting depth ranges from 0.5-1 inches for 1-2 
year old bulblets up to 4-6 inches for mature bulbs  (as measured to their base). 
 Larger bulbs (1.5 inches 
in diameter or greater) ca n be planted deeper (8-10 
inches) if drainage is ap propriate.  Commercial 
production involves planting from October to 
November in well drained soil of pH 6-7 with at least 
2% organic matter, covering with at least 3 inches of 
soil above the bulb “nose”, applying 2 inches of 
straw mulch, fertilizing with 7-14-28 fertilizer four 
weeks after planting, and harvesting in July (De 
Hertogh, Noone and Lutman 1990).  Keep the camas 
bed damp until it gets warm.  Once plants senesce 
after flowering, stop watering so seeds form and 
bulbs cure.  Suggested spacing for flower beds and 
naturalized landscapes vary from 3-4 inches apart (8-
10 per sq. ft.) to 6-8 inches apart.  Other publications 
recommend 6-8 bulbs every 12 inches for outdoor 
gardens.  A dense “natural” stand may have 9 
plants/sq. ft. (100/sq. meter) or more (Thoms 1989).  
It may be necessary to bury bulbs with a protective 
wire mesh to prevent herbiv ory.  The mesh needs to 
be coarse enough to allow shoots to grow through 
(De Hertogh et. al. 1993). 
 
Seed Collections 
Common camas propagates easily from seed.  It can 
be collected as soon as the pods mature (turn light 
brown) or split open to reveal the mature black seeds.  
Pods ripen from late May- July depending on 
latitude, longitude, moisture conditions, or elevation.  
Dry seeds can be stored frozen or in a cool, dry place 
prior to planting.  
 
Camas seed requires 42-100 days of cold  
temperatures (34-40°F) under moist stratification for 
maximum germination (90-100%)(Emery 1988, 
Guerrant and Raven 1995, Deno 1993, Northway 
pers. comm. 1998, Thoms 1989).  “Moist 
stratification” means placement of seeds which are 
“imbibed”, or have soaked  up water, in layers of a 
moist medium at cool temperatures to allow for after-
ripening.  Germination also  requires cool conditions 
and can occur in the dark (Northway pers. comm. 
1998).  The alternative is to plant seed outdoors in the 
fall (Sept-Oct).  One-leafed , grass-like seedlings will 
emerge in February or March under suitable 
conditions.  Seedlings require moisture through the 
spring growing period to survive.  Warm 
temperatures during seedling development can be 
lethal. 
 
Suggested site preparation methods and seeding rates 
for wetland revegetation are not well known, but a 
broadcast rate of 20 live seeds/sq. ft. for both 
Camassia  sub-species resulted in poor to good 
seedling counts the following spring (0-10 or more 
seedlings/sq. ft.) (Darris, pers. comm., 1999).

Seedling success was dependent on weed 
competition, hydrology, type of disturbance, mulch, 
erosion, or other factors.  Camas seedlings were 
inhibited by dense stands of live grass such as Lolium 
multiflorum .  However, seedlings appeared to benefit 
when grown in the mulch of native grass 
( Deschampsia cespitosa), at least on well-drained, 
stable, slightly higher ground ( Ibid).  In areas with 
wet, mild winters, soil scar ification for shallow seed 
coverage or just constant moisture from irrigation or 
winter rains can result in good germination.  At least 
one grower sows seed directly on the soil surface in 
the fall (Robinson pers. comm. 1999).  However, 
other growers have found that a 1-2 inch covering of 
organic mulch is required during the first growing 
season to protect the tiny  bulblet from exposure to 
dry soil, surface cracking, and extreme temperatures.  
Sawdust or a chemically killed dense stand of grass 
works well (Watson pers. comm. 1999).  Seeds 
deeper than 0.4-0.8 inch (1-2 cm) will not germinate 
successfully (Watson 1988).   
 
Seeds per pound :  Camassia quamash  ssp. breviflora  
– 131,000 (+/- 20,000) 
 
Management 
Camas is favored as forage by deer so fencing or 
repellents may be useful, particularly during the first 
growing season.  Consistent soil moisture is required 
every spring, but the soil can be allowed to dry out 
soon after the pods mature  or the leaves senesce (dry 
up and turn brown).  Moderate soil nutrient levels are 
beneficial.  In natural settings, minor soil disturbance 
(loosening, surface scarifica tion) adjacent to existing 
specimens may enhance natural regeneration by seed.  
Late summer field burning (where and when 
permitted) may improve stand vigor, reduce 
competition from brush and certain weeds, and aid in 
regeneration.  For optimal bulb development, avoid 
mowing or grazing more than lightly, if at all, even 
during foliar senescence.  Individual plants may live 
15-20 years. 
 
Traditional Resource Management (TRM) was often 
intensive, to the point of being considered “semi-
agricultural” by some.  According to Dr. Nancy 
Turner, TRM included the following: 
•   Ownership, demarcation, and inheritance of beds 
or patches,  
•   Clearing of rock, brush, and weedy vegetation,  
•  Harvesting bulbs after seeds were produced, 
during specific times of the year,  
•   Periodic field burning in summer after digging,  
•  In some cases, sod removal then bulb removal 
followed by sod replacement,  
•   Digging or “cultivation” to keep the soil loose,  
•  “Selective breeding” by transplanting “better” 
bulbs to the beds,  
•   Sustainable harvest techni ques, including partial, 
selective harvests and incidental or planned 
promotion of camas colonization and 
reproduction, and  
•  Death camas bulbs ( Zigadenus venenosus ) were 
removed, so they wouldn’t accidentally be 
mistaken for the edible camas bulbs.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CAQUB2 is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Cultivars of common 
camas are available from the flower bulb industry.  
Camassia quamash ‘Orion’ is deep blue, while those 
of ‘San Juan Form’ are an even deeper, more vibrant 
blue.  There is also a wh ite form (Benzel 1995).  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture.  Indian life of the Yosemite region .  Yosemite 
Association, Yosemite National Parks, California.  
388 pp. 
 
Barton, B.J. 1997.   Gardening by mail.  A source 
book .  A Mariner Book, Houghton Mifflin Company, 
Boston & New York. 
 
Brenzel, K.N. (ed.) 1995.   Sunset western garden 
book .  Sunset Publishing Corporation, Menlo Park, 
California.  200 pp. 
 
Bryan, J. 1989.   Bulbs (2 volumes).  Timber Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
CalPhotos. 2000.   Camassia quamash ssp.  breviflora.  
Version: 000328.  Photo: Brother Alfred Brousseau.  
<http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?seq_num
=2643&one=T>.  CalFlora, Inc., Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Craighead, J.J., F.C. Craighead, & R.J. Davis 1963.  
A field guide to Rocky Mountain wildflowers .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
Cooke, S.S. (ed.) 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and

northwestern Oregon.  Seattle Audubon Society & 
Washington Native Plant Society.  415 pp. 
 
Deno, N.C.  1993.   Seed germination theory and 
practice.  Self-published and self-distributed.  
Professor Emeritus of Chem istry, State College, 
Pennsylvania.  110 pp.  
 
De Hertogh, A.A., L.B. Gallitano, G.H. Pemberton, 
& M.E. Traer 1993.   Guidelines for the utilization of 
flowering bulbs as perennial (naturalized) plants in 
North American landscapes and gardens .  Bulletin 
No. 37.  Holland flower bulb technical services, 
Netherlands Flower Bulb Center (IBC).  Hillegom, 
the Netherlands. 
 
De Hertogh, A.A. & M. De Nard (eds.) 1993.  
Chapter 37, general chapter on spring flowering 
bulbs .  Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands and New York, New 
York.  Pp. 705-707. 
 
De Hertogh, A.A., C. Noone, & A. Lutman 1990.  
Camassia.   IN: Geophyte , Version 2.2.  North 
Carolina State University, Department of 
Horticultural Science, Raleigh, North Carolina.  8 pp. 
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California.  44 pp. 
 
Guard, J.B. 1995.   Wetland plants of Oregon and 
Washington .  Lone Pine Publishing. Redmond, WA, 
Vancouver, B.C., & Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.  pp. 
98-99. 
 
Guerrant, E.O. Jr. & A. Raven 1995.   Seed 
germination and storability studies of 69 plant taxa 
native to the Willamette Valley wet prairie .  The 
Berry Botanic Garden, Por tland, Oregon.  65 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945, rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Harbinger, L.J. 1964.   The importance of food plants 
in the maintenance of Nez Perce cultural identity.   
Thesis, Master of Arts in Anthropology, Washington 
State University, Pullman, Washington.  82 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist (eds.) 1973 .  Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest.  An illustrated manual.   
University of Washington Press, Seattle & London.  
730 pp. 
 
International Flower Bulb Center 1999.   Spring bulb 
guide (Camassia) .  <http://www.bulb.com>.   
Technical Information Service of the IFBC.  
Hillegom, the Netherlands.  3 pp. 
 
Isaacson, R.T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural library's 
source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson 
Horticultural Library, University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum. 261 pp. 
 
Kruckeberg, A.R. 1996 (2nd edition ).  Gardening 
with native plants of the Pacific Northwest .  
University of Washington Press, Seattle & London.  
Greystone Books/Douglas & McIntyre, 
Vancouver/Toronto.  153 pp. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. &  N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, botany, and use.   Gordon & Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
 
Langaslag, J.J.J. (chairman) 1989.   Camassia.  IN: 
Teelt en gerbruiksmogelijkheden van 
bijgoedgewassen .  Tweede Druk.  Ministerie 
Landbouw Visserij en Consulentschap Algemene 
Dienst Bloembollenteelt.  Lisse, The Netherlands.  pp 
76-78. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
Mayer, K.E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. (eds.) 1988.  A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA, 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish & 
Game, and PG&E. 
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp.  
 
Piper, C.V. 1916.   Notes on Quamasia with a 
description of a new species .  Proceedings of the 
Biological Society of Washington 24:77. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon (eds.) 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia and Alaska.   British Columbia 
Ministry of Forests and Lone Pine Publishing.  108 
pp.

Schopmeyer, Technical Coordinator 1974.  Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States .  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Showers, M.A. & K. Wiese (eds.) 1995.   Nursery 
sources for California native plants.  DMG Open File 
Report 90-04.  California Dept. of Conservation, 
Office of Mine Reclamation,  Sacramento, California.  
Thoms, A. 1989.  The northern roots of hunter-
gatherer intensification: camas and the Pacific 
Northwest.  PhD dissertation.  Dept. of 
Anthropology, Washington State University, 
Pullman, Washington.  521 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. & M.A.M. Bell 1983.  The ethnobotany 
of the Southern Kwakiutl Indians of British 
Columbia .  Econ. Bot. 27:257-310. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982 .  The ethnobotany of 
the Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island.   Cultural 
Recovery Paper No. 2, British Columbia Provincial 
Museum, Queen’s Printer, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. & H.V. Kuhnlein 1983.   Camas 
(Camassia spp.) and riceroot (Fritillaria ssp.): Two 
liliaceous “root” foods of the northwest coast 
Indians.  Ecology of Food and Nutrition  13:199-219. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000328.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Watson, R.D. 1988.   Interview data on Camas 
growing in Moscow, Idaho.  Interviewed (4-18-88) 
by Alson V. Thoms.  Notes on file, Center for 
Northwest Anthropology, Washington State 
University, Pullman, Washington. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Dale C. Darris 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.