Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MOUNTAIN 
WHITETHORN  
Ceanothus cordulatus Kellogg 
Plant Symbol = CECO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
Alternative Names 
Snowbush 
 
Uses 
Mountain whitethorn can be used for ground cover 
on slopes, terraces or steep banks and as a barrier 
plant.  Mountain whitethorn may be allowed to 
assume natural forms or may be shaped through 
pruning and pinching off the growing tips.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae).  Mountain 
whitethorn is a densely branched, spiny, evergreen, 
flat-topped native shrub, wh ich reaches heights of 2 
to 5 feet.  However, at elevations, such as the Lake 
Tahoe Basin, it assumes a low spreading growth 
form.  Individual plants may spread to form 
continuous ground cover ov er areas with a diameter 
up to 12 feet.  The nume rous stems terminate in a 
hard sharp point thus, the name whitethorn.  
 
Whitethorn flowers form in a small, dense cluster 1 
to 2 inches long.  The flowers, which bloom from late 
spring to mid summer, have a heavy penetrating 
fragrance.  During the flowering season, the abundant 
white flowers may cause ar eas to appear covered 
with snow.  
 
Distribution 
California, Nevada, and Southwest Oregon.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 © Gary A. Monroe @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Adaptation 
Mountain whitethorn is well suited to dry open flats 
and rocky slopes with well-drained soils. 
 
Seed Establishment, Pr oduction and Management 
Mountain whitethorn seeds mature in late August and 
September.  The seeds are contained within a 
triangular capsule.  Collected capsules should be 
stored in paper bags and allowed to dry until they 
open and reveal the seeds. 
 
The seed has a hard exterior coat and therefore a 
combination of soaking in hot water and cold storage 
pretreatments are necessary . Seeds should be placed 
in hot water, preheated to 180 degrees F., and then 
allowed to cool and soak for 24 hours.  Following 
this hot water treatment, mix the seed with moist 
sand, place the mixture in plastic bags and store in 
the refrigerator.  
 
Periodically check the bags for moisture and for 
swelling of the seed which indicates that they are 
close to germinating.  Once the seeds have swollen, 
plant them in containers of potting soil and cover 
them with approximately ½ inch of soil. 
 
After the plants have formed a third pair of leaves 
they can be transplanted individually to larger ½ to 1 
gallon containers.  The young plants will be ready for 
their permanent location in 1 ½ to 2 years.  New 
plants should be watered occasionally until they are 
well established.  Afterward, deep watering every 1 
to 1 ½ months will be adequate to maintain uniform 
growth.  
 
Container grown plants may be available from local 
nurseries.  Dig a hole two to three times the diameter 
of the root ball and at least six inches deeper.  
Backfill the hole with six inches of native soil.  Make

a few, 1/8 inch deep vertical cuts in the root ball, or 
carefully “tease” roots away from the root ball with 
your hands to encourage roots to grow into the new 
soil.  Set the plant into the hole and fill in around the 
roots, firming the soil with your hands as you fill, 
until the hole is half full.  Fill the hole with water and 
allow it to settle.  This will settle the silt and 
eliminate air pockets  around the roots. 
 
Backfill with enough planting mix so the plant will 
set at the same level it was growing at in the 
container.  Water to allow soil to settle, then add 
more soil if necessary.  Build a berm of soil to form a 
watering basin around the outer edge of the hole.  
Break the basin down after two or three years.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Fairly free from diseases, but is susceptible to crown 
and root problems related to agricultural soils and 
wet and poorly drained soils.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Maleza’ Cultivar: This was released by the 
Lockeford,Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
California in 1989.  Mal eza mountain whitethorn is 
well suited for medium to coarse textured, well-
drained soils.  It is adapted to the Tahoe Basin, but 
grows well at elevations  down to 3500 feet where 
precipitation is adequate.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
USDA NRCS (Sept.) 1988.  Proposed Notice of 
Designation of Tested Germplasm of ‘Maleza’ 
Mountain Whitethorn for Conservation Use on 
Critically Eroded Areas in the Tahoe Basin and 
Surrounding Areas . Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, California. 
 
USDA NRCS.  Plants for the Lake Tahoe Basin . 
 
USDA NRCS. 2005.  The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
Accessed: 29MAR2005. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 Edited: 07Mar2005 ; j9mar05 jsp; 27sep05 jsp; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.