Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INCENSE CEDAR
Calocedrus decurrens (Torr.) 
Florin
Plant Symbol = CADE27  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
California incense cedar, California white cedar, 
bastard cedar, California calocedar, post cedar, white 
cedar, red cedar 
 
Uses 
Medicinal: A decoction of the leaves was used to 
treat stomach troubles (Moe rman 1998).  Steam from 
an infusion of incense cedar bark was inhaled in the 
treatment of colds (Ibid.).  The bark was used to 
make baskets and the twigs were used to make 
brooms. 
 
Economic:  Incense cedar has aromatic wood that 
resists decay and insects.  The wood is used as 
window sashes, sheathing under stucco or brick 
veneer construction, mudsills, fencing, greenhouse 
benches, and poles.  It is also widely used for interior 
and exterior siding.  The soft and pliable wood makes 
it one of the few species suitable for making pencils.  
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Incense cedar is an 
attractive landscape tree th at is excellent for large 
areas and formal plantings (D irr 1990).  This tree is a 
splendid park and large home-grounds species in 
climates suitable for them (Lemmon 1952).  It is 
browsed moderately by mule deer.  Small mammals 
eat the seeds.  This speci es is primarily used by 
wildlife species for cover. 
 Trees of the Pacific Northwest Oregon State University
 
Agroforestry: Calocedrus decurrens  is used in tree 
strips for windbreaks.  It is planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of 
winter storms and reduce home heating costs during 
the winter months.  Incense cedar is also widely 
planted in the mountains for erosion control. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Cypress family Cupressaceae.  Incense 
cedar (Calocedrus decurrens  is a medium sized tree 
eighty to one hundred twenty feet high (Preston 
1989).  The leaves are  small, scale-like, oblong-
ovate, in whorls of four, decurrent, and closely adnate 
on the branchlets and arom atic when crushed.  The 
flowers are monecious, appe aring in January on the 
ends of short lateral branchle ts of the previous year.  
The fruit is reddish-brown or yellowish-brown that 
ripens in the early autumn and remains on the tree 
until spring.  The bark is bright cinnamon-red, broken 
into irregularly ridges, and covered with closely 
appressed plate-like scales (Sargent 1961).  
 
Distribution : Calocedrus decurrens  is native to the 
mountains from western Oregon in higher Coast 
Ranges and Sierra Nevada to southern California and 
western Nevada.  For current distribution, please

consult the Plant profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Incense cedar prefers moist, well-drained, fertile soil.  
It grows best in full sun or light shade.  This species 
is not tolerant of smoggy  or wind-swept conditions 
(Dirr 1990).  It shows good adaptability to different 
soil types (Ibid.).  This tree is often found in mixed 
coniferous stands with sugar pine, ponderosa pine, 
Jeffrey pine, western white pine, white fir, and 
Douglas fir (Preston 1989). 
 
Establishment 
Propagation for Seed : Sow seeds in the early spring 
in a greenhouse.  Seeds require a stratification period 
for about eight weeks at 32-40ºF for good 
germination.  When the seedlings are large enough to 
handle, place them into individual pots to grow in a 
light shaded area in a greenhouse or cold frame for 
the first winter.  Plant them out in the late spring or 
early summer. 
 
Management 
Incense cedar has aromatic wood that resists insects 
and decay.  Practically no pest s attack the tree, but in 
the forests where it is native, mature tree trunk are 
often infested with dry rot of the heartwood (Wyman 
1965). 
 
In its younger years, es pecially when growing 
strongly in the open, incense cedar forms an almost 
geometrically perfect pyramid, its lower branches 
nearly touching the ground, and the whole mass so 
densely overlapping that it sheds both rain and snow 
(Lemmon 1952).  In old age, after battling the 
elements for perhaps a thousand years, it is far more 
irregular and picturesque,  often with several summits 
trying to replace the old one destroyed long before 
lightening or a great wind (Ibid.). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental  characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses
.  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Lape, F. 1965.   A garden of trees and shrubs: 
practical hints for planning and planting an 
arboretum .  Comstock Publishing Associates, Ithaca, 
New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Oregon State University 2001 .  Trees of the Pacific 
Northwest.  Corvallis, Oregon.  Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://www.orst.edu/instruct/for241/con/spp/icdrspp
.html> 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr. 1948.   North American trees.  2nd ed.  
The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr. 1989.   North American trees.  4th ed.  
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Taylor, N. 1965.   The guide to garden shrubs and 
trees .  Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 
Massachusetts 
 
Wyman, D. 1965.   Trees for American gardens .  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York.

Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 24feb03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.