Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEW JERSEY TEA 
Ceanothus americanus  L. 
Plant Symbol = CEAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Tribes of the Missouri River region 
used the leaves for tea and  burned the roots for fuel 
on buffalo hunting trips when  fuel wood was scarce.  
The roots of New Jersey tea were used by the 
Chippewa for pulmonary troubles and for 
constipation coupled with  shortness of breath and 
bloating.  The Cherokee held the root tea on an 
aching tooth to ease the pain and consumed hot root 
tea for bowel troubles. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae).  New 
Jersey tea is a native shrub ranging from 2-10 dm tall.  
The leaves are broadly oblong-ovate, 5-10 cm long 
by 2.5-6 cm wide.  The leaves are wedge-shaped, 
tapering to a point at the base with a blunt tip.  New 
Jersey tea has a branched, racemose inflorescence (1-
4 cm long) with flowers maturing from the bottom 
upwards.  The flower petals are dipper-shaped, 1-1.5 
mm long, and white colored. 
 @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: New Jersey tea is usually found in the sandy 
soils of open woodlands and prairies, and on rocky 
hillsides. 
 
Adaptation 
New Jersey tea is fire-adapted.  It is typically top-
killed by fire, but is a prolific re-sprouter from the 
surviving rootstock.  Where frequent fire occurs, 
New Jersey tea becomes a dominant species forming 
clusters among prairie grasses. 
 
Establishment 
New Jersey tea is a drought tolerant species that 
grows best in well-drained soils with full sun.  New 
Jersey tea is difficult to transplant, therefore 
propagation by seed is recommended.  Seeds should 
be planted outside in the late fall or early winter.  To 
improve seed germination for spring planting the 
seeds should be submerged in hot water (180 deg. F) 
and allowed to soak overnight as the water cools then 
planted outside.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
New Jersey tea is susceptible to leaf spot and 
powdery mildew, however no serious insect or 
disease problems exist.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas . Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
 
Easyliving Wildflowers 2001.   Native perennial 
wildflowers .  Willow Springs, Missouri. 
http://www.easywildflower s.com/quality/cea.amer.ht
m
 
Gilmore, M. 1977. Uses of plants by the indians of 
the Missouri river region . University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska.  109 pp. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
great plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas.  1392 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants their uses-a 400 year history . Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Missouri Botanical Garden 2000.   Plant Finder.  
http://www.mobot.org/hort/p lantfinder/Code/A/G82.
htm
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn, Michigan. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb. 
 
Rydberg, P.A. 1932.   Flora of the prairies and plains 
of central North America . The Science Press Printing 
Company, Lancaster, Pe nnsylvania.  969 pp. 
 
United States Department  of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain  Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory 2001 .  Fire effects information 
system .  Accessed: 23jul2001. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/shrubs/ceaa
me/index.html
 
Prepared By:  
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.