Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TARO 
Colocasia esculenta  (L.) Schott
Plant Symbol = COES  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and Pacific Islands West Area Office 
 
Forest & Kim Starr (USGS) @ Plants of Hawaii (HEAR) 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Coco yam, dasheen, elepha nt’s ear, gabi, binata, 
callaloo, eddo, eddy root, swamp taro 
Chamorro: suni, 
Chuukese: woot, 
Hawaiian: kalo, 
Marshallese: jibabwãi,  
Palauan: bisupsal,  
Pohnpeian: sawa 
Samoan: talo,  
Ulithian: ioth 
Yapese: mal 
 
Caution : If taro is not prepared and cooked well, the 
acridity will cause itchiness in the mouth and throat.  
All parts of taro can cause stomach aches, if ingested 
without cooking.  Contact with the sap can irritate 
sensitive skin.  
 
Uses 
Please consult the links on the PLANTS Plant Profile 
for this species for extensive information not 
contained within this plant guide. 
 
Ethnobotanical : Taro was the most important food 
throughout the Hawaiian Islands.  The mature root is 
boiled as a starchy vegetable.  It was the staple of the 
Hawaiian diet and the plant used to make poi.   
 
The leaves are high in minerals and vitamins A, B, 
and C.  These large leaves  are cooked like mustard or 
turnip greens and the resulting product is called 
callaloo in the Caribbean. 
 
The young leaves are cooked and used for human 
consumption as a very nutritious vegetable and the 
corms are used as staple in place of rice or potato 
(Plucknett and White 1979).   These young leaves are 
boiled or covered with coconut cream, wrapped in 
banana or breadfruit leaves and cooked on hot stones 
(Kubo 1970).   
 
The corms are generally cooked by baking, boiling or 
baking in the traditional ovens. 
 
The starch contained in the large corms of taro is 
highly digestible, therefore making it a good source 
for carbohydrate and to a  lesser degree a source of 
potassium and protein.  
 
Taro corms have been used in the production of taro 
chips, dehydrated stable commodities, starch, flour, 
and in non-food application of taro starch in the 
manufacture of biodegradable plastics.  
 
Taro is good for people allergic to milk or cereals and 
can be consumed by children who are sensitive to 
milk (Roth and et.al., 1967). 
 
The digestibility of taro starch has been estimated to 
be 98.8 percent.  Therefore taro flour and other 
products have been used for infant formulae in the 
United States and have formed an important 
constituent of proprietary canned baby foods.  
 
Medicinal: The Pinatubo Negritos of the Philippines 
used taro as medicine.  The leaves and corms were

boiled and eaten by women experiencing a difficult 
childbirth.  Many tribes believed the early morning 
dew that collected in the leaf was excellent medicinal 
eyewash.  Women with dysmenorrheal were made to 
sit on taro leaves.  Juice of the petioles is styptic and 
was used to arrest arterial hemorrhage.  Taro was 
used in earache and as an external stimulant and 
rubefacient.  Taro was used as a laxative in cases of 
hemorrhoids.  Some tribes use taro as an antidote to 
the stings of wasps and other biting or stinging 
insects.  Heated tubers were applied to painful parts 
in rheumatism.  Honey mixed with tuber ash was 
used as a cure for apthae in the mouth.   
 
In Hawaii, the raw juice mixed with sugar was taken 
orally to reduce fever.  Taro was used by Hawaiians 
to treat illness ranging from constipation to 
tuberculosis. 
 
In Malaysia, warmed leaves were used to compress a 
child's head to size if too long.  
 
Horticultural/Landscape:  Taro may be incorporated 
into the general landscape or planted in the traditional 
style in wet and dry paddies.  Taro can be planted in 
dry culture or non-flooded fields, but not all taros 
genetic lines can be planted in wet culture or flooded 
fields. 
 
Livestock : Taro leaf blades and petioles have been 
used in animal feed.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Arum Family (Araceae).   Taro is an ancient crop 
grown throughout the tropic and subtropics.  Taro is 
believed to have originated in South East Asia 
including India and Malaysia .  Spencer (1966) stated 
that taro and other edible arioida were distributed 
from east India to Formosa and the Solomon Islands.  
Taro seeds were dispersed by birds, and palm civets 
.(Panoff, 1972, Hambali, 1979).  
 
Taro, sometimes called the "potato of the tropics," or 
"elephant ears" is a wetland herbaceous perennial 
with huge “elephant ear” like leaves.  It produces 
heart shaped leaves 2-3' lo ng and 1-2' across on 3' 
long petioles that all emanate from an upright 
tuberous rootstock, called a corm.  The petioles are 
thick, succulent, and often purplish.  The leaf petiole 
attaches near the center of the leaf.  The corm is  shaped like a top with rough ridges, lumps and 
spindly roots, and usually weighs around 1-2 pounds, 
but can weigh eight pounds.  The skin is brown with 
white or pink flesh.  Taros can produce smaller tubers 
or "cormels" which grow off the sides of the main 
corm.  Under ideal growing conditions, a single taro 
plant can get 8' tall with an 8’canopy spread. 
 
There are more than 200 cultivars of taro, selected for 
their edible corms or cormels, or their tropical 
looking ornamental foliage.  These cultivars fall into 
two main groups: wetland taros, the source of the 
Polynesian food 
poi, which is made from the main 
corm; and upland taros, which produce numerous 
eddos that are used much like potatoes for cooking 
and in processing. 
 
Taro, although grown commercially in many areas of  
the Pacific Basin, for the most part, is a backyard 
crop planted usually in small plots near the house.  
Because taro has a high water requirement and a long 
growing season it can only grow where water is 
available most of  the year.  Its ability to grow in 
waterlogged conditions allows for the utilization of 
hydromorphic soils which are unsuitable for other 
crops (Onwueme, I.C. 1985)  
 
Taro and other aroid food crops have traditionally 
been a source of food energy for Pacific Islanders.  
Taro is a plant that must be tilled and watered if it is 
to grow and perform.  The roots and suckers of many 
varieties of taro were carried along the trade routes of 
the world.  The taro plant has a triple value in that the 
stem may be used as salads, the tubers provide easily 
digested starch, with the leaves are used as a green 
vegetable.  The leaves are also used as wrapping for 
food, as plates, and as an umbrella in a rainstorm.  
Cyrtosperma  (giant taro) provides for a reserve food 
crop, which grows well in low-lying areas and saline 
swamps.  
 
Distribution : For current U.S. distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation; Taro can grow in a wide range of soil 
from upland or dry land soils that are well drained, 
non-flooded soils to soils that are in high rainfall 
areas or saturated for prolonged periods of time.  
Taro can grow in areas that only it and rice can grow 
because of standing water du ring the growing season.  
The upland taro is usually grown on hillsides in soil 
that is marginal in fertility and productivity.  Soils in 
these areas are usually well drained and friable.  
While lowland or wetland taro is usually planted in

low-lying areas where there is an abundant supply of 
water.  The soils in these areas are normally alluvial 
and of high native fertility and production.  
 
Taro can grow in areas ranging from sea level to 
1,800 m in elevation under  daily average temperature 
of 21-27°C and rainfall of 250 cm annually.  Taro is 
usually planted at wide spacing of 1m x 1m at a 
density of 10,000 plants/ha in dry areas and at 
spacing as close as 45cm x 45cm or approximately 
49,000 plants/ha in wetland areas.  
 
Planting material  
Taro is usually the first crop planted after the 
clearance of a forest fallow because the soil if very 
fertile.  However  after repeated use the soil becomes 
less productive and will require organic or inorganic 
fertilizer to maintain high yields.  If commercial 
fertilizer is used be sure  not to place the fertilizer in 
the bottom of the hole with  the sucker because the 
fertilizer will destroy the young sucker.  
 
In the South Pacific, “tiapuli” or setts are prepared 
from the suckers or main plant.  The tiapuli consist of 
the cormels with the petioles and are the main 
material used of propagating taro.  Small tiapuli used 
for planting can have a consid erable effect on yield if 
weeding is delayed during early establishment.  
Large size planting material grows more vigorously, 
giving full ground cover earlier and hence providing 
better weed control.  Planting depth should be in a 
furrow or hole about 30 cm  deep.  Planting should be 
timed to rainfall with lower rainfall areas planted 
during the early part of the rainy season for best 
survival and production.  In areas with well-
distributed rainfall or if one is using irrigation the 
effect of planting dates is less important because 
planting can occur throughout the year.  Most of the 
planting and production operation is manual in small 
communities except for occas ional chemical weed 
control.  
 
In Hawaii, the planting material is called huli.  Huli 
are the cormels ('oha or keiki) that have been 
trimmed. When the kalo plant is harvested, the keiki 
are cut off from the harves ted makua plant and their 
leaves and corms are cut o ff, leaving only about a 
quarter of an inch attached to the stem. These huli are 
then left in a cool, dry pl ace for a day or two to allow 
the cut to heal before they  are planted again. The huli 
should be kept moist so that they don’t dry out but 
should not be left in standing water otherwise they 
will rot. After a day or so, the huli will be ready for 
planting. 
Wet kalo is grown in the lowlands and on valley 
floors in man made terraces (Lo'i) that are irrigated  by diverted mountain streams. The huli may be 
planted in rows or in mounds in the lo'i. They will 
grow to maturity in 9-14 months, depending on the 
variety. Wet kalo must have cold water running 
through it’s lo'i because warm, standing water will 
cause the kalo to rot.  
 
Management
 
Weeding must be preformed during the first six 
months after planting.  If weeding is not done on a 
regular basis during the first six months, taro 
production can be reduced by as much as 50 to 85 
percent.  Weeding after six months is usually not 
important because the taro crop forms full ground 
cover therefore preventing young weeds from 
growing.  Unwanted vegetation can be controlled 
using mechanical means  or through the use of 
approved herbicides.  
 
The taro must be weeded and mulched several times 
during the crop’s growth.  Commercial fertilizers are 
also used to produce larger plants. 
 
When the crop is ready to be harvested, the taro are 
pulled out of the ground and the corms cut off. The 
new planting material will also be prepared at this 
time. If the taro is being grown for the leaves, the 
leaves should be picked about two months after 
planting when the leaves are large but still young. If 
the taro is being grown for the corms, then they 
should be harvested when the corms reach maturity. 
Taro that is being grown for the corms should not be 
used for leaves because picking the leaves while the 
corm is developing will damage the corm. 
 
Harvesting  
Harvesting of taro depends on the location of the crop 
and the variety planted.  However, most lowland 
plantings can be harvested in 12 to 15 months after 
planting if weeds are controlled.  Taro growing on 
the warmer upland sites with good solar radiation 
will mature in about 12 months.  Most of the taro 
grown in the lowlands or wetland areas is harvested 
by hand.  The main corm and suckers are broken up 
and loosened from the soil and rotated in a circular 
fashion to cut and sever the roots.  Mature taro leaves 
turn yellowish in color.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Pests are major problems facing taro growers 
throughout its growing range.  Each of the following 
pests can occasionally become major pest and require 
control measures.  The largest number of pests 
usually attack the leaves of the plant.  The most 
common invertebrate pests are: Grasshoppers, 
crickets, thrips, aphids, leafhoppers, mealy bugs,

plant hoppers, scales, whiteflies, several moths and 
butterflies, beetles, termites, nematodes, snails and 
slugs, ants, and mites.  Vertebrate pests of taro 
include porcupines, rats and mice, bush pigs and 
rails. Taro diseases caused by biotic agents include 
four main groups of fungi: Ascomycetes, 
basidiomycetes, phycomycetes, and fungi imperfecti. 
These biotic agents cause leaf blight, leaf spot, soft 
rot, spongy black rot, and pocket rot of the corm.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References  
Hambali, G.G. 1979.  The dispersal of taro by 
common palm civets. Proc Sdt Symp. Inter. Soc. 
Trop. Root Crops, Philippines 
 
Kubo, P. 1970.  The history of taro and taro products 
in Hawaii .  Typescript paper submitted for Hist. 424, 
Dept of Hist., University of Hawaii., Honolulu. 
 
.  
 
Panoff, F. 1972.  Manage taro and cordy1ine: 
elements of a Melanesian key . J. Poly. Soc. 
81(3):375-88. 
 
Plucknett, D.L. 1976.   Giant swamp taro.  Proc. 4th 
Symp.  Tnter. Soc. Trop. Root Crops. Cali, 
Colombia.  
 
Plucknett, D.L., R.S. de la Pena, and F. Obrero. 1970. 
Taro (Colocasia esculenta): a review . Field Crop 
Abstracts 23(4), 413-426.  
 
Plucknett, D.L., and M.S. White. 1979.  Storage and 
processing of taro in the People’s Republic of China . 
In: Small-scale processing  and storage of tropical 
root crops, ed. D .L. Plucknett. 119-123. Westview 
Trop. Agric. Sr., no.1  Boulder, Colorado.  
 
Roth, A., R.M. Worth, I.J. Lichton. 1967.   Use of poi 
in the prevention of allergic diseases in potentially 
allergic infants .  Ann. of Allergy 25:505-506.  
 
USDA Forest Service. 2006.  Colocasia esculenta(L.) 
Schott, Araceae .  Pacific Island Ecosystems At Risk. 
Accessed: 070213.  <http://www.hear.org/pier/species/colocasia_esculent
a.htm>. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore
, Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
And 
John H. Lawrence , West Area Office, NRCS Pacific 
Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam 
 
Species Coordinator 
John H. Lawrence , West Area Office, NRCS Pacific 
Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam 
 Edited: 20Oct2003 1mm; 070213 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.