Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAY HAWTHORN 
Crataegus aestivalis Walt. 
Plant Symbol = CRAE  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Because it tolerates a wide variety 
of sites, it can be planted to stabilize banks, for 
shelterbelts, and from wind and water erosion.   
 
Timber : Although the wood is hard and strong, it has 
no commercial value exce pt for tool handles and 
other small items.  Fruits are often gathered for 
jellies.   
 
Wildlife : It provides excellent cover and nesting sites 
for many smaller birds.  Birds, rodents, and other 
smaller mammals eat the small fruits.  White tailed 
deer browse the young  twigs and leaves.   
 
Beautification/landscape : It is used in beautification 
project around homes, city  streets, and office  buildings.  It is excellent for environmental plantings, 
including small specimen tree and shrub borders.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute 
@ PLANTS 
Description 
General : It is a spiny tree that grows to forty feet 
high and fifteen inches DBH.  Leaves are narrow, 
broadest above or near the middle, dark green and 
shiny, serrated, seldom lobed and smooth.  Flowers 
are white, produced singly or in two or three 
flowered clusters.  Fruits are broadest above the 
middle or rounded, and red in color.   
 
Distribution : May hawthorn grows on the outer 
coastal plain from North Carolina to Mississippi.  For 
current distribution, please consult the plant profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Although it will succeed in pa rtial shade and different 
soil types, it grows best in full sunlight, well-drained 
loamy soils.  May hawthorn will tolerate wet soils 
becoming drought tolerant once established.  It is 
wind tolerant making it a good tree species in 
shelterbelt planting.  It is also tolerant of atmospheric 
pollution and performs well in urban settings.  It is 
commonly found in river swamps, pond areas, and 
stream banks.   
 
Establishment  
Propagation from Seed or Grafting : May hawthorn 
can be propagated by either seeds or grafting.  
Successful propagation using seeds requires acid 
scarification followed by warm stratification and 
prechilling.  Seeds, whose numbers per pound (lb.) 
varies with species, are pl anted early in the fall, in 
drill rows eight to twelve inches apart and covered 
with 1/4 inch of soil.  Seedlings must not be kept in 
the nursery longer than a year.   
 
Containerized trees should be planted when they are 
no more than eight feet tall, in the fall or early spring.  
Balled and burlapped trees should be planted in early 
spring.

Grafting on seedling stock of Crataegus oxyacantha 
or  Crataegus monogyna  is best carried out in the 
winter to early spring.   
 
Management 
Pruning should be done in the winter or early spring 
in order to maintain a clear shoot leader on young 
trees and/or remove the weakest branches to allow 
more light to pass through.  Suckers or stems arising 
from the roots should be removed when they become 
noticeable.   
 
Pest and Potential Problems 
Although pests and diseases seldom affect  Crataegus 
aestivalis , it is susceptible to fire-blight, cedar-
hawthorn rust, cedar-quince rust, leaf blight and fruit 
rot, and leaf spot.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.  Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation and uses .  3
rd 
ed.  Stipes, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Duncan, W.H. & M.B. Duncan 1988.   Trees of the 
Southeastern United States.   University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Elias, T.S. 1989.   Field guide to North American 
trees .  Revised ed. Grolier Book Clubs Inc., Danbury, 
Connecticut. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1983.   Landscape plants for eastern North 
America .  John Wiley and Sons, Inc, New York, New 
York. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar. 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Little, E.E. 1996.   National Audubon Society field 
guide to North American trees: Eastern region .  
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1974.   Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States .  Agricultural Handbook 450. 
USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1990.   Silvics of North 
America .  Agricultural Handbook 654.  Forest 
Service, USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young. 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Revised and enlarged ed.  
Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon 
 
Prepared By 
Alfredo B. Lorenzo 
Formerly, Southern University and A&M College 
College of Agricultural, Family and Consumer 
Sciences, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 18apr02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.