Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MARIPOSA LILY 
Calochortus superbus  Purdy 
ex J.T. Howell  
Plant Symbol = CASU3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Butterfly Mariposa, Mariposa tulip, white Mariposa 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The sweet bulbs of this plant were 
eaten raw, roasted in ashes, boiled, or baked in an 
earth oven and relished by many tribes in California 
including the Pomo, Yuki, Sierra Miwok, Kawaiisu, 
Wappo, Tubatulabal, Foothill Yokuts, and Wailaki.  
The Sierra Miwok dug the bulbs in April when buds 
appeared or after flowering, while the Wukchumni 
Yokuts dug the plants in bloom about April or May.  
The bulbs were rubbed across an open-twined basket 
to remove the outer skin by some tribes.  They were 
reputed to grow in "great tracts" on open hillsides in 
Mendocino County, California in the early 1900's.  
They were harvested with a digging stick and eaten 
within four or five days, as they do not store well. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).   Calochortus 
venustus and Calochortus superbus  have overlapping 
distributions and are hard to tell apart. They also 
were not separated as two distinct species in the first 
half of the 20th century when anthropologists were 
doing their fieldwork among tribes.  Therefore, it is 
highly likely that tribes dug the bulbs of populations 
of both species.  The large showy flowers of 
Calochortus venustus  range from white, yellow, 
purple, to dark red, and have a red-brown eyespot 
above the gland on the inside of each petal.  
Sometimes there is a paler blotch above the first.  The 
base of the plant is bulblet-bearing.  The erect stems 
are branched and 1 to 6-fl owered.  The linear leaves 
are basal and 1-2 dm long.  The fruit is erect, 5-6 cm, 
linear and angled. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
The main identifying features that distinguish 
Calochortus superbus  from Calochortus venustus  is 
the nectary.  On  Calochortus venustus it is square, 
while on  Calochortus superbus it is crescent or 
chevron-shaped.  Another difference is that the petals 
on  Calochortus venustus sometimes have a second 
distal, paler spot, while with  Calochortus superbus 
the petal spot is always one, generally in the yellow 
zone. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Calochortus superbus  is found in open 
grassland, oak woodland, dry meadows, and mixed 
conifer forests below 1700 m in northwestern 
California, the Cascade Range foothills, central 
western California, the Sierra Nevada foothills, and 
southwestern California. 
 
Establishment 
Collect or buy seed from  local sources.  Place the 
seeds in a paper bag until you are ready to plant 
them.  Plant them in a 5 inch or deeper pot in a soil 
that has excellent drainage.  Scatter the seeds at least 
one-quarter inch apart.  Sprinkle a light layer of soil 
on top and then place quarte r-inch gravel on top of 
the soil.  The seeds should be planted in the fall and 
require no stratification.  Let the pots sit outside 
during the winter in partial shade.  Water the pots, 
keeping them slightly damp  (if rains are insufficient).  
Germination is generally about February.  Fertilize 
the plants in a weak solution about once a month 
during active growth until April.  When the tips of

the leaves turn yellow, stop watering and fertilizing 
(about the end of April).  The bulbs are dormant 
during flowering.  In the fall start watering again.  
Give the plants more room in the fall of the second or 
third year by transplanting them and spacing them 1-
2 inches apart.  Plant the plants outside in the ground 
in the third or fourth year.  Plant them in full sun in 
summer or fall.  Start watering them in September.  
After they have bloomed for the first time, they 
should be established. 
 
Management 
Weed around the plants regularly and protect them 
from insects, birds, mammals, and other animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CASU3 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries and seed companies within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford. 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Chesnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII. Reprinted by 
the Mendocino County Historical Society in 1974. 
 
Fiedler, P. & B. Ness.   Calochortus.  pp. 1183-1189 
IN: The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California.  
J.C. Hickman (ed.). University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Gayton, A.H. 1948.  Yokuts and Western Mono 
ethnography I: Tulare Lake, Southern Valley, and 
Central Foothill Yokuts .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California. 144 pp. 
 
Voegelin, E.W.  1938.  Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records Vol 2:(1):1-84. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press.  Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.