Plant Guide
PIGEONPEA 
Cajanus cajan  (L.) Millsp.   
Plant Symbol = CACA27  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, NJ  
 
Pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan) variety ‘2 B Bushy’ (background) and ‘ICPL 
92016’ (foreground). Photo by  Christopher Sheahan, USDA-NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center , 2012. 
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common  Names:  pigeon pea, Angola pea, 
Congo pea,  dhal, no -eye pea, gungo pea, and red gram  
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:  
Cajanus indicus Spreng. ,  
Cajanus flavus  DC.,   
Cytisus cajanus  L.  
Uses   Commercial
 crop:  Cajanus cajan  is grown as a pulse cro p 
(crop harvested for dry seed) or eaten green as a 
vegetable.  The grain is popularly consumed in India, 
Asia, and Africa.  India  is the largest importer and 
producer , where seed is sold as dhal (dry split pea).  
Unprocessed seed should not be consumed by humans or 
livestock. The seed contains tannin and trypsin inhibi tors 
(trypsin inhibitors are  removed through cooking).  
 
The protein content in split seeds is similar to soybean 
and  ranges from 21– 28% (Phatak et al., 1993). It is also 
widely used as a good source of dietary vitamins and 
minerals . 
 
Forage:  C. cajan  makes  an excellent, high -protein forage 
for livestock . Crude protein ranges from 28 –36%  (Phatak 
et al., 1993) . In Florida, plants yielded 3.1 short tons/acre 
of biomass (Duke, 1983). Livestock may browse foliage, 
but damage to the branches may result, so continuous 
grazing should be avoided. Palatability has been reported 
to increase with age of the plant (Cook et al., 2005).  
 
C. cajan can be grown as a forage intercropped with 
sorghum and/or millet. The deep taproot of C. cajan 
draws water from deeper soil dept hs than most legumes, 
so will not interfere with the water uptake of other crops 
and grasses. It is not generally seeded as forage with other 
legumes like cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata), but mainly 
with grasses (Cook et al., 2005).  
 
A nutritious feed for sheep  can be made from the seedpod 
hulls and threshed waste of harvested plants.  
 
Cover crop/green manure : C. cajan  competes poorly with 
weeds and can be slow to establish if soils are not at least 
64°F (Mullen et al., 2003). As a green manure it can fix 
about  62 lb N/acre up to the time when pods are produced 
(Phatak et al., 1993).  
 
Wildlife:
 C. cajan  has been used as a trap crop for 
H eliothis  spp. (moth pest s), in  affected cotton  (Mullen et 
al., 2003). A trap crop is a form of companion planting 
used to attrac t pests away from nearby crops. Plantings
 
are also  used as live fences and windbreaks in many 
regions.  
Ethnobotany  
Woody stems have been used for thatched roofs, baskets, 
and charcoal (Allen and Allen, 1981). Decoctions of leaf 
and stem have been used as a  diuretic, laxative, and to 
treat sore throat  (Allen and Allen, 1981). Several cultures 
have used decoctions for skin irritations and sores. Floral 
decoctions have been used to treat bronchitis, coughs, and 
pneumonia. Some Chinese use the dried roots to ev acuate

intestinal worms, as an expectorant, sedative, and a 
remedy for wounds (Duke, 1983).  
Status  
C. cajan is an introduced species in the United States.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : C. cajan  is an erect  perennial, warm -season crop 
that is widely grown in the tropics and subtropics.  It is a 
shrub that can grow  to 12 ft tall, but usually  only reaches  
3  to  6 ft .  
 
The  ribbed  stem grows upright and is covered in short, 
soft hairs (pubescent) and is  woody at the base. Its deep 
tap root is fast- growing. The pubescent, stalked leaflets 
are 2  to  4 inches long (5 –10 cm) and  ¾ to 1 ½ inches wide 
(2 –4 cm) ,  with minute r esinous glands underneath.  
 
The bi -laterally symmetrical, bell- shaped blooms are 
yellow or yellow and red, may be in pairs, and grow in the 
angle between stem and leaf on an unbranched 
inflorescence.  The upper two lobes are united and two -
toothed, and the lower lip is smaller and three -toothed. 
The lower bracts fall off early.  
 
The two -valve, pointed seedpods are produced in clusters, 
and mottled red. They are 2 to 3.5 inches ( 5–9 cm ) long, 
½ inch ( 12 mm) wide, flat, covered with soft hairs, and 
taper to a sharp point. The round or oval seeds may be 
l ight beige to dark brown. The 2 to  9-seeded pods do not 
shatter in the field.  
 
 
Seedpods of pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan).  (Photo by Christopher 
Sheahan, USDA -NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center ,2012) 
C. cajan  has a deep taproot system that grows large, 
cylindrical nodules. This nodulation can be initiated by a 
variety of rhizobial s trains (Allen and Allen, 1981).  
 
Distribution : C. cajan  is an old world food crop that 
grows best in the tropics and subtropics, but has also been  successfully grown in the Southern United States
, Hawaii, 
and Puerto Rico. It is uncertain whether  C. cajan is native 
to Africa (Allen and Allen , 1981) or India (Duke, 1983). 
Nevertheless, the plant has been in cultivation in parts of 
Africa and India for thousands of years . For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat : C. cajan  grows in forests in it s native range. It 
can be found in warmer, dryer regions of the tropics and 
subtropics as well as more temperate regions.  
Adaptation  
C. cajan  is adapted to a wide range of soil types. It grows 
best in well -drained soils and will not survive  
waterlogged con ditions. It can be grown in a pH range of 
4.5 –8.4 (Cook et al., 2005). C. cajan  grows best under hot 
conditions (65– 86°F), and can grow in temperatures 
greater than 95°F (Cook et al., 2005).  
Mullen et al. (2003) found that a soil temperature of 64°F  
or greater  is required at time of planting, as lower 
temperatures will lengthen the period of establishment. 
Nevertheless, it is a hardy plant that can grow at 
temperatures as low as 41 °F (Phatak  et al., 1993), and has 
been successfully grown in warmer te mperate regions 
such as North Carolina (Duke, 1983).  Frost will defoliate 
the plant.  
 
C. cajan  is drought resistant and can sur vive under very 
dry conditions because of its deep root system.  It has been 
found to grow throughout a six month dry season (Cook 
et al., 2005) ; however, f lowering will be delayed and seed 
yields will decrease under long periods of  drought 
(Mullen et al., 2003).  It is less adapted to humid, wet 
conditions.   
Establishment  
Sow seeds 1. 5 inches deep on 1  to  3 foot rows at 8  to 10 
lb pe r acre.  Drill the seed in a weed -free seedbed or 
transplant seedlings on 6  foot rows if grown as intercrop. 
Seedlings will  emerge within 3 weeks, but will grow 
slowly, so it is important to closely manage weeds for the 
first 6 weeks after seedling emergence (Cook et al., 2005) . 
 
Cowpea type inoculants can be used prior to planting  but 
are not necessary, as naturally  available Rhizobium  
species are present in most soils  where legumes have been 
grown in the last three year s (Phatak et al., 1993).  
For successful pod development, it is important to grow 
the plant under full sunlight and never under waterlogged 
conditions. Fertilization is not recommended as the plant 
can grow well in soils with low phosphorus levels (Phatak 
et al., 1993) and has show n little response to fertilizers 
(Duke, 1983).  
Management  
C. cajanus can be managed as an annual shrub or a 
perennial plant. As a perennial plant it has been 
successfully used in alley cropping systems  with cereals

and legumes . Under good management, the p lant can live 
up to five years.  As the plant ages, the stem will become 
woodier, and leaf regeneration will decline.   
 
Harvesting should be done after first frost, as leaf drop 
will make harvesting easier. Harvesting  methods are 
similar to those for soybea n and can be done with a 
combine.   
 
The plant will not survive heavy, continuous grazing or 
heavy cutting, but may be pruned. Weeds can b e 
cultivated in the inter -rows. It cannot survive fire.  
 
Pigeon pea can be used in rotation with cowpea and  it is 
resi stant to root lesion nematodes ( Pratylenchus spp.) that 
affect cowpea  (Mullen et al., 2003).   
Pests and Potential Problems  
The plant attracts Hel iothis  spp. which can significantly 
decrease yields. Other pests include: cutworms 
(Noctudidae), thrips (Thysanoptera), mirids (Miri dae), 
and green stink bugs  ( Nezara viridula ). The seedpods are 
eaten by Heliothis  sp p., pod borers ( Lycaena boetica ), and 
other caterpillars in the field and by bean weevils during 
storage (Cook et al., 2005).  C. cajan  can devel op 
Fusarium  wilt, a common fungal disease.  
Environmental Concerns  
None.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
The time required to reach maturity can vary greatly due 
to seed variety,  temperature, and photoperiod. C. cajan  is 
a short -day plant, requiring a daylight length of 12.5 
hours to initiate flowering and seed production (Cook et 
al., 2005). C. cajan  requires 65-80 days to flower and 50-
75 additional days to create mature seeds (Mullen et al., 
2003) , however many vari eties have been developed to 
flower earlier . It  is 60 % self -pollinated (Cook et al., 
2005 ), but varieties grown within 2 –3 miles may cross 
(Mullen et  al ., 2003) . 
 
The plant is a prolific seed producer. A single Hawaiian 
hybrid plant was shown to yield 6,46 0 seeds, weighing 
2.5 lb  (1.15 kg)  (Allen and Allen, 1981). Yields of mature 
seedpods can be from 0 .25 to 1 ton/acre (Mullen et al., 
2003 ). In Australia and In dia, short-duration varieties 
(less than  100 days) have yielded 2.23 tons/acre (Phatak 
et al., 19 93). There are roughly 7 ,000 to 8,000 seeds per 
pound (Cook et al., 2005; USDA- NRCS, 2012). 
 
The seedpods can withstand weather damage ( Mullen et 
al., 2003 ). After the first year of growth, seed production 
declines in subsequent years (Duke, 1983).   
Cultiv ars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are  many cultivars  of pigeonpea  from Africa and 
India.   
  The variety ‘
Flavus ’ is yellow -flowered and early 
maturing. The variety ‘ Bicolor ’ may be red, purple, or 
streaked, perennial, and late- maturing. Both varieties may 
cross. There is a day -neutral cultivar from Florida called 
‘Amarillo’ that can be sown and harvested throughout the 
year (Duke, 1983).  Other  varieties include ‘Hunt’, 
‘Quant um’, and ‘Quest’  (Mullen et al., 2003) . 
 
References  
Allen, O.N and E.K. Allen. 1981.  The Leguminosa e: a 
source book of characteristics, uses , and nodulation. 
The Univ.  o f Wisconsin Press, Madison.   
C ook, B.G., B.C.  Pengelly,  S.D. Brown,  J.L. Donnelly,   
D.A . Eagles,  M.A. Franco,  J. Hanson,  B.F. Mullen, 
I.J.  Partridge , M.  Peters, and  R.  Schultze -Kraft.  2005. 
Tropical f orages: an interactive selection tool. 
Cajanus cajun. CSIRO, DPI&F(Qld), CIAT , and 
ILRI, Brisbane, Australia.  
  http://www.tropicalforages.info/key/Forages/Media/
Html/Cajanus_cajan.htm  (accessed 24 Jul y 2012) . 
Duke, J.A. 1983. Handbook of energy crops. NewCROP  (New Crops Resource On line Program), Purdue 
Univ.  Center fo r New Crops and Plant Products. 
http://www.hort. purdue.edu/newcrop/duke_energy/C
ajanus_cajun.html  (accessed 24 Jul y 2012) . 
FAO. 2012. Grassland species index. Cajanus cajan.  http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Gbase/DAT
A/PF000150.HTM  (accessed 6 June 2012) . 
Mullen, C.L., J.F. Holland, and L. Heuke. 2003.  Cowpea, 
lablab, and pigeon pea. Agfact P4.2.21. NSW 
Agriculture, Orange, New South Wales. 
http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/00
06/157488/cowpea -lablab -pigeon -pea.pdf  (accessed 
24 Jul y 2012) . 
Phatak, S.C., R.G. Nadimpalli, S.C. Tiwari, and H.L. 
Bhardwaj. 1993. Pigeonpeas: potential new crop for 
the southeastern United States. In: J . Janick and J.E. 
Simon , ed itor s, New Crops. Wiley, New York. p.  
597– 599. 
http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings199
3/v2 -597.html  (accessed 24 Jul y 2012) . 
Stevens, J.M. 2012. Pea, pigeon — Cajanus cajan. 
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences (IFAS), 
Univ. of FL. Extension. Publication #HS641. 
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/mv108# (accessed 24 Jul y 
2012) . 
Thorp, S., M. Davison, O. Frost, and  M. Pickstock. (ed. ) 
2012. New agriculturist: t he potential of pigeonpea.  
Wren Media Ltd., Suffolk, UK. http://www.new -
ag.info/99- 5/focuson/focuson3.html  (accessed 6 Jun e 
2012) . 
USDA  NRCS. 2012. T he PLANTS database. National 
Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC .  
http://plants.usda.gov  (accessed 10 Jul y 2012) .  
Prepared By : Christopher M.  Sheahan; USDA -NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, New Jersey

Citation  
Sheahan, C. M. 2012.  Plant guide for pigeonpea  (Cajanus 
cajan) . USDA- Natural Resources  Conservation Service,  
Cape May Plant Materials Center . Cape May, NJ. 08210.  
Published  August 2012 
Edited: 31Aug2012 aym ; 7Sept2012 ac 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Pro gram Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER