Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
BUTTONBUSH  
Cephalanthus occidentalis  L. 
Plant Symbol = CEOC2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Button ball, button willow, buttonbush,  Cephalanthus 
occidentalis  var. californicus, Cephalanthus 
occidentalis  var. pubescens,  honey-bells, riverbush.  
 
WARNING: Common buttonbush contains the 
poison CEPHALATHIN.  Cephalathin will induce 
vomiting, paralysis, and convulsions if ingested. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Common buttonbush is used for 
erosion control along shorelines.  It forms dense 
stands and its swollen plant base stabilizes the plant. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used common 
buttonbush medicinally.  Decoctions of the bark were 
used as washes for sore eyes, antidiarrheal agents, 
anti-inflammation and rheumatism medications, skin 
astringents, headache and fever relievers, and 
venereal disease remedies.  The bark was also 
chewed to relieve toothaches.  Roots were used for 
muscle inflammation and as blood medicines. 
 
Ornamental:  Showy flowers and fruit make common 
buttonbush a popular choice for use in native plant 
gardens, shrub borders, and along pond shores and 
water gardens.  The persistent fruits give the plant 
some winter interest. 
 
Wildlife:  Waterfowl and shorebirds consume the 
seeds of common buttonbush.  White-tailed deer 
browse foliage in the northeastern United States.  
Wood ducks use the plant’ s structure for protection 
of brooding nests.  Butterflies, bees, and 
hummingbirds are attracted to common buttonbush 
for its nectar.  Bees use it to produce honey. 
 L. Allain  
 
Description 
General : Madder Family (Rubiaceae). Common 
buttonbush is a warm-season shrub or small tree that 
reaches 6 m in height at maturity.  Stem bases are 
swollen.  Young twigs are green, 4-sided with 
elongated lenticels, and turn brown and scaly upon 
maturation.  Leaves are opposite or whorled, lance-
shaped, 18 cm long and 7.5 cm wide, glossy dark 
green, and emerge in May.  Flowers are tubular, 4- to 
5-lobed, white to reddish, 4 cm across, and form in 
dense clusters at the ends of the branches.  Long 
styles give flowers a pincushion appearance.  The 
fruit are ball-like and contain 2-seeded nutlets.  
Common buttonbush blooms in June through 
September and sets fruit in September and October. 
 
Key characteristics of common buttonbush are its 
pincushion flower heads, elongated lenticels, and 
swollen stem bases.  It is also the only wetland shrub 
that has whorled leaves and spherical-shaped flowers. 
 
Distribution : Common buttonbush is native to North 
America.  It occurs from Nova Scotia to Ontario, 
south through Florida, and west to the eastern Great 
Plains with scattered populations in New Mexico, 
Arizona, California, and northern Mexico.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Common buttonbush is a wetland shrub 
common in swamps, floodplains, marshes, bogs, 
ditches that are underwater for part of the year, and 
alluvial plains with intermittent flooding.  It is 
present in riparian and wetland communities and is 
associated with plants like American beech, red 
maple, sugar maple, black oak, pin oak,  Nyssa 
species, bald cypress, southern bayberry, red bay,

holly, dogberry, grape, viburnum, poison ivy, Indian 
grass, big bluestem, switchgrass, and sedges. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for common buttonbush 
are 5 through 9.  It is a pioneer species in flooded 
areas and colonizes lowland marsh communities 
dominated by hardstem bulrush.  It grows well in 
sandy, loamy soils or alluvial soils with sand or silt 
surfaces.  It favors acidic or neutral soils and is 
intolerant of alkalinity.  It prefers medium to wet 
moisture levels and is intolerant of dry soils.  
Abundance increases with increased water levels and 
with increased light levels.  Its distribution is limited 
to regions that have a mean July temperature of 20
oC. 
 
Management 
Common buttonbush does not colonize along 
manmade waterways.  It is moderately susceptible to 
herbicides and can be damaged by springtime 
flooding.  Pruning is not necessary for control of 
spread but can be done in the spring to shape the 
plant.  Dense shrubs can be cut back in the fall, when 
water levels are low, to maintain manageability. 
 
It has been found in the South that common 
buttonbush remains dominant in the absence of fire.  
It will resprout in a few months following low-
intensity burns in wet woodlands.  Frequent fires will 
promote occasional sprouting, but common 
buttonbush is slow to resprout (7 years) following 
high-intensity burns.  In the southern marshlands, fire 
decreases grass densities, releasing nutrients for 
common buttonbush, and increasing growth. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Common buttonbush seeds are ready for collection in 
the fall when they have turned reddish-brown.  No 
pretreatment is necessary.  Sow seeds into moist, 
humus soils in full sun or part shade.   
 
Cuttings will produce roots in moist sandy soil.  
Unrooted cuttings can be pushed into moist soil along 
shorelines and will establish on their own. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
In 1996, the Big Flats Plant Materials Center released 
the ‘Keystone’ common buttonbush cultivar for use 
in wetland and riparian area restoration for the entire 
common buttonbush range. ‘K eystone’ was selected 
for its increased plant vigor, stem and foliar 
abundance, and increased basal area.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allain, L. 2004. USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 (http://plants.usda.gov, 24 June 2004). 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge. 
 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 21 
June 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Esquivel, R.G. 2001.  Propagation protocol for 
production of container Cephalanthus occidentalis L. 
plants.  (http://www.native plantnetwork.org, 21 June 
2004). College of Natural  Resources, University of 
Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Floridata. 2004.  Plant encyclopedia  
(http://floridata.com, 21 June 2004). Floridata 
Marketplace, Tallahassee. 
 
Kemper Center for Home Gardening. 2004. 
(http://ridgwaydb-mobot.org/ 
kemperweb/plantfinder/Alpha.asp, 21 June 2004). 
Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Morris, R. 2003.  Cephalanthus occidentalis  
(http://www.scs.leeds.ac.uk/ cgi-bin/pfaf/arr_html? 
Cephalanthus+occidentalis, 21 June 2004). Plants for 
a Future Database, Blagdon Cross, Ashwater, 
Beaworthy, Devon, United Kingdom. 
 
Snyder, S.A. 1991.  Cephalanthus occidentalis.  
 (http://www.fs.fed.us/databas e/feis/, 21 June 2004). 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Missoula. 
 
Wisconsin State Herbarium. 2004.  Cephalanthus 
occidentalis  (www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora/scripts/ 
detail.asp?SpCode=CEPOCC, 21 June 2004). 
University of Wisconsin, Madison. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants  (http://www.plantatlas. 
usf.edu, 21 June 2004). Institute of Systematic 
Botany, University of South Florida, Tampa.

Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center,  
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 25June2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.