Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COCKSPUR 
HAWTHORN  
Crataegus crus-galli  L. 
Plant Symbol = CRCR2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Because it tolerates a wide variety 
of sites, it can be planted to stabilize banks, for 
shelterbelts, and for erosion control. 
 
Wildlife: It provides excellent cover and nesting sites 
for many smaller birds.  The small fruits are eaten by 
many birds especially cedar  waxwings, fox sparrows, 
and ruffed grouse; rodents and other smaller birds.  
White tailed deer and mule deer browse the young 
twigs and leaves.   
 
Beautification: Excellent in group plantings, 
deciduous screens, groupings, tall barrier hedge, and 
seasonal accent tree.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: It is a small tree that grows twenty to thirty 
feet high, twenty to thirty-five feet wide; with wide-
spreading, horizontal, thorny branches.  Leaves are 
broadest above or near the middle, thick, leathery, 
shiny dark green above, usually not lobed, and 
smooth.  Flowers ranging from white to red are 
produced in clusters.  Fruits are broadest above the 
middle or rounded, dull red or green. 
 Native Trees of Texas Department of Horticulture Texas A&M University
 
Distribution: Cockspur hawthorn grows from 
southern Quebec, and Ontario to northern Louisiana, 
Alabama and northwestern Georgia, and west to 
Kansas. 
 
Adaptation 
Although Cockspur hawthorn generally requires no 
special soil requirements, it prefers a moist, well-
drained, slightly acid soils, and full sunlight.  It is 
adaptable to poor soils; various soil pHs, compacted 
soils, drought, heat and winter salt spray.  Adapted to 
USDA Hardiness Zone 4. 
 
Establishment  
Propagation from Seed or Grafting: Cockspur 
hawthorn can be propagated by seeds or by stem 
cuttings grafted onto seedling rootstock.  Propagation 
using seeds requires acid scarification for two to 
three hours followed by three months warm 
stratification and another three months prechilling.  
Seeds are planted in drill rows eight to twelve inches 
apart and covered with 1/4 inch of soil.  
 
Containerized trees should be planted when they are 
no more than eight feet tall, in the fall or spring. 
 
Grafts are budded on seedling understock in August 
and September. 
 
Management 
Seedlings develop taproot, thus should not be kept in 
seedbeds longer than one year.  Balled and burlapped 
trees should be planted in early spring.  If 
transplanted in autumn, amend soil, fertilize, water 
thoroughly, mulch adequately and avoid winter salt

spray.  Pruning should be done in the winter or early 
spring in order to maintain a clear shoot leader on 
young trees and/or remove the weakest branches to 
allow more light to pass through.  Suckers or stems 
arising from the roots should be removed when they 
become noticeable. 
 
Pest and Potential Problems 
Cedar hawthorn rust affects the fruit, foliage and 
stems.  Potential pests include leaf blotch minor. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Consult you local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.  Manual of woody landscape plants: 
their identification, ornamental characteristics, 
culture, propagation and uses.  3
rd ed.  Stipes, 
Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Duncan, W.H. & M.B. Duncan 1988.  Trees of the 
Southeastern United States.  University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Elias, T.S. 1989.  Field  guide to North American 
trees.  Revised ed. Grolier Book Clubs Inc., Danbury, 
Connecticut. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1983.  Landscape plants for eastern North 
America.  John Wiley and Sons, Inc, New York, New 
York. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar. 1962.  Guide to southern 
trees.  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Little, E.E. 1996.  National Audubon Society field 
guide to North American trees: Eastern region.  
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York. 
 
Texas A&M University 2002.  Native trees of Texas.  
Department of Horticulture, College Station, Texas.  
Accessed: 11jan02.  <http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/ornamentals/natives/indexscien
tific.htm> 
 
USDA Forest Service 1974.  Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States.  Agricultural Handbook 450. 
USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
USDA Forest Service 1990.  Silvics of North 
America.  Agricultural Handbook 654.  Forest 
Service, USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young. 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Revised and enlarged ed.  
Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon 
 
Prepared By 
Alfredo B. Lorenzo 
Formerly, Southern University and A&M College 
College of Agricultural, Family and Consumer 
Sciences, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 24feb03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.