Plant Guide
SPOTTED KNAPWEED 
Centaurea steobe L. 
Plant Symbol =  CEST8 
Contributed by :   USDA NRCS Montana Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure 1. Spotted knapweed flower  heads. Photo by 
Christina Herron, Mo ntana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana.  Used  with permission.  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  None  
Scientific Alternate Names:  Centaurea maculosa  Lam., 
Centaurea  biebersteinii  DC. 
Taxonomy:  Spotted knapweed  is in the Asteraceae 
(sunflower) family.  In its native range of  Western, 
C entral, and  Eastern  Europe, two sub- species have been 
identified;  Centaurea stoebe spp.  stoebe  is  diploid and 
biennial, and subspecies  C. stoebe spp. micr anthos  is 
tetraploid and  perennial.  The perennial subspecies is 
considered more invasive in Europe than the biennial 
subspecies.  The invasiveness of the North American  taxon, 
C. stoebe  spp. micranthos , has been ascribed to it 
being perennial because it can tolerate dense vegetation 
once it has become established, whereas the biennial is 
more dependent on disturbance . 
In the Ukraine, spotted knapweed hybri dized with diffuse 
knapweed ( Centaurea diffusa) on sites where the tw o 
species coexisted. In North America, hybrids of the tw o 
species are only found on sites invaded by diffuse 
knapweed leading to the hypothesis that hybrid 
individuals were introduced into North America with 
diffuse knapweed (Blair and Hufbauer , 2009).  
Uses  
Bee keepers value the flowers of spotted knapweed 
because of the flavorful honey produced from its nectar . 
Status 
Spotted knapweed is listed as noxious, prohibited, banned 
or otherwise regulated in 16 states.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant  is weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desir able vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Pleas e consult with your local NRCS 
field office, cooperative extension service office, state 
natura l resource, or state agriculture  department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from  the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information.  
Description  
General :   Rosette leaves grow from  buds on the root 
crown of a deep taproot.  They have short stalks and grow 
up to eight inches long and two inches wide and are 
deeply divided once or twice into oblong lobes on both 
sides of the center vein.  Flower stems are eight inches to 
four feet tall  and branch on the upper half.   Stem leaves 
are smaller toward the stem apex, alternately arranged, 
sessile, and have few lobes or are linear and entire.  
Flower  heads are solitary or in clusters of two or three on 
the  branch ends, ovate to oblong, ¼ -inch wide  and ½-inch 
long. The involucres bracts of the flower  head are 
imbricate, widest and yellow -green at the base, with black 
margins, obvious dark longitudinal veins, and a fringe of 
spines, the central spine shorter than the lateral ones. 
There are  20 to 30 purple to pink (rarely white) flowers 
per flower  head.  Seeds are  ⅛-inch long, oval, brown to

black, with pale longitudinal lines and a pappus of short, 
simple, and persistent bristles.  
Life History:   There are four relatively distinct and 
measurable life history stages of  spotted knapweed; seeds, 
seedlings, rosettes, and flowering plants.   Spotted 
knapweed reproduces  only by seeds.  Seed production of 
spotted knapweed  in western Montana ranged from 
10, 760 to 83,950 per square foot  on an Idaho fesc ue 
habitat -type (Jacobs and Sheley , 1998), was measured at 
46,285 per square foot  in Colorado (Seastedt et al. , 2007), 
and was reported as high as  430,550 per square foot in 
Washington (Shirman,  1981).  In Montana, viable seeds 
were recovered from soil that had no seed inputs for eight 
years (Davis et al. , 1993).  Seedlings are first -year 
emergents and are difficult to distinguish from seedlings 
of other forb species.   Spotted knapweed can persist for 
an entire growing season in the seedling stage.  Rosette s 
can develop from seedlings within one growing season, 
and can be identified, in most cases, by the distinctive 
pinnatifid, oblong- lobed leaves.  In addition, plants that 
flower in one year may persist in the following year as 
rosettes.  Flowering plants are distinguished by the 
production of an upright (except when heavily grazed or 
repeatedly mowed) paniculate inflorescence with few to 
many branches and reaching heights of eight inches to 
four feet depending on the environmental conditions  and 
plant comp etition .  Development of flowering plants from 
seedlings in one growing season is common.  Flower  
heads develop on branch ends and are distinguished by 
the comb -like fringed, black -tipped involuc re bracts and 
the pink to light -purple flowers.  Each flower head can 
have as many as 30 flowers each producing one seed.  
Sensitivity analysis of life history stages and calculated 
transitions has identified early summer rosette survival, 
the transition from the rosette stage to the flowering plant 
stage, flowering  plant survival, and seeds produced per 
flowering plant as life history stages and transitions 
critical to  spotted knapweed population  fitness (Jacobs 
and Sheley,  1998). 
Distribution :   Spotted knapweed is native to  Central 
Europe east to  Central Russia, Caucasia, and  Western 
Siberia.  It was first reported in North America in 1883 
from Victoria, British Columbia and has since spread to 
all but  eight continental provinces and states.   For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :   In its native range spotted knapweed commonly 
grows in the forest -grassland interface on deep, well -
developed to dry soils.  It forms dense stands in more 
moist areas on well- drained soils including  gravel, and on 
drier sites where summer precipitat ion is supplemented by 
runoff.  
Ethnobotany  
Centaurea  is appropriately derived from the Greek word 
for Centaurs,  kentaruion, which were the
 mythical 
creatures with human head s, arms, and chest s, and the res t of the body like that of a horse.  The unruly Centaurs that 
lived in herds around Mount Pelion in Thessaly, Greece, 
were a plague to people around them.
 
Adaptation  
In North America, Spotted knapweed  has been reported 
from elevations ranging from 1,900 to over 10,000 feet, in 
precipitation zones ranging from 8 to 79 inches annually, 
and  growing on  a wide range of soils types.  
Establishment  
Spotted knapweed establishes from seed only. Seed crops 
have a  high percent viability and will germinate in the fall 
of the year produced, the following spring, or will remain 
dormant and  viable at a significant percentage for eight or 
more years (Davis et al.,  1993). 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Spotted knapweed is  a difficult to manage weed pest in 
the semi -arid west and in the mid -western United States 
and Canada.  
Environmental Concerns  
Areas with large- scale and dense infestations of s potted 
knapweed have increased  surface water runoff  and stream 
sedimentation  and reduced soil water infiltration  (Lacey 
et al. , 1989), reduced forage production for some classes 
of livestock  (Watson and Renney , 1974) , and reduced 
wildlife habitat ( Spoon et al., 1983) . 
Control  
Herbicides:   Short -term control of spotted knapweed 
popu lations  is effective using herbicides.  The length of 
control (i.e. , the time the population regenerates from 
seeds in the soil) will depend on the  size of the soil seed 
bank (effected by how long the population has been 
there),  soil residual activity of the herbicide (effected by 
soil texture  and  precipitation ), and the competitiveness of 
the plant community.  Picloram applied at one pint 
product per acre (0.25 pounds active ingredient per a cre) 
can provide 90 percent or more population reduction for 
three  or more years on loamy soils with a well -maintained 
grassland community.  However, picloram is a restricted -
use herbicide and cannot be applied near surface water or 
where there is a high water table.  It is water soluble, 
mobile, and will leach quickly f rom the rooting zone in 
sandy soils.  Picloram also breaks down in sunlight which 
reduces its residual activity.  Because of the residual 
activity, timing of picloram application is not as critical as 
with other herbicides with less residual activity.  Spr ing, 
early summer, and fall applications result in the greatest 
control.  Application during the hot and dry part of the 
summer should be avoided because uptake into the plant 
is limited when plants are dormant and the active 
ingredient breaks down rapidly  in the sun. 
An alternative to picloram is 2,4 -D, a broadleaf selective 
herbicide, which can be applied to sensitive areas or 
where the use of picloram  is prohibited.  The timing of 
2, 4- D application is important  for maximizing control

because this herbicide has brief residual soil activity .  To 
have the greatest reduction of spotted knapweed 
populations, 2,4- D should be applied after most of the 
seeds have germinated and before plants flower, generally 
at the late bud stage but before flowers appear .  This 
timing will target early summer rosettes, prevent the 
transition from rosette to flowering plant, and eliminate 
seed production.   These are life history stages and 
transitions that are most important to spotted knapweed 
population fitness.  Repeate d annual applications of 2,4- D 
may be necessary to maintain control of plants that 
regenerate from the soil seed bank.  However, re-
application will depend on the degree of seedling 
suppression by competitive plants.   Other herbicides 
available for control  of spotted knapweed include 
products that contain  aminopyralid, dicamba, clopyralid, 
or  triclopyr.  
Biological control:   T here are eight  flower head insects 
and five root -boring insects that have been approved and 
released for biological control of spotted  knapweed in the 
United States (Story et al. , 2004) .  Most of these insects 
are available commercially or through state, federal, or 
private programs.  Once insects are established they can 
be collected on site and re- distributed.  Bio-control insects 
may  reduce spotted knapweed populations where 
competitive plants are available, but without other 
management, are  unlikely  to eradicate population s. 
Urophora  seed head flies were released over 20 years ago 
and are well established throughout most of the spotte d 
knapweed -infested areas in the western United States.  
These species have been observed to reduce seed 
production by 50 percent or more.  Other  flower head 
feeding insects are not as  widely distributed, but may be 
as effective as the  Urophora fly.  The Larinus  flower - 
head weevils and  Metzneria seed head  moth are believed 
to be effective in reducing seed production.   Larinus 
species prefer hot dry sites and  Metzneria does best on 
sites with winter snow cover.  A Montana study 
calculated the reduction in s eed production by the 
combination  Urophora and Larinus  feeding to be 84.2 to 
90.5% (Story et al. , 2008).  However, seed  feeding insect 
species are not compatible with each other.   On a site in 
Colorado,  Larinus consumed about 40% of  Urophora in 
co -infested  spotted knapweed flower  heads (Seastedt et 
al. , 2007) and in Montana  Urophora reproduction was 71 
percent lower when  Larinus minutus was present (Smith 
and Mayer , 2005).   Poor establishment of the  Chaetorellia 
and  Terellia  flies is believed to be the resu lt of 
competition with other  flower head insect species.   The 
larva of  Metzneria  and  Bangasternus  will attack  other 
insects in the seed head.   The  Bangasternus  seed head  
weevil feeds  primarily on diffuse and squarrose 
knapweed , but reduces spotted knapweed  seed production 
by up to 95%.  
Of the root  feeding insects, the  Agapeta root moth, 
Cyphocleonus  root weevil, and  Sphenoptera root borer are  well established in parts of the western states.  These 
species prefer hot, dry, open sites.  Reductions in spotted 
knapweed biomass and density have been noted 
10 years 
after the release of root -boring weevils  (Jacobs et al. , 
2006) .  Observations suggest that the  Cyphocleonus root 
weevil reduces the longevity of spotted knapweed plants 
making their duration more biennial than perennial, and 
thus less competitive with perennial grasses.   Combining 
the root herbivore  Cyphocleonus with the seed feeding 
weevil  Larinus reduced spotted knapweed biomass and 
seed production additively compared to either insect alone 
in a common  garden study , and the presence of plant 
competition further decreased knapweed growth (Knochel 
et al. , 2010).  
The  Pelochrista  root moth first released in Montana in 
1984 has been slow to establish for unknown reasons.  
The  Pterolonche  root moth was releas ed and established 
in Oregon in 1986 but has not been recovered since 2000, 
presumably because of the dramatic control of diffuse 
knapweed (another host for this species) by the seed head  
weevils  (Story et al. , 2004) . 
R eductions in spotted knapweed densiti es have been 
observed in southwestern Mont ana after the release of 
flower  head -and root -feeding biological control insects.  
In most cases, two or more insect species  establish on the 
spotted knapweed population.  Ten years after the release 
and establishm ent of Cyphocleonus  achates and  Larinus 
spp . in large scale and dense populations of spotted 
knapweed, three different plant communities were 
observed depending on management treatments.  Where 
the biological  control insects were released and no other 
mana gement was used, the plant community remained 
dominated by spotted knapweed.  Where picloram was 
applied and the biological control insects established on 
spotted knapweed regenerating from the seed bank, 
cheatgrass  (Bromus tectorum ) was the dominant plant  in 
the plant community.   Where picloram was used  and 
perennial grass  seeded and established,  and the insects 
established, the perennial grasses dominated the plant 
community.  These observations illustrate how plant 
community composition was important in  influencing the 
outcome of management actions.  
Grazing Control:   Spotted knapweed has adequate 
nutritional quality during the growing season to sustain 
livestock and wildlife based on crude protein and neutral 
detergent fiber concentration of harvested and dried 
rosettes, bolting, and flowering/seed  set plants ( Ganguli et 
al. , 2010).  Crude protein concentration was greater in 
rosettes (20%), than bolting (12%) and flowering/seed  set 
plants (11%).   Neutral detergent fiber was lowest in 
rosettes (30%), followed by bolting plants (29%) and 
highest in flowering/seed  set p lants (40%).  In a cafeteria -
type preference trial, sheep readily consumed all spotted 
knapweed ph enological stages, but generally selected 
rosettes and bolting plants over flowering  and  seed  set 
plants ( Ganguli  et al. , 2010).

In a confined grazing study, five years of repeated sheep 
grazing reduced spotted knapweed density and biomass 
compared to a control and to a first year only application 
of 2,4- D (Sheley et al. , 2004).   Also in this study, repeated 
sheep grazing after a one time application of 2,4 -D 
r educed spotted knapweed density and biomass compared 
to the one time application of 2,4 -D after five years 
indicating confined sheep grazing can be used in an 
integrated pest management program to maintain spotted 
knapweed below a threshold achieved after  pesticide 
appli cation.  
A prescribed grazing study herded a band of 800 ewes 
and 1 ,120 lambs on lightly infested (13% spotted 
knapweed vegetative composition) or moderately infested 
(36% spotted knapweed vegetative composition) rough 
fescue/bluebunch wheatgrass  (Festuca 
campestris/ Pseudoroegneria spicata)  foothills rangeland 
in western Montana in mid -June or mid- July (Thrift et al. , 
2008).   Sheep diets averaged 64% and 26% spotted 
knapweed in the moderate and light infestations, 
respectively.   Fewer graminoi ds were eaten in June than 
July in the light infestation whereas fewer graminoids 
were eaten July than June in the moderate infestation.   
The authors concluded this prescription for sheep grazing 
on these sites would make herbicide application 
uneconomical  suggesting prescribed sheep grazing can be 
used as an alternative to pesticide application in an 
integrated pest management program for spotted 
knapweed.  
Prescribed grazing to maintain the vigor and 
competitiveness of grassland plant communities will 
prev ent spotted knapweed invasion.   On the other hand, 
intense and frequent grazing pressure  opens grassland 
plant communities to spotted knapweed invasion and re -
invasion after management treatments (Jacobs et al. , 
2000;  Jacobs and Sheley , 1999; Jacobs and Sh eley, 1997).  
Mowing:   A hand -clipping study in west -central Montana 
removed spotted knapweed buds and flowers at seven 
different timings and frequencies (Benzel et al.,  2009).  
Clipping  when plants were bolting to flower, or later in 
the season,  reduced spotted knapweed seed production by 
90% and 100%, respectively, compared to a no clipping 
control.   The results suggest defoliation by mowing or 
prescribe grazing will suppress spotted knapweed viable 
seed production.   The results of a mowing stud y led to the 
recommendation of a single annual mowing applied at the 
flowering or seed producing stage for partial control of 
spotted knapweed (Rinella  et al. , 2001).   However, 
mowing at the flowering stage or later may cause 
mortality of biological contro l insect larvae where they 
are established on spotted knapweed  (Story et al., 2010) . 
Prescribed Burning:   A study in western Michigan 
applied prescribed burning to spotted knapweed- infested 
gravel mine spoils in late April or May for three years 
reducing s potted knapweed density and biomass and 
increasing the dominance of warm -season grasses  (MacDonald et al., 
2007).  The results support using 
carefully timed burns to optimize  the reduction of low-
density spotted knapweed populations while benefiting 
fire -adapted plant communities with abundant warm -
season grasses.   Prescribed burns on sites in western 
Montana in cool season grass communities resulted in 
increases in invasive species biomass and seed production 
(Jacobs and Sheley , 2003).   
Hand Pulling:   Hand pulling that extracts the root crown 
can temporally reduce spotted knapweed on small -scale 
infestations or as a follow -up treatment to initial herbicide 
treatment on larger -scale infestations.  Pulling or grubbing 
the root crown is most easily accomplishe d when the soil 
is moist and a shovel is used to pry -up the tap root.  When 
the soil is dry the plant tends to break -off above the root 
crown enabling it to regenerate.  If flowering plants have 
been pulled, they should be sealed in plastic bags and 
dispos ed of in the trash to prevent seed spread.  Wearing 
gloves while pulling spotted knapweed will protect 
against potential skin irritation from chemicals produced 
by knapweed.  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed special ist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guar antee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
References  
Benzel, K. R., T.K. Mosley, and J.C. Mosley. 2009 
Defoliation timing effects on spotted knapweed seed 
production and viability. Range.  Ecol . Manage. 
62:550- 556. 
Blair, A.C. and R.A. Hufbau er. 2009. Geographic patterns 
of hybridization between spotted knapweed 
( Centaurea steobe ) and diffuse knapweed ( Centaurea 
diffusa ) [electronic resource]. Invasive  Plant  Science 
and  Management 2(1): 55 -69.  
Davis, E. S., P. K. Fay, T. K. Chincoine, and C. A. Lacey.   1993.  Persistence of spotted knapweed ( Centaurea 
maculosa) seed in soil.  Weed Sci.  41:57- 61. 
Ganguli, A.C., M.B. Hale, and K.L. Launchbaugh. 2010.  Seasonal change in nutrient composition of spot ted 
knapweed and preference by sheep. Small  Ruminant 
Research 89: 47 -50.  
Jacobs, J.S. and R.L. Sheley. 1997. Relationship among  Idaho fescue defoliation, soil water, and spotted 
knapweed emergence and growth. J. Range Manage.  
50:258- 262. 
Jacobs, J.S. and R .L. Sheley. 1999. Grass defoliation 
intensity, frequency, and season effects on spotted 
knapweed invas ion. J. Range Manage.  52: 626- 632. 
Jacobs, J. S. and R. L. Sheley.  1998.  Observation:   spotted knapweed life history.  J . Range Manage. 
51:665- 673.

Jacobs, J.S., R.L. Sheley, and J.R. Carter. 2000. Picloram, 
fertilizer, and defoliation interactions on spotted 
knapweed reinvasion. J . Range Manag e. 53: 309- 314.  
Jacobs, J.S. and R.L. Sheley. 2003.  Prescribed fire effects 
on dalmatian toadflax. J. Range Manage. 56: 193 -
197.  
Jacobs, J.S., S.E. Sing, and J.M. Martin. 2006. Influence  of herbivory and competition on invasive weed 
fitness: observed effects of  Cyphocleonus achates 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae) and grass seeding 
treatments on spotted kna pweed performance. 
Environ. Entomol.  35(6): 1590- 1596. 
Knochel, D.G., N.D. Monson, and T.R. Seastedt. 2010.  Additive effects of aboveground and belowground 
herbivores on the dominance of spotted knapweed 
(Centaurea stoebe ). Oecologia 164:701- 712. 
Lacey, J. R., C.B. Marlow, and J.R. Lane. 1989. Influence 
of spotted knapweed ( Centaurea maculosa) on 
surface water runoff and  sediment yield. Weed 
Technol.  3: 627- 631. 
MacDonald, N.W., B.T. Scull, and S.R. Abella. 2007.  Mid-spring burning reduces spotted knapweed and 
increas es native grasses during a Michigan 
experimental gras sland establishment. Restor. Ecol.  
15(1): 118- 128. 
Rinella, M.J., J.S. Jacobs, R.L. Sheley, and J.J.  Borkowski. 2001. Spotted knapweed response to 
season and frequency of mowing. J . Range Manage.  
54: 52- 56. 
Rinella, M.J., J.M. Mangold, E.K. Espeland, R.L. Sheley,  and J.S. Jacobs. 2012. Long -term population 
dynamics of seeded plants i n invaded grasslands. 
Ecol. Applic.  22(4): 1320- 1329. 
Seastedt, T.R., D.G. Knochel, M. Garmoe, S.A. Shosky.   2007.  Interact ions and effects of multiple biological 
control insects on diffuse and spotted knapweed in 
the Front Range of Colorado.  Biological Control 
42(3): 345- 354. 
Sheley, R.L., J.S. Jacobs, and J.M. Martin. 2004. 
Integrating 2,4 -D and sheep grazing to rehabilitat e 
spotte d knapweed infestations. J.  Range Manage.  57: 
371- 375. 
Shirman, R. 1981. Seed production and spring seedling  establishment of diffuse and spott ed knapweed. J. 
Range Manage.  34:45-47. 
Smith, L. and M. Mayer.  2005.  Field cage assessment of  interfer ence among insects attacking seed heads of 
spotted and  diffuse knapweed.  Biocontrol Science 
and Technology 15(5): 427- 442. 
Spoon, C.W., H.R. Bowles, and A. Kulla. 1983. Noxious 
weeds on the Lolo National Forest. A situation 
analysis staff paper. USDA Forest Service Northern 
Region, Missoula, Montana.  
Story, J.M., G.L. Piper, and E.M. Coombs. 2004.  Knapweeds.   In: Coombs, E. M., Coombs, J. K. 
Clark, G. L. Piper, and A. F. Cofrancesco, Jr. (eds) 
Biological control of invasive plants in the United  States.  Or
egon State Univ. Press, Corvallis.   196-
232. 
Story, J.M., L. Smith, J.G. Corn, and L.J. White.  2008.   Influence of seed head -attacking biological control 
agents on spotted knapweed reproductive potential in 
western Montana over a 30 -year period.  Environ. 
Entomol.  37(2): 510- 519. 
Story, J.M., J.G. Corn, and L.J. White. 2010.  Compatibility of seed head biological control agents 
and mowing for management of  spotted knapweed. 
Environ. Entomol.  39: 164- 168. 
Thrift, B.D., J.C. Mosley,  T.K. Brewer, B.L. Roeder, B.E. 
Olsen, and R.W. Kott. 2008. Prescribed sheep 
grazing to suppress spotted knapweed on foothills 
rangeland. Range.  Ecol. Manage.  61:18-25. 
Watson, A.K. and A.J. Renney. 1974. The biology of 
Canadian weeds. 6.  Centaurea diffusa and C. 
maculosa. Can. J. Plant Sci.  54: 687- 701.
 
Prepared By :  Jim  Jacobs : USDA -NRCS, Bozeman, 
Montana  
Citation 
Jacobs , J.,2012 . Plant  Guide for  spotted knapweed  
( Centaurea steobe L. ). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Bozeman, Montana 59715  
Published  September 2012 
Edited:  14Sep12 js; 19Sep12 rg; 20Sep12 jb  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS  is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER