Plant Guide
YELLOW 
RABBITBRUSH  
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus  
(Hook.) Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = CHVI8  
 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
 
Al Schneider @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
Alternate Names 
Crinitaria viscidiflora Hooker  
Ericameria viscidiflora  (Hook.) L.C. Anderson 
Douglas rabbitbrush 
Green rabbitbrush  
Low rabbitbrush 
Sticky -leaf rabbitbrush  
Viscid rabbitbrush  
Uses  
Wildlife  and livestock : Yellow rabbitbrush is browsed by 
large game and livestock. It is considered desirable fall 
forage for cattle, sheep, horses, elk and antelope, and 
spring forage for deer (Ogle and Brazee, 2009). It is a  valuable forage especially during late fall and earl
y winter 
after more desirable forage has been utilized 
(Tirmenstein, 1999). Palatability and usage vary between 
subspecies of yellow rabbitbrush (McArthuer et al., 
1979).   
 
Yellow  rabbitbrush provides cover and nesting habitat for 
sage -grouse,  small birds  and rodents  (Gregg et al., 1994) . 
Black -tailed jackrabbits consume large quantities of 
yellow rabbitbrush during winter and early spring when 
plants are dormant (Curie and Goodwin, 1966).  
 
Yellow rabbitbrush provides late summer and fall forage 
for butterf lies. Unpublished field reports indicate 
visitation from bordered patch butterflies ( Chlosyne 
lacinia ), Mormon metalmark ( Apodemia mormo), 
mourning cloak ( Nymphalis antiopa), common checkered 
skipper ( Pyrgus communis ), and Weidemeyer’s admiral 
( Limenitis w eidemeyerii ). 
 
Restoration : Yellow rabbitbrush is a  seral species which 
colonizes disturbed areas making it well suited for use in 
restoration and revegetation plantings. It can be 
establishe d from direct seeding and will spread via 
windborne seed.  It has been successfully used for 
revegetating depleted rangelands, strip mines and 
roadsides (Plummer, 1977).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or en dangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Yellow 
rabbitbrush is a low - to moderate -growing shrub reaching 
mature heights of 20 to 100 cm ( 8 to 39 in) tall. The  stems 
can be g labrous or pubescent depending on variety, and 
are covered with pale green to white -gray bark. The 
leaves are narrow and linear to oblong 1 to 6 cm ( 0.4 to 
2.4  in) long and 0.5 to 8 mm ( 0.02 to 0.3 in) wide and 
often appear twisted. The flowers heads are b orne in 
numerous compact to open terminal cymes. The flower 
heads are 5 to 7.5 mm ( 0.2 to 0.3 in) long and 2 to 4 mm 
( 0.08 to 0.16 in) wide with glandular or pubescent bracts. 
The individual flowers are yellow 4 to 6 mm ( 0.16 to 0.25 
in) long, producing a 4 mm ( 0.16 in) long, hairy achene  
(Welsh et al., 2003) .  
 
There are five recognized varieties of yellow rabbitbrush 
including varieties planifolius , lanceolatus , puberulus , 
axillaris  and  viscidiflorus  which can be distinguished  by 
leaf morphology, stem pubescence and distribution. Flora