Plant Guide
CAMELINA 
Camelina  sativa  (L.) Crantz  
Plant Symbol = CASA2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS WA Plant Materials 
Program
 
1, Camelina sativa,  Photo  by Robert Evans, ARS  
Alternate Names 
False flax ,Gold -of -pleasure ,Linseed dodder  
Largeseed Falseflax ,Leindotter , Siberian oilseed  
 
Uses  
For a long time camelina  was known primarily in 
North America as a weed .  More recently, camelina  is 
being recognized for its value as an oilseed crop.   Oil 
content of the seed, on a dry weight basis, is typically 
between 30 and 40 percent.   The oil contains about 
64 percent polyunsaturated, 30 percent 
monounsaturated, and 6 percent saturated fatty acids 
(McVay and Lamb 2008).  Camelina  oil can be used 
in both edible and industrial products.  Historically, 
the seeds of camelina  were crushed and boiled to 
release oil for food, medicinal use, and lamp oil.  
More recent ly camelina  is being grown as a sour ce of 
vegetable oil high in omega -3 fatty acids .  Camelina  
is being marketed in Europe in salad dressing and as 
cooking oil (it is not suitable as deep -fat fry oil). It is 
also used in cosmetics, skin care products, soaps, and 
soft detergents  (Ehrensing and Guy 2008) .  The oil 
has been used successfully as an adjuvant in 
agri cultural spraying applications , as a biodiesel, and 
it  has been approved for use in  cattle, chicken, and 
pig feed (Ehrensing and Guy 2008, Hulbert et al 
2011).  
Camelina  meal, the product remaining after the oil 
ha s been extracted from the seed, is similar to 
soybean and canola meal and contains more than  40% protein and has a moderately
-low glucosinolate 
content.     
Camelina seems to perform well as a companion crop 
(ins tead of oats) in establishing legumes for green 
manure cover and/or forage (Hunter 2010).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
It is considered a weed in many areas, but other areas 
embrace it for the use of its oils as a food, fuel or for 
its possible medicinal value.  Camelina  is pr imarily a 
minor weed in flax and not often a problem in other 
crops (Putnam et al., 1993).  Its ability to survive in a 
diverse range of habitats enables it to be introduced 
fairly easily into new environments (Global Invasive 
Species Database).   
 
Please  consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information.  
Description  
Camelina sativa  is an annual  in the mustard family  
and  attains heights of 1 to 3 fee t.  It has branched 
stems  that become woody at maturity.  Stems are 
generally smooth or only sparsely hairy near their 
base  (Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973) . Leaves are 
arrow -shaped, sharp -pointed, 2 to 3.5 inches long 
with smooth edges.  It produces prolific small, pale 
yellow  or greenish -yellow flowers with 4 petals.  
Fruits are pear shaped pods known as silicles and 
have a squared off tip  (Klinkenberg 2008) .  Seed 
pods are ¼ to slightly  more than ½ inch long.  Seeds 
are small ( < 1/16 inch long and a bout half as wide) 
pale yellow -brown, oblong, rough, with a ridged 
surface.   There are approximately 400,000 seeds of 
camelina  per pound.  
 
Camelina  is  widely  distributed throughout the 
northern tier of states within the United States.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.

University Extension, MontGuide, MT200701AG Revised 3/08.   
Putnam, D.H., J. T. Budin, L.A. Field, and W.M.  Breene. 1 993 Camelina: A promising low -input 
oilseed.  In J. Janick and J.E. Simon (Eds.), New 
crops  (pp. 314- 322). New York: Wiley.   
Sustainable Oils  web site . 2009.  
( http://www.susoils.com/opportunities/protocol_
spring.php ) 
Wysocki , Don and  Nick  Sirovatka . 2008.  Camelina, 
a Potential Oilseed Crop for Semiarid Oregon.   
 
Prepared By : 
Richard Fleenor , USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program, Spokane WA    
Citation   Fleenor, Richard A. 2011. 
Plant Guide for Camelina 
( Camelina sativa) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Se rvice, Spokane, WA 99201  
 
Published September, 2011  
Edited:  20Sep20 11 r f, 30Sep2011 jab  
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Progr am 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER