Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUEJOINT 
REEDGRASS 
Calamagrostis canadensis  
(Michx.) Beaux  
Plant Symbol = CACA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Manhattan, Kansas 
Plant Materials Center  
 
 
Alternate Names  
Bluejoint or Macoun’s Reedgrass 
 
Uses 
Calamogrostis canadensis  is a wetland species that 
has forage value for deer, bison, and cattle (Hogg and 
Lieffers, 1991). It produces good quality hay when 
harvested prior to heading. Forage quality is highest 
about three weeks before  boot stage (McKendrick et  
al ., 1977).  It also has value as a food for waterfowl. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA SCS 1989. Midwest Wetland Flora 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Bluejoint is a tall, 
erect, cool season perennial grass that is found in wet 
meadows and prairies. Th e creeping rhizomes and 
rootstocks of this species result in natural stands 
having a hummocky, uneven appearance. The erect 
stems are slender and not branched and can be 1 to 2 
meters tall. The leaves are elongated and very 
narrow, with a bluish green color and are rough to the 
touch. The caryopses are ellipsoidal, yellow-brown, 
smooth, and about 1 to 1.5 mm long. The 
inflorescence is an open panicle with a caryopsis 
borne singly in each spikel et (Barkley, 1986).   
Flowers June to August and is a typical wind 
pollinated species like most of the grasses. 
Calamagrostis canadensis  possesses the C-3 
photosynthetic pathway for carbon fixation (Waller 
and Lewis, 1979). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. It has a distribution from 
Greenland to Alaska south to North Carolina, Kansas, 
and California.  
 
Habitat: Bluejoint survives best in moist to saturated 
soils, but not soils inundated by water. The species 
has an extremely broad distribution and a wide 
ecological amplitude occurring in diverse wetland 
areas.  
 
Adaptation 
  According to Mitchell (1974) mature bluejoint 
stands tolerate thick build up of litter and mulch. This 
species occurs in highly organic peat and clay soils, 
but prefers a silt type so il (Hammer, 1992). This 
species is adapted to a variety of temperature (-40 to

105 degrees F) and precipitation regimes. It stands up 
well to winter conditions and is extremely winter 
hardy (Eggers and Reed, 1987). The species 
demonstrates broad ecological amplitudes occurring 
in lowland wetlands to windswept alpine ridges 
(Mitchell, 1968). It has a wide pH tolerance (pH 5 to 
8) from acidic soils to more alkaline water (LaBaugh, 
1989). It can tolerate fresh water to slightly brackish  
( 0 to 10 ppt) (Hammer, 1992). Eggers and Reed 
(1987) noted that the species is usually a 
subdominant in sedge ( Carex) meadows, and occurs 
in open woods, especially after fire and logging. 
Other grasses associated with  Calamagrostis include 
Spartina pectinata, Beckmannia syzigachne, 
Scolochloa festucacea,  and Poa palustris  (Fulton     
et al ., 1986). 
 
Management 
Because unfertilized bluejoint is intolerant of heavy 
grazing or repeated harvests, harvesting should be 
restricted to a single event per year. To maintain 
adequate stands of bluejoint, harvest should be 
performed before flowering and only on alternate 
years ( McKendrick  et al. 1977).  McKendrick  et al.  
(1977) noted that fertilized stands (1-2 tons dry 
matter / acre) of bluejoint produced three times more 
forage than did unfertilized stands (0.5 tons dry 
matter / acre). Mitchell (1974) found that fertilized 
stands produced crude leaf protein of 12-20% dry 
weight during mid-June harvests. Unfertilized forage 
was found to have marginal calcium and magnesium 
content and its digestibility was reduced (Corns and 
Schraa, 1962). Sparrow and Panciera (2005) found 
that clipping can improve late season forage quality.  
Bluejoint seeds are much smaller than those of most 
other forage grasses and require specialized 
processing after harvest (Klebesadel  et al. 1962). 
Their small size results in generally poor seedling 
vigor, thus requiring very shallow seeding and 
effective weed control during establishment. 
                         
Pests and Potential Problems 
Norton et al. (1987) reported that the nematode 
Subanguina calamagrostis  invades the leaf tissue of 
the grass and forms galls th at cause the leaves to 
become twisted and contorted.  A fungus 
Dilophospora alopecuri  (Fr.) Fr. also invades leaves 
of the grass due to the  entry wound caused by the 
nematode (Norton  et al., 1987).  Mitchell (1979b) 
also reported that an ins ect invades the sheath of the 
flag leaf and severs the culm at the base of the 
inflorescence, thus interfer ing with seed production. 
Heavy grazing and trampling by cattle breaks grass 
rhizomes and adds to soil compaction in wet 
meadows.  Fulton et al.(1986)  noted that heavy 
grazing reduces stands of bluejoint which allows  invasion by other wetland grasses, sedges, reeds, 
rushes, and smartweeds. The invasion of manna grass 
(
Glyceria grandis ) is the best indicator of grazing 
disturbance in the prairie pothole region (Fulton  et 
al ., 1986). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed is more commonly used for revegetation 
projects than vegetative materials. Seed production is 
highly variable among ecotypes and low production 
results in higher seed costs. Seed yields of 20 to 50 
pounds per acre can be expected if grown on 
agricultural stations or commercial growers 
(Mitchell, 1979a). Panicles can be collected by hand 
in wetter sites and combined on drier sites. Panicles 
should be harvested before seed shatter for maximum 
seed production. Mitchell (1979a) indicated that 
bluejoint contained from 3.5 to 4.0 million seeds per 
pound. Obtaining clean seed units of  Calamagrostis 
are difficult due to the tufts of hairs attached to the 
lemma bracts. Panicles are  threshed with a hammer 
mill to remove lemmas and hair tufts from lemmas 
(Klebesadel, et al. 1962). Klebesadel (1962) noted 
that seed fed into a hammer mill operating at 1200 
rpm’s with a 0.5 inch screen diameter round hole will 
dislodge 60 % of the caryopses from the lemmas and 
remove 25 to 30 per cent of the hairs from the 
lemmas. Seeds of bluejoint do not appear to have any 
complicated germination requirements. Germination, 
seed viability and dormancy were studied by Conn in 
1990. This researcher noted that Calamagrostis seed 
remained viable (greater th an 84%) for at least two 
years after collection and  storage. Klebesadel  et al. 
(1962) noted that this species had no dormancy or 
after ripening requirements and germination was not 
improved by scarification, stratification or light 
treatments. Chromosome number is variable with  
2n=28 to 66. Several chromosomal races exist, the 
major ones being  C. canadensis var. canadensis  and 
var.  macrouniana  2n=42 (Greene, 1984) in the 
continental U.S. and  C. canadensis var. langsdorfii 
2n=56 (Mitchell, 1968) which occurs primarily in 
Alaska. Within  Calamagrostis polyploid complexes 
exist as well as interspecific hybridization involving 
apomictic (seed from unfertilized eggs) forms are 
suspected. Hybrids produce fruits by sexual and 
apomictic means (Greene, 1984). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Sourdough’ bluejoint re edgrass is a cultivar 
developed by the Alaska Experiment Station for 
revegetation uses. Collections (36) from the interior, 
western and south central Alaska were combined into 
a synthetic population to produce ‘Sourdough’. The

cultivar ‘Sourdough’ tolerates severe cold and wind 
under arctic and alpine conditions, and resists snow 
mold infestations (Mitchell, 1980). Breeder and 
foundation class seeds are maintained by the Alaska 
Plant Materials Center. Registered and certified class 
seeds are available through the Alaska Seed Growers, 
Inc. 
 Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Bluejoint reedgrass often forms dense stands 
following disturbances such as burning or clear cut 
timber harvests (Lieffers  et al. 1993). These dense 
stands of grass can inhibit white spruce ( Picea 
glauca ) seedling establishment, thus bluejoint  reedgrass is often considered a serious weed problem 
in white spruce plantations (Lieffers 
et al. 1993). It is 
a common weed species in pastures and in reduced 
tillage agricultural fields in Alaska (Conn, 1987).  
Research on control of bluejoint reedgrass has 
focused on intensive clipping or use of herbicides. 
Hogg and Lieffers (1991) reported poor control with 
multiple clippings at ground level during a single 
growing season, but Lieffers  et al. (1993) indicated 
that two or more cuts per year or intensive grazing 
over several years can keep the grass under control. 
Lieffers  et al. (1993) reported that herbicides such as 
glyphosate and hexazinone can provide moderate to 
excellent control of bluejoint. Conn and Deck (1991) 
indicated that the best control of bluejoint was 
obtained when glyphosate was applied to the grass in 
the late reproductive stages.  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA SCS. 1989. Midwest Wetland Flora 
 
References 
Barkley, T.M.(ed.) 1986. Flora of the Great Plains. 
University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS.  
 
Conn, J.S. 1987. Effects of tillage and straw 
management on Alaskan weed vegetation: a study of 
newly cleared land. Soil and Tillage Res. 9:275-285. 
 
Conn, J.S. 1990. Seed viability and dormancy of 17 
weed species after burial for 4.7 years in Alaska. 
Weed Science. 38:134-138. 
 
Conn, J.S. and R.E. Deck. 1991. Bluejoint reedgrass 
( Calamagrostis canadensis ) control with glyphosate 
and additives. Weed Tech. 5:521-524. 
 
Corns, W.G. and R.J.  Schaa. 1962. Season 
productivity and chemical composition of marsh reed 
grass (Calamagrostis canadensis ) (Michx.) Beauv. 
harvested periodically from fertilized and unfertilized 
native sod. Can. J. Plant Sci. 42:651-659.  
 
Eggers, S.D. and D.M. Reed. 1987. Wetland plants 
and plant communities of Minnesota and Wisconsin. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St. Paul, Minnesota. 
 
Fulton, G.W., J.L. Richardson, and W.T. Barker. 
1986. Wetland soils and vegetation. Report 106, 
Agricultural Experiment Stat ion, North Dakota State 
University, Fargo, ND. 
 
Greene, C.W. 1984. Sexual and apomictic 
reproduction in Calamagrostis  (Gramineae) from 
eastern North America. Amer. J. Bot. 7:285-293.  
 
Hammer, D.A. 1992. Creating freshwater wetlands. 
Lewis Publishers, Inc., Chelsea, MI.

Hogg, E.H. and V.J. Lieffers. 1991. Seasonal changes 
in shoot regrowth potential in Calamagrostis 
canadensis. Oecologia. 85:596-602. 
 
Klebesadel, L.J., C.I. Branton, and J.J. Koranda. 
1962. Seed characteristics of bluejoint and techniques 
for threshing. J. Range Man. 15:227-229. 
 
LaBaugh, J.W. 1989. Chem ical characteristics of 
water in northern prairie wetlands. In: A.G. van der 
Valk(ed.). Pp. 56-92. Northern Prairie Wetlands. 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA. 
 
Lieffers, V.J., S.E. MacDonald, and E.H. Hogg. 
1993. Ecology of and control strategies for 
Calamagrostis canadensis  in boreal forest sites. Can. 
J. For. Res. 23:2070-2077. 
 
McKendrick, J.D., A.L. Brundage, and V.L. Burton. 
1977. Quality of bluejoint hay is influenced by time 
of harvest. Agroborealis. 9:26-29. 
 
McLaughlin, W.M., G.R. Smith, and M.A. Peters. 
1984. Influence of N, P, and K fertilization on yield 
and mineral composition of native bluejoint grass on 
the lower Kenai Peninsula, AK. Agron. J. 76:389-
397. 
 
Mitchell, W.W. 1968. Taxonomy, variation, and 
chorology of three chromosome races of the 
Calamagrostis canadensis  complex in Alaska. 
Madrono. 19:235-245. 
 
Mitchell, W.W. 1974. Native bluejoint: a valuable 
forage and germplasm resource. Agroborealis. 6:21-
22. 
 
Mitchell, W.W. 1979a. Managing native bluejoint 
reedgrass for forage production. Agroborealis. 11:15-
19. 
 
Mitchell, W.W. 1979b. Three varieties of native 
Alaskan grasses for revegetation purposes. Circular 
32, Agricultural Experiment Station, University of 
Alaska, Fairbanks, AK. 
 
Mitchell, W.W. 1980. Registration of Sourdough 
Bluejoint Reedgrass. Crop Science. 20: Sept.1980. 
 
Norton, D.C., A.M. Cody, and A.W. Gabel. 1987. 
Subanguina calmagrostis  and its biology in 
Calamagrostis spp. in Iowa, Ohio, and Wisconsin. J. 
Nematology. 19:260-262. 
 
Reed, P.B. 1988. National list of plant species that 
occur in wetlands: North Central (region 3). Report  88 (26.3), U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Washington, DC.  
 
Shaver, G.R. and J.M. Melillo. 1984. Nutrient 
budgets of marsh plants: efficiency concepts and 
relations to availability. Ecology. 65:1491-1510. 
 
Sparrow, S.D. and M.T. Panciera. 2005. Response of 
bluejoint reedgrass dominated stands to mowing and 
nitrogen fertilization in central Alaska. Agricultural 
and Forestry Experiment Station Bulletin 112. 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK.  
 
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North Americam 
grasses. J. Range Man. 32:12-28.  
 
Prepared By
: Richard L. Wynia                            
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center          
Manhattan, Kansas  
 Edited: 07mar2006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.