Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
HORNBEAM  
Carpinus caroliniana  Walt. 
Plant Symbol = CACA18  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Ironwood, musclewood, mu scle beech, blue beech, 
water beech  
 
Uses 
The wood of  Carpinus is of minor economic 
importance because of the small size of the trees.  It 
is whitish, extremely hard, and heavy and has been 
used for making mallet heads, tool handles, levers, 
and other small, hard, wooden objects.  The wood is 
not subject to cracking or splitting and was used by 
American pioneers for bowls and dishes.   
 
American hornbeam is planted in landscapes and 
naturalized areas.  It prefers deep, fertile, moist, 
acidic soil and grows best in partial shade, but will  
 
grow in full sun.  Its chief liabilities in cultivation are 
a relatively slow growth rate and difficulty in 
transplantation.  It is not drought-tolerant.   
 
Seeds, buds, or catkins are eaten by a number of 
songbirds, ruffed grouse, ring-necked pheasants, 
bobwhite, turkey, fox, and gray squirrels.  
Cottontails, beaver, and white-tailed deer eat the 
leaves, twigs, and larger stems.  Beaver heavily uses 
American hornbeam, because  it is readily available in 
typical beaver habitat. 
 ©  William S. Justice Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Birch Family (Betulaceae).  American 
hornbeam is a native, large shrub or small tree with a 
wide-spreading, flat-topped crown, the stems slender, 
dark brown, hairy; bark gray, thin, usually smooth, 
with smooth, longitudinal fluting (resembling a 
flexed muscle).  Its leaves are deciduous, simple, 
alternate, ovate to elliptic, 3-12 cm long, with 
doubly-serrate edges, dark green, turning yellow to 
orange or red in the fall, glabrous above, slightly to 
moderately pubescent beneath, especially on major 
veins, with or without conspicuous dark glands.  The 
flowers are unisexual, in catkins, the male (staminate) 
catkins 2-6 cm long, female (pistillate) catkins 1-2.5 
cm long, both types on the same plant (the species 
monoecious).  Fruits are a nutlet 4-6 mm long, 
subtended by a 3-winged, narrow, leaf-like bract, 
numerous nutlets held together in pendulous chain-
like clusters 2.5-12 cm long, changing from green to 
brown in September-October.  The common name, 
beam, is an Old English wo rd for tree, with horn 
suggesting an analogy of  the hard, close-grained 
wood to the tough material of horns.   
 
Variation within the species : the two subspecies are 
distinguished by morphology and geography.  They 
hybridize or intergrade wher e their ranges overlap in 
a broad band running from the Carolinas south to 
northern Georgia and westward to Missouri, 
Arkansas, and southeastern Oklahoma.  Plants with

intermediate features are also found throughout the 
highlands of Missouri and Arkansas. 
 
 1. Leaf blades narrowly  ovate to oblong-ovate, 3-
8.5(-12) cm long, acute to obtuse at the tip; secondary 
teeth blunt and small; lower surfaces without small 
dark glands; southern Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico 
coastal plains and also extends northward in the 
Mississippi Embayment.  ............. subsp.  caroliniana  
  
2. Leaf blades ovate to elliptic, mostly 8-12 cm long, 
usually abruptly narrowing at the tip, sometimes long 
and gradually tapered; secondary teeth sharp-tipped, 
often almost as large as primary teeth; lower surfaces 
covered with tiny, dark glands; Appalachians and 
interior forested northeastern North America.  
......................  subsp.  virginiana (Marsh.) Furlow   
 
Trees of temperate forests in the mountains of 
Mexico and Central America, formerly considered to 
be part of Carpinus caroliniana , are now treated as 
C. tropicalis (J.D. Smith) Lundell spp.  tropicalis and 
C. tropicalis ssp.  mexicana Furlow.   
 
Distribution:  Widespread in the eastern United States 
--- from central Maine west to southwestern Quebec, 
southeastern Ontario, northern Michigan, and 
northern Minnesota, south to central Iowa and eastern 
Texas, east to central Florida. Absent from the 
lowermost Gulf Coastal Plain and the Mississippi 
embayment south of Missouri).   
 
Adaptation  
American hornbeam occu rs primarily as an 
understory species in bottomland mixed-hardwood 
forests.  Best sites are in the transition between mesic 
and wet areas -- near lakes and swamps, on well-
drained terraces of rivers, terraces or steep slopes of 
minor streams with some gradient, coves, ravine 
bottoms, and rises in lowlands.  These sites generally 
have abundant soil moisture but sufficient drainage to 
prevent saturation and poor aeration during the 
growing season, although trees may be abundant on 
sites flooded for up to about 20% of the growing 
season.  American hornb eam occurs less commonly 
in upland hardwood forests and may range from 300-
900 meters elevation in the Appalachian and 
Adirondack Mountains.  In the northeastern US, it 
may be an early migrant and form pure stands in 
moist old fields; it may be a minor seral component 
of sapling-size tree-shrub communities along the 
mid-Atlantic coast.  Flowering: March-May; fruiting: 
August-October.   
  
Establishment 
American hornbeam begins  to produce seeds at about 
15 years and peaks at 25  to 50 years, probably 
ceasing at about 75 years.   Large seed crops are 
produced at 3-5-year inte rvals.  Seeds are mainly 
dispersed by birds.  Seed establishment will occur on 
leaf litter in deep shade.  Flooding, drought, damping 
off, proximity to a conspecific adult, and herbivory 
are important causes of mortality for first-year 
seedlings.  Reproduction also may occur by sprouts 
from the root crown and by root sprouts, although the 
latter apparently is not common.   
 
American hornbeam is best suited to establishment in 
bottomlands that have already been stabilized by 
pioneer species.  It is shade-tolerant and persists in 
the understory of late seral and climax communities.  
Shade tolerance declines  with age and American 
hornbeam is likely to become dominant, with other 
subcanopy species, at so me sites after overstory 
removal.    
 
Management 
Because of its thin bark, American hornbeam is 
probably either top-killed or completely killed by 
most fires.  It occurs mostly in communities that 
rarely experience fire.  It sprouts after top-kill by fire 
and repeated fires at a cl osely spaced interval will 
quickly eliminate the species.  The wood rots very 
rapidly and dying trees usually disappear naturally 
within a decade.   
  
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Delcourt, H.R. & P.A. Delcourt 1994.   Postglacial 
rise and decline of Ostrya virginiana (Mill.) K. Koch 
and Carpinus caroliniana Walt. in eastern North 
America: predictable responses of forest species to 
cyclic changes in seasonality of climates.   J. 
Biogeogr. 21:137-150.  
 
Furlow, J.J.  1987. The  Carpinus caroliniana 
complex in North America.  I.  A multivariate 
analysis of geographical variation.   Syst. Bot. 12:21-
40.

Furlow, J.J.  1987.  The Carpinus caroliniana 
complex in North America .  II.  Systematics.  Syst. 
Bot. 12:416-434.  
 
Furlow, J.J. 1990.   The genera of Betulaceae in the 
southeastern United States .  J. Arnold Arbor. 71:1-
67.  
 
Furlow, J.J. 1993.  Carpinus .  Pp. 531-533, IN: Flora 
of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Metzger, F.T. 1990.   Carpinus carolinianus  Walt.  
American hornbeam.  Pp. 179-185, IN: R.M. Burns 
and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North America .  
Volume 2.   Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Carpinus caroliniana .  In: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The Fire Effects Information 
System  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Science Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Wardell, G.I. & J.E. Winstead 1978.   Population 
differences in bud bursting of Carpinus caroliniana 
Walter.   Trans. Kentucky Acad. Sci. 39:127-130.  
 
Winstead, J.E., B.J. Smith, & G.I. Wardell 1977.  
Fruit weight clines in populations of ash, ironwood, 
cherry, dogwood and maple .  Castanea 42:56-60.    
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of  race, color, national or
igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.