Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
BEAUTYBERRY  
Callicarpa americana  L. 
Plant Symbol = CAAM2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate names 
Beautyberry (Callicarpa means “beautyberry”), 
French mulberry, American  mulberry, wild goose’s 
berries 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The roots, leaves and branches of the 
American beautyberry were used by the Alabama, 
Choctaw, Creek, Koasati, Seminole and other Native 
American tribes for variou s medicinal purposes.  The 
roots, leaves and branches were made into a 
decoction that was used in sweat baths to treat both 
malarial fevers and rheumatism.  The boiled plant 
parts were poured into a big pan that was placed near 
the patient inside a sweathouse.  A similar decoction 
of the roots was used to treat dizziness and 
stomachaches.  The roots of  Callicarpa americana  
were boiled with roots from  Rubus spp. to make an 
infusion to treat dysentery.  The roots and berries 
were boiled and drunk to treat colic.  The bark from 
the stems and roots was used to treat itchy skin.  A 
tea from the root bark was taken to treat urine 
retention or “urine stopped-up sickness.”   
 
Wildlife : The fruits of Ameri can beautyberry are an 
important food source for many species of birds 
including bobwhite quails, mockingbirds, robins, 
towhees, and brown thrashers.   Animals that eat the  fruit include armadillos, raccoons, wood rats, gray 
foxes, opossums, and white-tailed deer.  The long-
lasting fruits provide food for birds and animals well 
into the winter months when other food-sources are 
unavailable.   
 
Other: 
Beautyberry shrubs are raised for their 
ornamental flowers as well as their colorful clusters 
of fruits.    
 
Status 
 © William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
  
Description 
General : Vervain Family (Verbenaceae).  American 
beautyberry is a native, pere nnial shrub.  These small, 
deciduous shrubs reach from 1 to 2 m in height.  The 
leaves are opposite, elliptical to ovate in shape (7 to 
15 cm long) and have saw-toothed margins.  The 
under-side of the leaves can be covered with white or 
rust-colored woolly hairs.  The inconspicuous blue, 
violet, pink, or white flowers are borne in axillary 
clusters that bloom from late spring to early summer.  
The flowers are funnel-shape d with four clefs.  The 
round, showy, violet or magenta drupes or fruits are 
4-5 mm in diameter.  The very juicy fruits, containing 
from 2 to 4 seeds, begin to ripen in August or 
September.  These colorful fruits remain on the 
shrubs long after the leaves drop.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: American beautyberry  shrubs occur in dry 
open woods, moist woods, thickets and hammocks.  
They occur as understudy species in upland pine 
forests, upper slope pine-oak forests and old-growth 
maritime forests.  These shrubs are adapted to 
climates with hot, humid summers and moderate 
winters.   
 
Establishment 
These shrubs may be propagated by softwood 
cuttings, but they are primarily grown from seed.  
The seeds do not require pretreatment for 
germination.  The many volunteers that this plant 
produces are very hearty and can be dug up and 
transplanted elsewhere in a more desirable location.

The plants do well in partial shade and sunny 
locations in well-drained soils.  The shrubs have a 
denser habit and produce more fruit in sunny 
locations.   
 
Management 
This plant can produce abundant volunteers from the 
many seeds that drop to the soil.  The flowers are 
produced on new growth, so prune plants after the 
fruits are gone to increase the next year’s growth and 
berry production.  The plants can take a hard pruning 
and may be pruned to the ground level in the winter if 
desired.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  The white-fruited C. Americana 
var. lacteal  is available from specialty nurseries.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Barbour, M.G., & W.D. Billings, Editors  2000.  
North American terrestrial vegetation , Second 
Edition.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.  708 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W.  1883.   Flora of the southern United 
States: Flowering plants and ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.  493 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants. 
Fifth Edition.  Stipes Publishing, Champaign, Illinois.  
1187 pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. &  H.L. Blomquist  1953.  Flowers of 
the south: Native and exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001) 
 
Ottensen, C. 1995.  The native plant primer.  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Rogers, D.J. &  C. Rogers  1991.  Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Swanson, R.E.  1994.   A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Swanton, J.R. 2000.   Creek religion and medicine .  
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska.  
684 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A.  1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes . Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
88 pp. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory  2001.   Fire effects information 
system, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [19 June 2001]. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.

Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 28sep01 jsp; 29apr03 ahv; 31may06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.