Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE ROOT 
Carex barbarae Dewey 
Plant Symbol = CABA4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Santa Barbara sedge, sedge 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: White root is a significant basketry 
material used by central California Native 
Americans, who use the long white rhizomes for the 
sewing strand in coiled baskets.  White root was used 
by over one third of California tribes for basket 
weaving.  Traditionally tended white root plants may 
have rhizomes as long as 4- 6 feet in length; untended 
plants have short, twisted rhizomes.  Sandy, moist 
soils are the preferred locations for production of 
long rhizomes. 
 
Other uses of white root include gathering the shoots 
into a loose knot to hold worms for fishing or to 
gather eggs.  The Miwok occasionally used sedge 
leaves to cover the floor  where spectators sat in the 
roundhouse.  Today they use pine needles. 
 
A significant portion of the riparian forest understory 
was tended prior to European settlement.  It is highly 
likely that most areas with desirable rhizomes were 
harvested every two to four  years.  This maintained a 
lawn-like, grassy appearance under California 
riparian forests.  Given the high population of native 
peoples in California, particularly in the low 
elevation range of  Carex barbarae, it is probable that 
most available plants in suitable soils were 
sustainably harvested. 
 Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
White root is one of the most difficult plants for 
basket weavers to obtain due to elimination of 
traditional gathering sites and difficulty accessing 
those still remaining.  Valley oak riparian woodlands 
have diminished to less than five percent of their 
original range.  Carex barbarae , as an understory 
dominant, has been reduced even further.  Many 
traditional gathering sites have been eliminated or 
destroyed. Where gathering  sites still exist, access for 
Indian people to private or public lands has been 
difficult.  Facilitating access for tending and 
gathering traditional materials is a top priority for the 
California Indian Basketweavers Association. 
 
Ecological Restoration : Carex barbarae  is 
increasingly being recommended for riparian 
restoration, streambank stabilization, and erosion 
control.  Plants establish readily in a wide variety of 
environmental conditions.  Adult plants produce 
many rhizomes each year and each rhizome can be 
used for revegetation.  Subdivision of adult plants 
also results in very high plant survival and rapid 
colonization.  Seeds are fair ly easy to germinate, and 
seedlings are easy to transport and replant.  
Cultivation of  Carex barbarae  for nursery stock has 
only been recently initiated and studies are underway 
to determine optimum revegetation procedures.  This 
plant is useful for green stripping outside riparian 
areas, causing fires to lay down before reaching the 
forested areas along rivers.  Mature plants have well-
developed, deep root systems and are therefore 
resilient to low intensity fire. 
 
Wildlife : Because of their wide availability in riparian 
corridors, the lens-shaped seeds of sedges are eaten

by many kinds of wildlife.  Waterfowl and ducks eat 
sedge seeds frequently in small to fair amounts.  
Sedges are also of value to rails, grouse and to seed-
eating songbirds.  Carex species seeds, along with 
insects, are the most regular  item of diet of grouse 
chicks.  Birds known to eat sedge seeds include 
coots, ducks (such as wood ducks, canvasbacks, 
mallards, pintails, teal, shoveler), marsh birds and 
shorebirds (dowichers, rails, and sandpipers), upland 
gamebirds (grouse, pheasant, and wild turkey), and 
songbirds (house finch, junco, sparrow, and towhee).  
In addition to providing food for many wildlife 
species, sedges are also valuable for cover.  
Frequently they provide nesting cover for ducks, and 
their tufted growth fu rnishes concealment and 
bedding for other animals.  
 
Wood ducks nest in the tr ees above the sedges.  The 
grassy beds soften the fall of fledglings as they 
plunge from their nests to the ground.  White root 
seeds and leaves are eaten by black bear, jack rabbit, 
porcupine, squirrels, moles and other small rodents.  
The sedge plants provide cover and habitat for 
reptiles and amphibians,  rabbits, raccoons, deer, 
porcupines, opossums, and skunks.  Beavers, otters, 
muskrats and minks make their way through the 
sedges as they go to and from the water.  White root 
also stabilizes the bank and provides bank overhang 
for fish and invertebrate species habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  White root is a 
grass-like plant with long  horizontal rhizomes.  The 
common name white root is based on these long 
horizontal rhizomes used by Indian people for basket 
weaving.  Stems are 12 to 40  inches long Leaf blades 
are light green and triangular shaped 0.25 to 0.75 
inch in width.  Flowers are on lateral spikelets, 1 to 4 
inches long.  The linear spikelets have the base of 
lower spikelets staminate an d narrowly tapered.  The 
pistillate (female) flower bract is distinctive in that it 
has a long golden brown awn often over 0.2 inches in 
length covering the pistillate flower (perigynia).  This 
plant has long rhizomes that can be 4 to 6 feet long.  
Similar plants include the following:  Carex senta, 
Carex nebrascensis, and  Carex schottii. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  White root  grows from Ventura County in  southern California to southern Oregon.  Plants grow 
in riparian areas; moist 
places along streams or on 
slopes, occasionally bordering marshes, and on open 
or brush slopes and valley flats that are wet in the 
spring.  Plants grow from sea level to 3,000 feet 
evaluation.  The distribution of white root includes 
the mountains of coastal southern California, San 
Bernadino Mountains, Channel Islands, Coast Ranges 
from Ventura County north to Humboldt county, 
Central Valley, Sierra Nevada foothills from Fresno 
County north to El Dorado County, and southern 
Oregon.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : White root is an understory dominant of 
the oak woodland gallery riparian forests (Holland 
1986);  Leymus triticoides and  Carex praegracilis  are 
co-dominants in the understory.  The oak woodland 
gallery riparian community type is a dense, broad-
leafed, winter deciduous ripa rian forest dominated by 
valley oak ( Quercus lobata),  cottonwood, (Populus 
fremontii)  and willow ( Salix goodingii, S. lucida) .  
Understories are dense, with abundant vegetative 
reproduction of canopy dominants plus box elder 
( Acer negundo  californica), walnut ( Juglans hindsii) , 
sycamore ( Platanus racemosa ), red willow (Salix  
laevigata) , and gray willow ( Salix exigua).  Shade-
tolerant shrubs like buttonbush ( Cephalanthus 
occidentalis  ) and Oregon ash ( Fraxinus latifolia ) are 
also present.  California grape ( Vitis californica  ) and 
poison oak ( Toxicodendron diversilobum ) are the 
most conspicuous lianas.  
 
General : White root  may be planted from bare 
rootstock or seedlings from container stalk or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are 
preferred revegetation methods, particularly where 
there is moving water.  Plants started as seed tend to 
stay diminutive for over a  year, with plant leaves 
remaining stunted and fragile for a considerable 
period of time. 
 
Live Plant Collections : No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected; a depth of 15 
cm (6 in) is sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This 
will leave enough plants and roots to grow back 
during the next growing season. 
 
Live transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible.  Plants should be transported and stored in a 
cool location prior to planting.  Plugs may be split 
into smaller units, generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm 
(2.4 x 2.4 in) with healthy rhizomes and tops.  Weeds 
in the plugs should be removed by hand.  For ease in 
transport, soil may be washed  gently from roots.  The

roots should always remain moist or in water until 
planted.  
 
Clip leaves and stems from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches); this allows the plant to allocate more energy 
into root production.  Planting densities of 
approximately 1 meter centers provide full coverage 
the first year (given good site conditions).  Plant 
densities should be increased with fine soils such as 
clay or silt, steep slopes or prolonged inundation.  
Use an annual grass cover with white root plantings 
the first year to facilitate sediment deposition.  When 
plants are isolated clumps, erosion tends to occur 
around each plant.  The annual grass covers works 
well for mid-slope sites with minimal erosion.  For 
more extreme hydrology or steeper slopes, use filter 
fabric to stabilize sites.  
 
Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall just after 
the first rains (usually late October to November).  
This enables plant root systems to become 
established before heavy flooding and winter 
dormancy occurs.  Survival  is highest when plants are 
dormant, temperatures are cool, and soils are moist.  
Plants usually need to be planted by hand, as soils are 
too moist to use machines. 
 
Seed Collections 
•   Seed can be harvested by hand or 
mechanically with a stri pper header.  Collect 
seeds when they are ripe, from July to 
September.  Make sure seed heads are full. 
•   Plant clean seeds in the fall in weed free, 
moist seedbeds.   
•  Planting seeds after weeds have germinated.  
Burning, disking, raking, hoeing, or weeding 
by hand can control weeds.   
•  Most Indian people in gathering sites do not 
approve of herbicides.  Many other people 
have objections to the use of herbicides, so 
caution and sensitivity is advised. 
•  Broadcast seed and roll in or rake 1/4" to 1/2" 
below the soil surface. 
•  Hold off watering so seeds doesn't float out. 
•  Some seeds may be lost due to scour or 
flooding. 
•  Use erosion control blankets to protect soil 
and seeds. 
•  Plants grown from seeds and planted from 
container stock have higher transplant 
survival than direct seeding. 
•  Recommended seed density is unknown at 
this time.  In greenhouse germination 
experiment done by Stevens (1999), a high 
temperature was required for germination.   Below 18°C, very little if any seed 
germinated.  Between 21°C and 30.5°C, 
germination of pure live seed was 14 to 23% 
for seeds grown in higher nitrate fertilizer 
treatment, and 5 to 17% germination for 
seeds grown at low nitrate fertilization 
treatment.  Above 31.5°C, seeds desiccated 
or failed to germinate, and germination 
results were very low. 
•
  As expected, at high nitrate levels both high 
rates of biomass and fecundity are greatly 
increased.  Fertilizing plants at moderate 
nitrate levels increased flower stalk and seed 
production, seed weight, and seed viability.  
A number of studies show that increasing 
temperatures from 21°C to 32°C increases 
germination percentages. 
 
Seed germination in greenhouse 
•  Clean seeds by blowing out light seeds. 
•  Put in water with sphagnum moss. 
•  To grow seeds, plant in greenhouse in 1" x 1" 
x 2" pots, 1/4" under the soil surface.  Keep 
moist at 100 degrees F (plus or minus 5 
degrees).  Seeds begin to germinate after a 
couple weeks in warm temperatures.   
•   Plants are ready as plugs in 100 to 120 days.  
By planting seeds in August, plugs are ready 
to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.  
 
Management 
Since white root tolerates  a wide range of shade, 
grows from dry slopes to areas which are seasonally 
inundated, and grows in a wide variety of soil 
textures and fertility, this plant has wide ecological 
amplitude. 
 
Traditional Native American tending practices 
removed competing species and impediments to 
growth such as stones and branches.  Tending 
practices aerated the soil and stimulated growth 
through pruning rhizomes.  Plants were harvested 
every two to four years, and less than one third of the 
plants were harvested.  The season of harvest was 
late fall through early spring, coinciding with the 
times that the plants were dormant and soils were 
moist.  In some cases, plan ts were replanted into new 
areas.  
 
Mowing, weeding by hand, or selective spraying with 
herbicides the first year are rapid and cost effective 
methods for weed control.  Use of herbicides may be 
inappropriate in traditional gathering sites.  White

root is a perennial plant; once established the first 
year,  it will subsequently dominate the site. 
 
Heavy grazing will eliminate Carex barbarae as well 
as other native species from riparian corridors.  
Historic records and personal interviews with Indian 
people document destruction of tended sedge beds 
from overgrazing.  In addition, grazing of traditional 
tended beds desecrates sacred space used by basket 
weavers.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
CABA4 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government”.  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris  1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture.  Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Yosemite 
Association, Yosemite National Parks, California.  
388 pp. 
 
Brode, J. & R.B. Bury. 1984.   The importance of 
riparian systems to amphibians and reptiles .  Pages 
30-36 IN: R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, eds. 
California riparian system s ecology, conservation and 
productive management. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Bye, R.A. 1985.   Botanical perspectives of 
ethnobotany of the greater Southwest .  Economic 
Botany 39(4):375-386. 
 
Conrad, S.G., R.L. Macdonald, & R.F. Holland. 
1976.  Riparian vegetation and flora of the 
Sacramento Valley . pp. 47-55 in Warner and K. 
Hendrix, eds. California riparian systems ecology, 
conservation and productive management. University 
of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Gaines, D.A. 1977.   The valley riparian forests of 
California: their importance to bird populations .  
Pages 57-85 IN: Anne Sands, ed. Riparian forests in 
California: their ecology and conservation. 
University. of California, Davis, Inst. of Ecol., Publ. 
No. 15. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V.P. Lawson. 1980.   
Kashaya Pomo plants.   Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of Cal ifornia.  University of California 
Press. 1 400 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1995.   Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands .  
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant Development 
Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1994.  Seed and live 
transplant collection procedures for 7 wetland plant 
species.   Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant 
Development Project, USDA. NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Holland, R.F. 1986.   Preliminary descriptions of the 
terrestrial natural communities of California.   State 
of California Department of Fish and Game Natural 
Diversity DataBase.  Natural Communities. 
 
Holstein, G. 1984 . California riparian forests: 
deciduous islands in an evergreen sea .  pp. 2-22 IN: 
R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, eds. California riparian 
systems ecology, conservation and productive 
management.  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Katibah, E.F., K.J. Dummer, & N.E. Nedeff. 1984. 
Current condition of riparian resources in the 
Central Valley of California .  pp. 314-322 IN: R.E. 
Warner and K. Hendrix, eds. California riparian 
systems ecology, conservation and productive 
management.  Univ. of Calif. Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Laymon, S.A. 1984.   Riparian bird community 
structure and dynamics: Dog Island, Red Bluff, 
California.   Pages 587-597 IN: R.E. Warner and K. 
Hendrix, eds. California riparian systems ecology, 
conservation and productive management.  
University. of California Pres s, Berkeley, California.  
1035 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.   
American wildlife and plan ts. A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp.

Mayer, K.E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr., Eds. 1988.  A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA, 
Forest Service; California Department of Fish and 
Game; and PG&E.  
 
Peri, D.W., S.M. Patterson, J.L. Goodrich, & R.N. 
Lerner 1983.   Ethnobotanical mitigation Warm 
Springs Dam - Lake Sonoma .  Elgar Hill, 
Environmental Analysis and Planning, Penngrove, 
California  133 pp. 
 
Peri, D.W. & S.M. Patterson 1976.   "The basket is in 
the roots, that's where it begin ." Pages 175-193, IN: 
Thomas C. Blackburn and Kat Anderson.  Before the 
Wilderness. Environmental Management by Native 
Californians.  A Ballena Press Publication. 
 
Ratliff, R.D. & S.E. Westfall 1988.   Biomass trends 
in a Nebraska sedge meadow, Sierra National Forest, 
California .  Aquatic Botany 30: 109-124. 
 
Roberts, W.G., J.G. Howe, & J. Major 1980.   A 
survey of riparian forest flora and fauna in 
California .  pp. 3-19, IN: Anne Sands (ed.). 1980. 
Riparian Forests in California: Their Ecology and 
Conservation. Institute of Ecology Publication No. 
15. 122 pp.  University of California, Davis, 
California. 
 
Stevens, M.L. 1999.   The effect of nitrogen 
fertilization on the growth, reproduction, and 
nitrogen use efficiency of (Carex barbarae).   PhD 
Dissertation, third paper.  University of California, 
Davis.  In progress. 
 
Vernor, J. 1980.   Birds of California oak habitats: 
management implications .  Pages 246-264 IN: T.R. 
Plumb (tech. coord.) Ecology, management and 
utilization of California oaks.  USDA, For. Serv. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-44, Berkeley, California. 
 
Warner, R.E. 1984.   Structural, floristic and 
condition inventory of Central Valley riparian 
systems.    pp. 356-374 IN: Warner, R.E. and Hendrix, 
1984.  California Riparian Systems.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley , California.  1035 pp. 
 
Zeiner, D.C, W.F. Laudensl ayer, Jr., K.E. Mayer & 
M. White 1990.   California's wildlife, Volume III, 
mammals .  State of California Department of Fish 
and Game. Sacramento, California.  407 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29a pr03 ahv; 31may06 sjp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.