Plant Guide

JERSEY TEA

Ceanothus herbaceus Raf.

Plant Symbol = CEHE 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
© Thomas G. Barnes Wildflowers and Ferns of Kentucky 
Alternative Names 
red root, grub root 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The root of Jersey tea was used by the 
Chippewa for a cough remedy.  They would grate 
approximately 5 inches of the root and mix it with 
water. The Lakota used the leaves of the plant to brew 
tea. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae). Jersey tea 
is a bushy shrub reaching up to one meter in height.  
The leaves are elliptical-oblong shaped to inversely 
lanceolate and are attached at the narrower end.  The 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
leaves are serrated with rounded teeth along the 
margins.  Veins arise unevenly just above the leaf base. 
The upper leaf surface is almost smooth.  The lower 
leaf surface has long, soft, unmated hairs.  The stalk of 
the inflorescence is 1-2 cm long and is racemose with 
flowers maturing from the bottom upwards.  The 
flowers are white and have 5 petals (1.5 mm long), 5 
stamens, and 3 lobed ovaries. The fruits or capsules 
are 3-4.5 mm wide and open at maturity to release the 
seeds.  The seeds are 2 mm long, brownish in color, 
and have a glossy surface.   
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
Habitat: Jersey tea is found on rocky and open wooded 
hillsides and in prairies. 
Establishment 
Jersey tea is a drought tolerant species that grows best 
in well-drained soils and in full sun.  Jersey tea is 
difficult to transplant, therefore propagation by seed is 
recommended.  Seeds can be planted in the late fall or 
early winter. To plant seeds in the spring, soak the 
seeds overnight in warm water and stratify.  
Management 
Please consult your local land management agency, as 
this plant is listed as threatened in many states. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Jersey tea is susceptible to leaf spot and powdery 
mildew, however no serious insect or disease problems 
exist.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from commercial 
plant sources.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.” The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be listed 
under the subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas. Texas Research Foundation, 
Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Densmore, F. 1974. How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts. Dover Publications Inc., 
New York, New York.  397pp. 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986. Flora of the 
Great Plains. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of Michigan-
Dearborn, Michigan. http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
Oklahoma Biological Survey 1999. Ceanothus 
herbaceus. University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma. 
http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/cean-her.htm 
Parke, D 2000. Ceanothus herbaceum (sic). 
Southwestern School of Botanical Medicine, Bisbee, 
Arizona.  Accessed: 09jan2002.  
<http://chili.rt66.com/hrbmoore/Images/New4-9-
97/Ceanothus_herbaceum-2.jpg> 
Rogers, D.J. 1980.  Lakota names and traditional uses 
of plants by Sicangu (Brule) people in the Rosebud 
area, South Dakota. Rosebud Educational Society 
Inc., St. Francis, South Dakota.  111pp. 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 01jun06 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.