Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SALTGRASS 
Distichlis spicata  (L.) Greene 
Plant Symbol = DISP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Louisiana State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
Inland saltgrass, seashore saltgrass, spike grass, and 
alkali grass 
 
Uses 
Livestock: Under favorable soil and moisture 
conditions, studies have shown Saltgrass favorable 
for pastures irrigated with saline water. The total dry 
matter yields were 9081 kg/ha with a total protein 
production of 1300 kg/ha.  Saltgrass is grazed by 
both cattle and horses and it has a forage value of fair 
to good because it remains green when most other 
grasses are dry during the drought periods and it is 
resistant to grazing and trampling.  It is cropped both 
when green and in the dry st ate; however, it is most 
commonly used the winter for livestock feed.  
Saltgrass along the Atlantic coast was the primary 
source of hay for th e early colonists. 
 
Wildlife: Saltgrass is a larval foodplant for the 
Wandering Skipper (Panoquina panoquinoides 
errans) butterfly. It is also an important food in the 
diet of waterfowl and the Florida salt marsh vole 
( Microtus pennsylvanicus dukecampbelli ), which is 
on the Endangered and Thre atened Species List of 
Southeastern United States . Ducks are reported to 
occasionally eat the dried seeds and controlled 
burning provides tender forages for wild geese. 
Distichlis spicata is significant in the salt marshes, 
which provide nesting grounds for birds, fish and 
larvae of many species of marine invertebrate 
animals. As salt marsh plants decompose, their stored 
nutrients provide a steady source of food for clams, 
crabs, and fish. 
 Hitchcock (1950) Texas A&M University 
 
Wetland Restoration : The thick entangled roots of 
salt marsh plants acts as a guard between the ocean 
and the shore protecting the land from pollutants and 
other chemicals associated with runoff water.  It is 
particularly useful in saline/alkaline wetlands. 
 
Medicine: Saltgrass is a respiratory allergenic plant 
that is offered by Miles  Pharmaceutical and used by 
Florida physicians to treat respiratory allergies. 
 
Spice : Indians that inhabited California used saltgrass 
as a seasoning.  They collected the salt crystals by 
threshing the blades.  The seasoning provided is gray-
green and said to have tasted like a salty dill pickle. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae) .  Inland saltgrass is 
a native, dioecious low, glabrous perennial, with 
scaly rhizomes.  Culms are erect, varying in heights 
of 1.5 – 4.5 dm, less tall in dense colonies. Lower 
leaves consist of sheaths only, which are overlapping 
and glabrous.  Sheath margins are scarious and 
sparsely ciliated apically.  Leaves are mostly cauline 
and vertically two-ranked.  Blades are firm, the edges 
often flat at the base and folded or rolled inward 
meeting in the middle, theref ore, appearing attenuate.  
Blades are generally less than 10 cm long. Salt 
crystals may be found on th e leaves and stems.  The 
ligules are stiff, membranous and apically ciliate. 
Ligules range in lengths between 0.2-0.5 mm long.

The inflorescences are dense, spike-like panicles, 
which range from 5-7 cm long or less.  Spikelets are 
3-10 flowered and are laterally flattened.  
 
Disarticulation is above the glumes and between the 
florets.  The two glumes are unequal in size.  Glumes 
are keeled and hard on the  back.  The margins of the 
glumes are scarious; the first glume is 1-3 nerved and 
1.5-2.5 mm long.  The second glume is 3-5 nerved 
and 2-3 mm long.   The le mmas are rounded on the 
back and have 9-11 faint nerves.  Lemmas are acute 
to cuspidate and 3-4 mm long.  The lemma margins 
are scarious.  Paleas ar e 2-nerved, 3-5 mm long, 
falcate, and are sharply keel ed, the keel very finely 
hispid-ciliate. The palea margins are scarious and are 
in-rolled.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Saltgrass is found in saline areas, 
brackish marshes, and in salt flats along the coasts of 
the Atlantic and Pacific O ceans, the Gulf of Mexico 
and the along the coast of S outh America.  It inhabits 
upper/high marsh (irregula rly flooded) areas, in 
which the water levels vary between 2 inches above 
the soil surface and 6 inches below the soil surface.  
It is also commonly present in the dry West, where it 
is one of the most drought- tolerant species.  Saltgrass 
is located in both organic alkaline and in saline soils.  
It is found in planting zones 7,8,9,and 10.  Distichlis 
spicata can be found in flow er from June to October.  
The inflorescence is yellowish in color, turning straw 
brown as it dries. 
 
General : It may be propagated by seeds, which are 
produced many times in a growing season and are 
dispersed by wind and water.  It is easier and more 
often propagated by its extensively creeping 
underground rhizomes.  
 
Rhizomes : Saltgrass can be established by seeds or by 
rhizome cuttings.  If using rhizome cuttings, they 
must not dry out.  They may be stored up to 28 days.  
It is recommended that the rhizomes be stored in a 
temperature range of 35-50° F and in 60-75% relative 
humidity.  Rhizomes are can be planted any time of 
the year at a depth of 1-2 inches.  However, rhizomes 
sprout better at 77-86° F. 
 
Seeds: Saltgrass seeds demand more than rhizomes to 
sprout.  The seeds need moist soil, low alkalinity and 
high temperatures.  Although many seeds are  produced, only a small percentage of those seeds may 
germinate naturally.   
 
Management 
Saltgrass can be managed by burning between 
September 1 and February 1 biannually, when the 
water level exceeds the soil surface.  Following 
burning, four inches of re-growth should be obtained 
before grazing is allowed. Water control systems may 
need to be installed to maintain correct water levels 
to avoid prolong inundation, which kills saltgrass. 
Cattle walkways are usually installed to make the 
forage more accessible. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Saltgrass is the alternate host for the red rust 
(
Puccinia aristidae , also known as Puccinia 
subnitens ) that infects spinach.  Although the red rust 
disease is difficult for shippers to detect, it grows 
rapidly during transit. Since little is known about this 
disease, there are no recommended control 
techniques.  Saltgrass eradication has been the only 
method used so far because the pathogen cannot  
complete its life cycle without this alternate host 
plant.    
 
Control 
This species can behave invasively in some 
situations.  Please contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘LK517f saltgrass’  is a California native, perennial, 
warm season grass with  extensive creeping, 
yellowish, scaly rhizomes forming large colonies. 
Establishment should be in late spring using rhizomes 
or plugs planted on one-foot centers. Irrigation water 
should be applied the first summer to ensure stand 
establishment. LK517f is used for riparian restoration 
and bank and shoreline stabilization. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Ahlgren, G.H. 1956.  Forage crops.  McGraw Hill 
Book Company, Inc., New York, New York.  7 p. 
 
Allen, C.M. 1992.   Grasses of Louisiana.  2nd ed.  
Cajun Prairie Habitat Preservation Society, 
Louisiana.  96 p. 
 
Austin, D.F. 1998.  Respiratory allergenic plants . 
AUG00.  
http://www.fau.edu/divdept/science/envsci/allergy.ht
ml
 
Bentley Community College 1997.   Salt marshes. 
AUG00.  
http://web.bentley.edu/sum97/ns314/ecosystems/saltc
omm.htm1
 
Comer, W.L. & D.G. Lugg 1983.  Yield and quality of 
saltgrass (Distichlis spicata (L.) Greene) grown in 
two soils and several salinities .  Western Society of 
Crop Science Abst racts.  AUG99.  
http://ectc.ext.missouri.edu:70/R13180-14574-
1m/info/wscs/abstracts/83.html
 
The University of Arizona 1997.   Arizona range 
grasses .  College of Agriculture, Cooperative 
Extension.  AUG99.   
http://phylogeny.arizona.edu/pubs/natresources/az97
105/desert_ saltgrass.html 
 
Colorado State University 1996.   Red rust on 
spinach.  Cooperative  Extension Pest Alert Bulletin, 
Vol. 13, No. 7 May 31, 1996. Red Rust on Spinach. 
AUG99.  
http://www.colostate.edu/D epts/IPM/news/pestalrt/V
ol13/pest13-7.htm
 
USDI, FWS 1992.  Endangered and Threatened 
tpecies of southeastern United States (The Red Book) 
FWS Region – 4 As of 11/92 .  AUG99.  
http://www.fws.gov/r9endspp/i/a/saa98.html
 
Godfrey, R. K. & J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States – 
Monocotyledons .  University of Georgia Press, 
Athens, Georgia.  213 p. 
 
Gordon–Garrison, M. 1994.   Gardening naturally. 
AUG00.  
http://sdcc12.ucsd.edu/~wa12/garden11.94.html
 
Kim, J.G. & B. Grenwell 1999 .  UCD wetlands 
lab/wetland plants .  AUG99.  
http://www.des.ucdavis.edu/wetlands/plants/ds.html 
 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflet 1971. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states .  
USDA Handbook No. 389.  83 p. 
 
Oregon Coast.Com 1999.   Neterts Bay: Oregon coast 
– salt marsh & mudflats . 
http://www.oregoncoast.com/Netarts/nbay3.htm
 
Sampson, A.W. 1924.  Native American forage 
plants .  John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, New 
York.  172 pp. 
 
Struttman, J. 1999.   Butterflies of New Jersey .  USDI, 
GS, BRD, Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center.  
AUG00.  
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/ resource/distr/lepid/BFL
YUSA/nj/5159.htm
 
Szalay, F.A. & V.H. Resh 1996.   Responses of 
wetland invertebrates and plants important in 
waterfowl diets to burning and mowing of emergent 
vegetation .  Wetlands 17: (1996).  AUG99.  
http://www.sws.org/wetlands/abstracts/volume17n1/
SZALAY.html  
 
Uchytil, R.J. 1990.   Distichlis spicata.  IN: The fire 
effects information system  [Database].  USDA, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station, 
Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, 
Montana. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA NRCS Louisiana St ate Office, Alexandria, 
Louisiana 
 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 07dec2000 jsp;10feb03 ahv;  10aug03 jsp; 27Apr05 rln; 
06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.