Plant Guide
WESTERN PRAIRIE 
CLOVER  
Dalea ornata (Douglas) Eaton 
& Wright 
Plant Symbol = DAOR2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
 Kishor Bhattarai, Utah State University  
Alternate Names 
Blue Mountain prairie clover, s howy prairie clover , 
o rnate dalea,  Petalostemon ornatus  Douglas ex. 
Hook,  Petalostemon  ornatum  Douglas , Kuhnistera 
ornata  (Douglas) Kuntze, Petalostemon lagopus  
Rydb.,  Petalostemon ornatum  fo.  pallidus  H. St. John  
Uses  
Rangeland revegetation:  Western  prairie clo ver can 
be used in seeding mixes for diversification and 
re vegetation  of rangelands .   
 
Forage :  Western  prairie clover is a  non-toxic  legume 
and  has the potential for increasing forage production  
and quality (Bhattarai  et al. 2009).  
Pollinator habitat: Da lea ornata attracts native bee 
fauna as well as  managed agricultural pollinators.   A 
similar species native to the Great Plains ( D.   purpurea)
 yields more than 20,000 seeds per plant 
when pollinated by agricultural pollinators  Apis 
mellifera  and Megachile  rotundata (Cane 2006).  
 
 
Beautification :  This plant is an excellent choice for 
beautification of roadsides, rest areas and parks.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Legume family (Fabaceae).  Western prairie 
clover is a perennial, herbaceous North American 
legume  that grows to 12 –  24  inches  in height .  It has 
a cluster of stems that arise from a taproot.  Dried 
stems are also usually present from previous years.  
Leaves are 1.6 to 2 inches long, alternate and odd-
pinnate, comprised of  5 – 7 oval shaped leaflets, each 
0.4  – 0.8 inch long.   Leaves and stems ar e dotted with 
tiny glands.  The  plant is hairless  except for long 
silky hairs on the calyces.  Flowers occur in  dense , 
cylinder -shaped spikes  which are 0.8  – 2.4 inches 
long.   The flowers are  light pink to purple in color 
and have 5 petals.  One petal is b road-clawed and 
attached to the calyx.  The other 4 petals are narrow -
clawed, attached to the staminal tube and alternate 
with the 5 stamens.  The flowers bloom upward along 
the spike May  – July.   Seedpods are enclosed by the 
calyces  and  contain 1 or  2 see ds.  The plant is  
primarily insect -pollinated and has a variable degree 
of  self -incompatibility . 
 
Distribution : Western  prairie clover is  native to 
southeastern Washington, western Idaho, eastern 
Oregon, northern California and northwestern 
Nevada.   It is relatively uncommon.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : Western prairie clover is f ound in 
sagebrush -steppe habitats in the southern Columbia 
Plateau, the Blue Mountains  and  the northern Great 
Basin .   
Adaptation  
Western  prairie clover is  adapted to low to moderate 
elevations and is characteristic of soft clay and sandy 
soils derived from weathering of basalt and volcanic 
ash (Barneby 1977) .