Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
PERSIMMON  
Diospyros virginiana  L. 
Plant Symbol = DIVI5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Eastern persimmon, possumwood, American ebony, 
white ebony, bara-bara, boa-wood, butterwood 
  
Uses 
Common persimmon is sometimes used as an 
ornamental for its hardiness, adaptability to a wide 
range of soils and climates, and immunity from 
disease and insects.  Moist, well-drained soils provide 
best conditions but the plant will tolerate hot, dry, 
poor soils, including various city conditions.  The 
species is rarely sold commercially, however.  The 
leaves are glossy and leat hery and may be yellow or 
reddish-purple in the fall.  Several cultivars have  been selected primarily for fr
uit color, taste, size, and 
early maturation; several are seedless.  Budded or 
grafted trees are a sure way of getting a desired type.  
Common persimmon sends down a deep taproot, 
which makes it a good species for erosion control but 
makes it difficult to transplant.   
 
The wood of common persimmon is hard, smooth, 
and even textured.  The hardness and shock 
resistance make it ideal for textile shuttles and heads 
for driver golf clubs.  The heartwood is used for 
veneer and specialty items, but most of commercially 
used persimmon is reported to consist of sapwood.  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetlands Science Institute @ PLANTS 
Unripe fruit and inner bark have been used in the 
treatment of fever, diarrhea, and hemorrhage.  The 
fruits are used in puddings, cookies, cakes, custard, 
and sherbet; the dried, roasted, ground seeds have 
been used as a substitute  for coffee.  Flowers produce 
nectar significant for bees in honey production.  
Leaves and twigs of common persimmon are eaten in 
fall and winter by white-tailed deer.  The fruit is 
eaten by squirrel, fox,  skunk, deer, bear, coyote, 
raccoon, opossum, and various birds, including quail, 
wild turkey, cedar waxwing, and catbird.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Ebony family (Ebenaceae). Native trees 
growing 5-12 (-21) meters tall; mature bark dark-
gray, thick and blocky.  Leaves are deciduous, 
simple, alternate, ovate to elliptic or oblong with 
smooth edges, 3.5-8 cm long, with an acuminate apex 
and rounded base, the lowe r surface usually lighter-
colored, especially on young leaves.  Flowers are 
either male (staminate) or female (pistillate), borne 
on separate trees (the species dioecious) on shoots of 
the current year after leafing; pistillate flowers 
solitary, sessile or short-stal ked, bell-shaped, ca. 2 cm 
long, the corolla creamy to greenish-yellow, fragrant, 
usually with 4 thick, recurved lobes; staminate 
flowers in 2-3-flowered clusters, tubular, 8-13 mm 
long, greenish-yellow.  Fruit is a berry 2-5 cm wide, 
greenish to yellowish with highly astringent pulp 
before ripening, turning yellowish-orange to reddish-
orange and sweet in the fall,  each fruit with 1-8 flat 
seeds.  The common name, persimmon, is the 
American Indian word for the fruit.

Variation within the species: variants have been 
described but are not generally formally recognized.   
   Var.  pubescens  (Pursh) Dipp. - Fuzzy persimmon  
   Var. platycarpa  Sarg. - Oklahoma persimmon 
   Var. mosieri  (Small) Sarg. - Florida persimmon 
 
Distribution:  Primarily a species of the east-central 
and southeastern U.S., with the southeast corner of its 
range in Texas, reaching northeast to New York and 
southern Connecticut, westward through southern 
Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois to Missouri and 
southeastern Kansas.  It does not grow in the main 
range of the Appalachian Mountains nor in much of 
the oak-hickory forest of the Allegheny Plateau.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Common persimmon grows over a wide range of 
conditions from dry, sterile, sandy woodlands to river 
bottoms to rocky hillsides.  Growth is best on terraces 
of large streams and rive r bottoms with clays and 
heavy loams; usual sites in the Mississippi Delta are 
wet flats, shallow sloughs, and swamp margins.  It 
thrives in full sun but also is shade-tolerant and can 
persist in the understory.  It is an early pioneer on 
abandoned and denuded cropland and is common on 
roadsides and fencerows.  Common persimmon often 
is seen as thickets (derived  from root suckers) in open 
fields and pastures.  This species flowers in March-
June and fruits in September-November.   
 
Establishment 
Fruit may be produced by 10-year-old trees but 
optimum fruit-bearing age is 25-50 years.  Good fruit 
crops are borne every 2 years.  Seeds are dispersed by 
birds and animals and by  overflow water in 
bottomlands.  Persimmon is slow growing and 
usually does not make a large tree, although it may 
reach 21-24 meters tall on optimal sites.  Trees have 
been reported to reach 150 years of age.   
 
Management 
Common persimmon usually is considered 
undesirable by growers of closely managed timber 
stands.  It has been controlled by prescribed burns but 
is also known to decrease wi th fire exclusion.  Roots 
and rootstocks are killed by severe fires that char the 
soil; less severe fires top-kill the plant.  Vigorous 
sprouts are produced from the root collar following 
top-kill by fire or after  cutting.  Deer occasionally 
browse the sprouts but cattle usually avoid them.  
Thickets from root suckers and collar sprouts in 
pastures may be problematic.  Various herbicides are 
used to kill the plants. 
 
The principal natural defoliators of common 
persimmon are the webworm (Seiarctica echo) and 
the hickory horned devil (Citheronia regalis ).  Small 
branches severed by a twig girdler ( Oncideres 
cingulata ) are often encountered – these wounds 
allow entry of a wilt fungus,  Cephalosporium 
diospyri , which kills many trees in the southeastern 
US.  An infected tree lives  1-2 years after the wilting 
appears.  Diseased trees should be burned and bruises 
on healthy trees should be covered with pitch or wax 
to prevent entry by wind-borne spores.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anonymous. 1973.  Persimmon, Diospyros 
virginiana .  Morton Arbor. Quart. 9:14-15.  
 
Coladonato, M. 1992.   Diospyros virginiana.  IN: 
W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Crandall, B.S. & W.L. Baker 1950.   The wilt disease 
of American persimmon caused by Cephalosporium 
diospyri.   Phytopath. 40:307-325.  
 
Glasgow, L.L. 1977.   Common persimmon.  Pp. 103-
104, IN:  Southern fruit-producing woody plants used 
by wildlife .  USDA, Forest Service, General Report 
SO-16. Southern Forest Experiment Station, New 
Orleans, Louisiana.   
 
Halls, L.K. 1990.   Diospyros virginiana L.  
Persimmon .  Pp. 294-298, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of North America. 
Volume 2 .  Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
McDaniel, J.C. 1973.   Persimmon cultivars for 
northern areas.   Fruit Var. J. 27(4):94-96.

Spongberg, S.A. 1977.  Ebenaceae hardy in 
temperate North America.  J. Arnold Arb. 58:146-
160.  
Wood C.E. & R.B. Channell 1960.   The genera of the 
Ebenales in the southeastern United States.   J. 
Arnold Arbor. 41:1-35.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 29nov00 jsp; 10jun03 ahv; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.