AMERICAN WILD
CARROT
Daucus pusillus Michx.
plant symbol = DAPU3
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches (TX)
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center
Alternate Names
Rattlesnakeweed, southwestern carrot, seedticks,
rattlesnake-weed, yerba del vibora
Uses
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans ate the roots raw and
cooked (Epple 1995).
Medicinal: In California this species is called
rattlesnake weed, because the herbage is reputed to be
efficacious in the treatment of snake bites (Moldenke
1949).  A poultice of the chewed plant has been
applied to snakebites (Moerman 1998).  A decoction
has been used to treat colds, itches and fevers (Ibid.).
Status
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species,
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).
Description
General: Celery Family (Apiaceae).  Daucus pusillus
is a native annual found most commonly during the
early-mid part of the growing season.  In most parts of
Texas, this species has gone to seed by mid-summer.
Rattlesnake-weed resemble their cultivated relative,
the garden carrot.  The stem is normally slender, from2-4 feet in height and unbranched or only a single
weak branch as compared to the introduced Daucus
carota, which is sometimes heavily branched and more
robust.  The flower is a white umbel.  Upon maturity,
the flower cluster (umbel) closes to form a cup or
bird’s nest.  The leaves are pinnately compound and
finely cut.  Leaflets are deeply serrated (saw-toothed).
The seed of Daucus carota have fine hairs rather than
the stiff bristles common to Daucus pusillus.  Another
distinguishing characteristic between the two species is
the central flower of each individual umbellet is rose
or purple in Daucus carota rather than being white
throughout as found in Daucus pusillus.
American wild carrot is self-fertile.  The flowers are
hermaphrodite, having both male and female organs,
and are pollinated by flies and bees.
A similar species is water parsnip (Sium suave), which
has a corrugated main stem and leaves only once
compound.  Bishop’s weed (Ammi majus) and water
hemlock (Cicuta maculata) have white umbels, but the
leaflets are not deeply serrated or carrot like.
Distribution
Daucus (pusillus or carota) is likely the most common
and widespread plant with white umbels growing
along Texas’ roadsides.  It is known from the U.S.
West Coast and the southern half of the U.S.  For
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.
Establishment
Adaptation: It is very common along road right-of-
ways.  It can also become quite dominant in some
pastures and prairies.  Rattlesnake-weed prefers moist,
loamy sites, but not wet sites.  The exotic, Daucus
carota, tolerates a much broader site in Texas, ranging
from blackland to rock outcrops.
American wild carrot requires moist, well-drained soil
and prefers sandy, loamy and clay soils.  It grows best
in a sunny position and cannot tolerate shade.  This
species occurs in rocky prairies, openings in woodland,
and rocky open, frequently limestone, glades, and
edges of bluff escarpments, sometimes along roadsides
and railroads (Steyermark 1963).
Propagation by Seed: American wild carrot seeds are
best sown in the autumn.  Always aim to sow thinly
and evenly to permit adequate room for the seedlings
to grow and develop freely (Heuser 1997).  The seeds
will germinate better if they are cold stratified.
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and
area of origin)
© Lee Davis
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office

These plant materials are readily available from
commercial sources.
References
Abrams, L. 1944.  Illustrated flora of the Pacific
States:Washington, Oregon and California.  Vol III.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California.
Davis, L. 2000.  Texas plant fact sheet: Daucus
pusillus.  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Epple, A.O. 1995.  A field guide to the plants of
Arizona.  Falcon Press, Helena, Montana.
Heuser, C.W. 1997.  The complete book of plant
propagation.  The Taunton Press, Newtown,
Connecticut.
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany.
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.
Moldenke, H.N. 1949.  American wildflowers.  D. Van
Nostrand Company, Inc., New York, New York.
Muenscher, W.C. 1955.  Weeds.  2nd ed.  Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, New York.
Munz, P.A. & Keck, D.D. 1965.  A California flora.
University of California Press, Los Angeles,
California.
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C. Bell 1968.  Manual of
the vascular flora of the Carolinas.  The University of
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.  Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa
State University Press, Ames, Iowa.
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database.
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant Data
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Prepared By
Lee Davis
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2,
Nacogdoches, Texas
Lincoln Moore
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton
Rouge, Louisiana
Species Coordinator
Lee Davis
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2,
Nacogdoches, Texas
Edited: 29jan02 jsp
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your
local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the
PLANTS <http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web
sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race,
color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities
who require alternative means for communication of program
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact
USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer.