Plant Guide
PROSTRATE 
BUNDLEFLOWER
 
Desmanthus virgatus  (L.) Willd. 
var.  depressus  (Willd.) B. L. 
Turner  
Plant Symbol = DEVI3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Prostrate bundleflower  plant s, Shelly D. Maher USDA NRCS  
Alternate Names 
Desmanthus,  wild tantan, creeping bundleflower  
Uses  
Livestoc k: Prostrate bundleflower  produces  forage for  
cattle  (Everitt,  Drawe and Lonard  1999)  and is very 
tolerant of heavy grazing ( Cook et al. 2005).  
 
Wildlife :  Prostrate bundleflower provides  forage for deer 
and  seed  for  bobwhite quail, scaled quail and mourning 
doves  (Everitt  et al. 1999). 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  Description
 
G
 eneral :  Prostrate bundleflower is a native, perennial 
legume.  It is a sprawling or occasionally erect herbaceous 
plant with stems 75 cm or longer.  Leaves are bipinnate, 
alternate and  2.4 -6.0 cm long.  The flower heads  are 
white .  The fruits are legume pods 2.2 -8.8 cm long , 
dehiscent along both sutures , and contain 9-27 seed s per 
pod.  Seeds are  2.1-2.9 mm long, 1.4- 2.7 mm wide, 
flattened,  and red or golden -brown in color (Luckow 
1993).  The plants produce seed from April through 
December.  Prostrate bundleflower has an average of 
62,000 seeds per pound.  
 
Distribution :  Prostrate bundleflower is found in Florida 
as well as in the southern half of Texas and down into the 
northern states  of Mexico (Richardson and King  2011).  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile  
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
  
Habitat :   It is found  on  various  range sites from Gray 
sandy loams to saline clays  (USDA -SCS  1985 & 1988) .  
Best performance of this seed source has been observed 
on medium to fine textured soils . It is associated with  
native grasses such as false Rho desgrass, plains 
bristlegrass  Hall’s panicum, hooded windmillgrass, curly 
mesquite and buffalograss.  It is also associated with 
or ange zexmenia, bush sunflower and snoutbean  (M.C. 
Johnston 1963) .   
 
Adaptation  
Prostrate bundleflower is very persistent in arid and 
subhumid environments.  It is tolerant of alkaline, sodic, 
saline and heavy clay soils.  
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weed s, it can be planted 
in the fall.  Establish a clean, weed -free seedbed by either 
tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Prostrate  bundleflower  is best seeded using a native -grass 
drill to ensure a good planting of the seed on rough, 
irregular rangeland.  Broadcast seeding may be used in 
areas not easily planted with a drill, but some type of 
additional coverage such as culti -packing or light 
dragging will be beneficial to ensure good seed t o soil 
contact.   
 
Balli  Germplasm  prostrate bundleflower will generally be 
used in  planting mixtures .  As such  the seeding rate will 
need to be adjusted according   to the percent of prostrate 
b undleflower  in the mixture.  For calibration purposes, a

seeding rate of five pounds of pure live seed (PLS)  per 
acre would be the single species recommendation.  Seed 
should be planted 1/4 to 1/2 inch deep.  A brief 
mechanical scarification w ill improve seed germination of 
its hard seed.   If one plant per square foot has be come 
established than the planting has been successful.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of phosphorus and 
potassium.  No nitrogen fertilizer is necessary since 
prostrate bundleflower is a legume  and  forms a symbiotic 
relationship with rhizobial bacteria to fix atmospheric 
nitrogen for use by the plant.   
 
Management  
Prostrate bundleflower should be deferred from grazing 
for 90 days to allow plants to become established.    After 
a stand is established, either continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used.  It is recommended that a minimum 
3  inch stubble height be maintained under grazing.    
Plants should be allowed to produce seed annually to 
e nsure stand health.  Prostrate  bundleflower  is a long-
lived perennial that is extremely drought tolerant once 
established.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Control of the pests may be necessary in order to produce 
seed crops in dry years under irrigation.   There are a host 
of insects tha t feed on the seed of prostrate bundleflower 
and will  continue  to feed on the  seed after harvest  unless 
treated . In order to reduce the detrimental effects of these 
insects , it is recommended that following harvest and seed 
drying, seed should be placed in  a freezer for a minimum 
of 48 hrs to kill seed -feeding insects.  It is possible that an 
insecticide treatment prior to harvest may eliminate this 
problem  .  H owever , this has not been tested.   
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns with 
prostrate bundleflower .   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed production for Balli Germplasm can be started from 
transplants or direct seeded on beds or flat ground.  Rapid 
spread and growth has been observed in transplant 
established stands providing  seed harvests within the first 
year.  Furthermore , transplant ed stands facilitate better 
weed control in the seed production fields.    
 
Seed is best harvested using a combine with a grain -style 
header.  The seed of prostrate bundleflower dehisces at 
maturity, however about 75% of the seed ripens 
uniformly.  Seed can be harvested before peak ripeness ; 
however , harvesting  too early has resulted in lower seed 
quality making the added yields negligible. Following 
harvest, trash can be removed  using a Clipper seed 
cleaner.  After the trash has been removed, seed can be 
further cleaned using a gravit y table.   This will be used to  remove light (immature) seed, which will greatly increase 
the
 purity of the seedlot.  
 
Well managed seed fields have p roduced 775 bulk pounds 
of clean seed  per acre.  Purity of the seed is usually 
around 80- 90% and germination rates for scarified seed 
ranges from 80 to 90%.  Adequately stored seed in 
humidity and temperature controlled facilities can be 
expected to stay v iable for over 10 years.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
 
Balli Germplasm  prostrate bundleflower  was released by 
the  USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center  and the South Texas Natives  Project of the Caesar 
K lebe rg Wildlife Research Institute at Texas A&M 
University- Kingsville in 2013.  It was selected for its 
survivability, plant vigor , forage production and seed 
production characteristics.  It is predominantly adapted to 
clay  loam and saline clay range sites in south Texas.  
Breeder seed is maintained by South Texas Natives .  
References  
Cook, B.G., Pengelly, B.C., Brown, S.D., Donnelly, J.L., 
Eagles, D.A., Franco, M.A., Hanson, J., Mullen, B.F., 
Partridge, I.J., Peters, M. and Schultze -Kraft, R. 20 05. 
Tropical Forages:  an interactive selection tool.  [CD -
ROM], CSIRO, DPI&F(Qld), CIAT and ILRI, Brisbane, 
Australia.   Accessed July 2013.   
 
Everitt, J.H., D.L. Drawe and R. I. Lonard. 1999.  Field 
Guide to the Broad -Leaved herbaceous Plants of South 
Texas .  Texas Tech University Press, Lubbock, TX.  
 
Johnston, M.C.  1963.  Past and Present Grasslands of 
Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico.  Ecology  
44(3):  456- 466. 
 
Luckow, M. 1993. Monograph of Desmanthus 
(Leguminosae -Mimosoideae). Systematic Botany 
Monographs. 38:1- 166. 
 
Richardson, A, and K. King. 2011. Plants of Deep South 
Texas A Field Guide to the Woody and   Flowering 
Species. Texas A&M University Press. College Station, 
TX.  
 
USDA -SCS. 19 85. Soil Survey of Webb  County, Texas. 
United States Department of  
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.  
 
USDA -SCS. 19 88. Soil Survey of Refugio  County, 
Texas. United States Department of  
Agriculture, Washington, D.C  
 
Prepared By :   
John Lloyd -Reilley , Manager  
Shelly Maher , Soil Conserv ationist

USDA NRCS E. ‘K ika’ de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  
Citation 
Lloyd -Reilley, J.  and S. Maher. 2013 .  Plant  guide for 
prostrate bundleflower ( Desmanthus virgatus  var.  
depressus).  USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center.  
Kingsville, TX 78363.   
 
Published  July 2013 F
or more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Progra m Web site 
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.
USDA  IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER