Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHOWY 
TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium canadense  (L.) 
DC. 
Plant Symbol = DECA7  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center 
 
                      R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center                                          
Fl
 owering occurs on the upper half of the plant on an 
elongated raceme during mid-summer, July – August, 
and lasts about 3 weeks.  The pea-like flowers are 
approximately a half inch in size with no scent, and 
consist of an upper and lower petal.  They are open 
pollinated (USDA-NRCS, 1997), and may be 
sparsely spaced or densely  packed along the raceme. 
The later giving the plant a nodding appearance when 
in full bloom.  The blossoms are pink to purple in 
color with a patch of darker pink and yellow near 
their center.  Each flower  is born on a hairy, red 
pedicel, and has a hairy, greenish-red calyx.  They 
are keel shaped near the  point of attachment, and 
open wide starting with the upper petal (Hilty, 2002-
2009).   
 
Alternate Names 
beggar’s lice, stick tights, showy trefoil 
 
Uses 
Wildlife and Conservation 
Desmodium
 species are consider ed valuable wildlife 
plants, and showy ticktrefoil is no exception.  It ranks 
as one of the most important species in the diet of 
Northern Bobwhite, is used heavily by Ruffed 
Grouse and Wild Turkey, and is preferred browse for 
White-tailed Deer (Miller and Miller, 1999).  Showy 
ticktrefoil is an important pollinator habitat plant.   
Humming birds frequent the brightly colored blooms, 
along with a host of insects.  Long-tongue bees, 
bumblebees, miner bees, leaf-cutting bees, and some 
short-tongued bees can be found working blooms of 
showy ticktrefoil (Hilty, 2002-2009).    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Showy ticktrefoil is a native, warm-season, 
perennial legume that typically grows 3-4 feet in 
height (USDA-NRCS, 2009.  It is capable of 
obtaining up to 6 feet in height under optimum 
conditions and when in competition with tall grasses 
(Grow Native, 2009).  Its growth form is erect, 
though it may occasionally sprawl.  The central stem 
is green in color with fine, white hairs.  The leaves 
are compound, trifoliate, and have an alternate 
arrangement on the stem.   The leaflets are 2 - 3.5 
inches in length, and less  than a half inch across, 
giving them a lanceolate shape.  The leaves are 
rounded at the tips and have fine, hook like, hairs on 
their underside (Hilty 2002-2009).   
 
 
Flowers desiccate and drop after pollination, forming 
seed pods, loments.  The loments generally have 3 to 
5 segments and are about 2.5 inches in length.  They 
are flattened and covered in fine, hooked hairs that 
readily adhere to clothing and passing animals (Hilty 
2002-2009). Showy ticktrefoil produces 
approximately 80,000 seeds per pound (Rotar and 
Urata, 1966)      
 
Distribution : 
Showy ticktrefoil is commonly found throughout the 
central United States from  Texas, northward into 
Canada.  It is found as far west as the Dakotas, but   
is absent in the southeastern United States.  North of 
Virginia, its range extends  eastward to the Atlantic 
coast all the way to Maine.

For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: 
Showy ticktrefoil is commonly associated with the 
tall grass prairie region.  It is a facultative plant, 
meaning it can be found in both upland and lowland 
sites.  It typically favors moist soils such as those 
found along river banks, lake edges, and wet 
meadows (Hitly, 2002-2009).  It can also be found in 
open woods, rocky and sandy prairies, roadsides and 
disturbed areas (Native Plants information Network, 
2009).        
 
Adaptation 
Showy ticktrefoil prefers full sun, and is indifferent 
to soil acidity (NPIN, 2009).  It is highly adaptable 
and will grow on a wide range of soil textures from 
coarse sands to fine clays, preferring loamy soil,  as 
long as adequate moisture is present (Evergreen, 
2009).  It is very competitive and is capable of 
competing with the tall grasses it is associated with in 
open prairies.  It is fire tolerant, and burning will 
increase stand vigor  (USDA-NRCS, 1997). 
 
Establishment 
To help reduce weed pressure, prepare a clean, firm 
seed bed by disking, harrowing, and firming the seed 
bed with a cultipacker or roller prior to establishment.  
Rain or irrigation may also be used to settle and firm 
the seed bed.  If possible, allow an initial flush of 
weeds to germinate before planting.  Treat with a 
broad spectrum herbicide such as glycosphate while 
the weeds are young, 2-4 l eaf stage.  This process 
may be repeated multiple times if severe weed 
pressure is anticipated.  Avoid soil disturbances such 
as disking or tillage after the initial flush of weeds 
have been treated as this brings new weed seed to the 
surface for germination.  
  
For optimum results, seed should be scarified, treated 
with “EL” culture inoculants, and planted ¼ inch 
deep or less.  Planting may be done in spring, after 
the threat of frost has passed, or fall.  For fall 
plantings, the seed should be planted late enough that 
it over winters in the soil, and germinates the 
following spring.  A Brillion seeder or grain drill can 
be used to plant the seed.   
 
For conservation plantings, showy ticktrefoil usually 
comprises less than 10% of a seeding mixture.  The 
rate can vary from .5 to 1 pound of pure live seed per 
acre.  The seeding rate should be increased to 10 
pounds of pure live seed per acre for monotypic 
stands or wildlife plots.  For seed production, 3.3  pounds per acre on 36 inch rows should be used.  
This equates to 20 pure live seed per linear foot of 
row (USDA-NRCS, 1997).   Plantings should 
coincide with rain events to ensure adequate moisture 
is available for germination and subsequent seedling 
growth for optimum stand establishment.  Irrigation 
is helpful for seed production, but it is not necessary 
for conservation plantings.   
 
Management 
Fertilization is not recomme
nded during the first year 
of establishment as it will increase weed competition 
in the new planting.  Fertilizer application should 
only be made to new plantings if soil tests indicate 
severe potassium or phosphorous deficiencies.  Being 
a legume, showy ticktrefoil does not require nitrogen 
inputs.  Nitrogen application will encourage weeds 
and make them more competitive.  A complete 
fertilizer; low in nitrogen, may be used in established 
stands.  Use soil tests to determine the proper amount 
of P and K to apply. 
 
Weeds may be controlled with selective herbicides, 
mowing, and cultivation.  Grass selective herbicides 
may be extremely useful in limiting grass 
competition in plantings (USDA-NRCS 1997). 
 
 Timely mowing of weeds will inhibit them from 
developing seed, or destroy the seed before it is 
mature.  Mowing also reduces weed competitiveness 
by reducing leaf area, and allows more light to reach 
the showy ticktrefoil seedlings.  Be certain to mow 
above the plants to reduce injury and increase its 
competitiveness.  Cultivation may also be used to 
control weeds between rows in seed production 
fields. One disadvantage of cultivation is the 
potential for increased weed competition as tillage 
can bring new weed seed to the surface for 
germination.   
 
For tall weeds, a wick applicator filled with a 50% 
glyphosate mixture is eff ective.  Attach the wick 
applicator to an ATV or tractor and drive slowly 
through the planting with the wick positioned above 
the height of the ticktrefoil plants, and at a height to 
maximize control of the target weeds.   
 
Once established, a pre-emergent herbicide may be 
used to limit weed pressure throughout the growing 
season.  It should be noted that a pre-emergent 
herbicides also have activity on desirable seeds that 
germinate in wildlife or restoration planting.       
Its use may only be applicable in a seed production 
situation.

Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Skipper butterfly larva feed on the foliage of the 
plant.  The stems are a pref erred food source for the 
Japanese beetle,  Papilio japonica  (Hilty, 2002-2009).  
Plants in a study at Michigan State University were 
reportedly decimated by Japanese beetles during both 
years of the study, and also attracted aphids, thrips, 
lygus bugs, leafhoppers, and leaf beetles (Landis et 
al, 2006.). 
 
As mentioned, the seed of showy ticktrefoil are 
incased in a pod that is covered in tiny, hooked hairs 
that act as a natural Velcro.  The seed will readily 
cling to clothing or animal fur and are distributed in 
this fashion.  This can lead to distribution into 
unwanted areas.  The pods can also cause some 
difficulty during harvest and seed cleaning.     
   
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known negative environmental concerns 
with this species.       
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Alexander Germplasm showy ticktrefoil is a source-
identified release from the Elsberry, Missouri Plant 
Materials Center.  It was collected from a native 
stand in Alexander County in southern Illinois. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
United States Government.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the  
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Evergreen. 2009.  The Native Plants Database 
( http://www.evergreen.ca/nativeplants/search/vie
w-plant.php?ID=00254, 21 May 2009) Canada, 
2002-2009. 
 
Grow Native.  2009.  
( http://www.grownative.org//plants/details.asp?id
=7. May 21, 2009)  Missouri Department of  Conservation and Missouri Department of 
Agriculture, Missouri. 2009.
   
 
Hilty, J. 2002-2009.  Illinois Wildflowers.  
http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/prairie/plantx/
shw_trefoilx.htm. May 21, 2009. Dr. John Hilty, 
Illinois. 
 
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center The 
University of Texas at Austin.  2009.  Native Plant 
Information  Network  
( http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_p
lant=deca7 21 May 2009)  Ausitn, TX. 78739 USA.  
 
Landis, D., Fieldler, A., Issacs, R. Tuell, J. Michigan 
State University Department of Entomology. 2006.  
( http://nativeplants.msu.edu/descan.htm 21 May 
2009) Michigan State Univers ity.  East Lansing, MI 
48824 USA.    
 
Miller, J.H., and Miller, K.V.  1999.  Forest Plants of 
the Southeast and Their Wildlife Uses.  Craftmaster 
Printers, Incorporated , Auburn, Alabama. 
 
Rotar, P.P. Urata, U. 1966. Technical Progress 
Report No. 147:  Some Agronomic Observations in 
Desmodium Speices: Seed Weights.  Hawaii 
Agricultural Experiment Station, University of 
Hawaii. 
 
USDA, NRCS Plant Material Program 1997. 
Alexander Germplasm Showy Ticktrefoil 
Desmodium canadense  L. (http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/mopmc/pubs/MOPMCBR
08AlexanderTickTrefoil.pdf. 21 May 2009) 
Elsberry Plant Material s Center, Elsberry, MO. 
63343 USA. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database 
( http://plants.usda.gov
, 21 May 2009). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Prepared By 
R. Alan Shadow , USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center, Nacogdoches, TX 
 
Species Coordinator 
R. Alan Shadow , USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center, Nacogdoches, TX 
 
Edited: 090609 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.