Plant Guide
TUFTED HAIRGRASS 
Deschampsia caespitosa 
(L.)P.Beauv.,orth. Var  
Plant Symbol = DECA18 
 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho, Colorado, and 
Oregon Plant Materials Program  
Tufted hairgrass.  Photo, courtesy of Christian Fischer . 
  
Alternate Names  
Deschampsia cespitosa,  Aira caespitosa, salt and 
pepper grass, tussock grass, small -flowered tickle 
grass,  blue -green hairgrass, fescue -leaved hairgrass, 
canche cespiteuse (PLANTS Database), (Darris and 
Gonzalves, 2009).  
Uses  
Graz
 ing/haying:  In the Rocky Mountain and 
Intermountain regions of North America , tufted  hairgrass provides good to excellent forage for
 all 
classes of livestock and is often cut for hay from 
native meadows (Walsh, 1995).  Hay yields can be as 
much as 1.5 tons per acre (Lawrence).  In western 
Oregon and Washington, yields of 1.5 to 8.5 tons per 
acre have been reported (Darris and Flessner,  2001), 
(Gamroth, pers. com.).  
 
Forage palatability for livestock is rated fair to good, 
and th
 e nutritional energy value is fair and protein 
value is poor (Walsh, 1995).   On rangelands in 
California, cattle readily consume tufted hairgrass 
prior to maturi ty.  Due to its ten dency to grow in 
cool, moist environments, it remains green and 
succulent throughout the growing season and is 
grazed readily during the summer (Sampson et al., 
1951).   However, it is considered a species of lower 
forage value in low ele vation coastal environments of 
Oregon, Washington and California (Darris and 
Gonzalves, 2009). It withstands grazing  and 
trampling  very well (Lawrence).  
 
Restoration and  reclamation:   It is used for 
restoration of moist to seasonally wet meadows and 
freshw ater wetlands, and for stabilizing disturbed 
streambanks, canals, shorelines and upper tidal 
marshes.  It is also used for acid and heavy metal 
mine spoil reclamation, alpine and boreal 
revegetation, grassed waterways , turf, and 
ornamental applications. (D arris and Gonzalves, 
2009).  
 
Wildlife:   Utilization by deer, elk, antelope, bison, 
bear, horses and rabbits is variable.  Cover and food 
values for small mammals, birds and waterfowl are 
rated poor to good, depending on wildlife species and 
location.  Tufted hairgrass is a larval food plant fo r 
several butterfly species in North America and is a 
host for at least 40 species of Lepidopteran insects 
(moths and butterflies) world -wide (Darris and 
Gonzalves, 2009).  
  
Turf:  Selections of tufted hairgrass are valued as 
wear resistant turf, particular ly on sites with water 
logged soils, intermediate light, low nitrogen, or high 
acidity (Brilman and Watkins, 2003).   Turf -type 
cultivars have been released from European sources 
that  tolerate repeated mowing.   They are 
recommended for lawns, sports fields,  golf course 
roughs and tees, and other heavy use areas, including 
shaded areas under trees.

Status 
This species is listed as endangered in Kentucky, 
Maryland and Massachusetts; rare in Indiana and of 
special concern in Connecticut.  Consult the 
PLANTS  Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Tufted hairgrass is 
a na
 tive perennial cool season bunchgrass with 
mostly basal leaves that grows 8 to 60 inches tall.  It 
is a highly variable species with widely varying 
taxonomic treatment (Barkworth et al., 2008). The 
species can be very long lived, with individual 
tussocks survi ving 30 years or more (Davy, 1980). In 
North America, low elevation coastal types are often 
much larger, coarser, and more robust compared to 
interior and alpine or subalpine populations.  
 
Tufted hairgrass is a strongly tufted perennial with 
culms reachin g 20-155 cm (8- 61 in) in height.  The 
sheaths are glabrous to scabrous, and ligules are 3 -7.5 
mm (0.12- 0.30 in) long, narrow, acuminate and 
membranous.  Leaf blades are firm, flat or folded, 1- 5 
mm (0.04- 0. 20 in) wide and 10- 50 (3.9-19.7 in) cm 
long; the upper surface with toothed nerves, the lower 
surface smooth.  The panicle is 5 -50 cm (2- 20 in) 
long, loose and open, sometimes nodding, shiny, and 
glossy.  Spikelets are 2 -flowered, usually shiny, and 
purplish to tawny .  Spikelet branches are thin but stif f 
and rough to the touch.  Glumes are lanceolate, acute, 
glabrous or scaberulous.  The first glume is 3- 5 mm 
(0.12- 0.20 in) long, 1 -nerved and the second glume is 
3- 5 mm (0.12- 0.20 in) long, 1-  to 3-nerved.  Lemmas 
are 2 -4 mm (0.08- 0.16 in) long, and often  purplish at 
the base with callus hairs.  The palea has a bifid tip, 
with a twisted and slightly geniculate awn that is 4 -6 
mm (0.16- 0.24 in) long (Cronquist, et. al, 1977), 
(Majerus, 2009), (Perryman and Skinner, 2007), 
(Hitchcock et al., 1969), (Barkwort h et al., 2008).   
Tufted hairgrass is most likely to be confused with 
redtop ( Agrostis alba) which has only one floret per 
spikelet.  It is similar to slender hairgrass 
( Deschampsia elongata) which has a narrow panicle 
in comparison to tufted hairgrass (L awrence).  
Chromosome number is 2n=26 (Peeters, 2000) and is 
highly cross -pollinated and self -incompatible (Walsh, 
1995).  Viviparous plants have also been reported.  
 
Distribution :   Tufted hairgrass has global distribution 
in moist arctic and temperate reg ions of the world.  In 
North America, it occurs from Greenland to Alaska 
and  south in the western United States into Northern 
Mexico.  It has limited distribution in the Black Hills 
and northern Great Plains.  It is found from 
Minnesota to Maine and south to Iowa, Illinois, Ohio 
and Georgia.  Some European populations have been 
 
introduced to North America and it is cultivated in 
Hawaii (Walsh, 1995). For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Adaptation  
Tufted hairgrass occurs from sea level to 14,000 feet 
elevation on moderately moist to seasonally flooded, 
water logged  sites in 20+ inch annual precipitation 
zones.  It prefers full sun but can be found in partially 
shaded environments (rarely found unde r dense 
shade) with a wide variety of soil types from gravel 
to clay textured soils and soil pH ranging from 3.5 to 
7.5.  Some populations have strong tolerance to 
heavy metals and high soil acidity.  Salinity tolerance 
is generally considered low, but pla nts occurring in 
upper tidal marshes may be more salt tolerant.  Some 
populations also tolerate sites with low fertility.   
Associated plants commonly found growing with 
tufted hairgrass include sedges, rushes and bentgrass 
(Darris and Gonzalves, 2009), (Majerus, 2009), 
(Walsh, 1995) , (Davy 1980).   In western North 
America  tufted hairgrass may dominate plant 
communities above treeline.  It occurs along moisture 
gradients from the middle of lee slopes with early 
melting snowdrifts to the bottoms of lee slopes  with 
very wet meadows (Walsh, 1995).  Tufted hairgrass 
culms and leaves are often killed by wildfire but root 
crowns generally survive all but the most severe fires 
(Walsh, 1995).  
 
 Tufted hairgrass is a frequent component of upper tidal 
marsh es along the Pacific Coast of North America. (Photo by 
Dale Darris) . 
Establishment  
Tufted hairgrass has approximately 1,300,000 seeds 
per pound (PLANTS Database).  The recommended 
full seeding rate is 1.5 pounds pure live seed (PLS) 
per acre (Ogle et. al, 2010).  Seed that has been 
delinted (hairs and awns removed from the hulls by a 
debearder or brush machine) flows more readily and 
precisely through standard drills and broadcast  
seeders.  The species  is slow to establish the first year 
but can dominate a site by the third year if seeding 
rates are heavy (2 to 3 pounds per acre).  If used as a 
component of a seeding mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired and it should be limited to no more than ¼ to

½ pound per acre if species diversity is a goal (Darris 
and Gonzalves, 2009).  For critical area or broadcast 
seeding, double the seeding rate.  The recommended 
seeding rate for turf varieties is 1 to 2 pounds per 
1000 square feet.   The seedbed should be firm and 
weed -free.  Weeds should be controlled by 
mechanical  cultivation or with herbicides prior to 
seeding.  Most seeding in interior or alpine regions is 
accomplished in late fall or early winter as a dormant 
planting as most sites are too wet during the spring 
and early summer. Some populations, particularly 
alp ine seed sources, can have dormant seed and 
benefit substantially from 45 to 90 days of cold moist 
stratification (Kaye 1997 ),  (Bartow per. com.) .  In 
certain areas, including coastal, low elevation regions 
with milder winters, sowing nondormant seed is done 
in spring, late summer, or early fall depending on 
rainfall patterns and soil moisture conditions.  
Because of the small size of  the seed and the 
advantage of sun light which  enhances germination, 
shallow seeding depth (0 to ¼ inch ) or only a light 
mulc h covering is recommended.  Starter fertilizers 
are generally not recommended for reclamation or 
restoration plantings w here soils are well developed. 
However, establishment on highly eroded or depleted 
sites can benefit from soil amendments and 
fertilization  based on a soil test, and  high seeding 
rates  (Walsh, 1995).   
 
For reclamation of sites contaminated with heavy 
metals or acidic soils, it is recommended to use seed 
sources from similar sites (Darris and Gonzalves, 
2009), (Walsh, 1995).  
Management  
Tufted hairgrass is slow to establish the first year but 
can dominate a site by the third year if seeding rates 
are high and conditions allow.  Once established, use 
a rotational, moderate use grazing system since this 
species often declines with continuous, season long 
use. Defer grazing each spring until soils are dry 
enough to prevent damage to the soils and plants and 
defer grazing at least one year after wildfire to allow 
recovery  (Walsh, 1995),  (Darris and Gonzalves, 
2009).  Grazing practices should allow for ample 
seed set at least once every 3 -4 years to maintain 
stands (Walsh, 1995).  
 
Species composition within tufted hairgrass meadows 
is very sensitive to changes in water table.  Lowering 
of the water table by channel cutting, poor road 
locations a nd drought have changed site potential and 
favored the expansion of Kentucky bluegrass ( Poa 
pratensis ) and perennial forbs in central Oregon.  
Raised water tables favor increase in sedge and rush 
dominance (Walsh, 1995).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Tufted  hairgrass is susceptible to diseases including 
e
 rgot,  several rusts, stripe smut, blind seed, several 
 
leaf spots, rapid blight,  and the turf disease, take -all 
patch.  Insect pests include aphids, billbugs and 
leafhoppers (Darris and Gonzalves, 2009).  
Envi ro
nmental Concerns 
Tufted hairgrass is a bunchgrass that reproduces by 
seed.  It generally does not move from its planting 
location except under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  However in some parts of 
Europe, it is known to spread readily in to recently 
disturbed areas, is a weed in some forage crops, and 
can become a serious competitor with young trees 
(Davy, 1980), (Darris and Gonzalves, 2009).  
Seed and Plant Production  
Tufted hairgrass can be grown for seed on well 
drained medium to fine textured soils on uplands and 
on poorly drained silt and clay soils in low lying 
areas.  If planted on seasonally flooded areas, fields 
must be firm enough to perform weed control and dry 
enough to harvest as early as mid -June in western 
Oregon.  It is slo w to establish compared with many 
introduced grasses and does not compete well with 
volunteer seedlings, especially ryegrass ( Lolium 
spp.).  Fields should be fallowed for two years 
following other grasses before planting tufted 
hairgrass.   The seedbed shou ld be moist, fine, very 
firm, weed -free and mostly free of residue. Tufted 
hairgrass is highly cross -pollinated  by wind so 
isolation standards similar to those set for Ce rtified 
(variety and pre -variety) seed production should be 
used if multiple sources a re grown in the same 
proximity  (Darris, et al., 1995).  For example in 
Oregon, minimum isolation distances for tufted 
hairgrass are as wide as 900 feet depending on 
generation and field size (Oregon Seed Certification 
Service, 1998).  
 
Seed Production  
Spring  or fall seeding is recommended in Oregon for 
non -dormant seed.  In colder interior regions late 
dormant seedings are  recommended .  Dormant seed 
should be sown only in the late  fall for best results. 
Seeding rates are 1 to 2 pounds PLS per acre with 
row sp acing of 24 to 36 inches and planting depth of 
¼ inch (Smith Jr. and Smith, 1997), (Darris, et. al, 
1995).  Large, robust ecotypes appear to be 
particularly sensitive to narrow row spacing (Darris 
and Stannard, 1997). Besides maximizing seed yield 
of some populations, widely spaced rows facilitate 
cultivation for weed control and the maintenance of 
rows by removing unwanted volunteers.

Tufted hairgrass seed.  Steve Hurst @USDA-NRCS-PLANTS 
Database . 
Fertilization 
Fertilizer recommendations vary by region.  In 
lowland regions of western Oregon, 25 to 35 lbs of N 
per acre may be optionally applied at or shortly after 
seeding.  For established stands on better drained 
soils, the highest seed yields are obtained by app lying 
100 lbs of N per acre in February or  March, in a 
single or split application (50/50) one month apart. 
There is no improvement in yields with supplemental 
applications of 25 lbs N per acre in fall (Darris 2000).   
Split applications of fertilizer  are r ecommended for 
uniformity, ease of management, to accommodate 
crop uptake and to provide flexibility in avoiding 
unfavorable weather conditions (Hart, et. al, 2005).  
Fertilizer applications should be based on soil tests.  
Phosphorous (P), potassium (K), a nd sulfur (S) may 
be limiting and should be a pplied according  to 
recommendations for tall fescue ( Schedonorus 
phoenix,  synonym:  Festuca arundinacea) seed 
production by Oregon State University (Hart et al., 
2005). In the Intermountain, Rocky Mountain, and 
G reat Plains regions, 45 lbs of N per acre is 
recommended annually (Smith Jr. and Smith, 1997).   
 
 
Weed control  
Weed control is important in both new and 
established stands.  In Oregon,  annual bluegrass ( Poa 
annua) and rattail fescue ( Vulpia spp.) can be 
pa rticularly competitive during the first two years of 
establishment.  Well established stands will shade out 
most annual bluegrass by the third growing season.  
However, rattail fescue can be more persistent and is 
difficult to screen out of the seed during  seed 
processing.  Broadleaf weeds can be controlled with 
rouging, row cultivation, and herbicides in both new 
and established stands (Smith Jr. and Smith, 1997), 
(Darris, et. al, 1995).  In Oregon only, grass weeds 
and volunteers can be controlled in established stands 
with one or more herbicides labeled for “grasses 
grown for seed”. Spot and between the row 
treatments of glyphosate herbicide including the use 
of shielded sprayers may be an option in certain 
 
regions and states. Always read and follow herbi cide 
label instructions.  
 
Irrigation   
In western Oregon, irrigation is seldom required for 
newly fall sown or established stands due to high 
precipitation between fall and spring.  However, 
spring plantings require periodic irrigation 
throughout the first summer of establishment.  In 
areas wit h lower precipitation or droughty soils such 
as  the intermountain west, growing season irrigation 
may be required every year for stand maintenance 
and  seed production.  It is recommended that stands 
be irrigated prior to flowering (not during pollination 
i f sprinkler irrigated) and after seed harvest.  In the 
fall, s oil moisture levels should be brought to field 
capacity by early September (Smith Jr. and Smith 
1997), (Darris et al., 1995).  
 
Harvesting  
Tufted hairgrass seed shatters readily at maturity so 
careful timing of harvest is critical.  Harvesting is 
done by (1) swathing (windrowing) followed by 
combining (threshing) the dry seed stalks a week or 
two later (preferably at 10% or less seed moisture 
content), (2) direct combining then drying the seed 
(be low 104°F or 40°C), or (3) direct removal of seed 
from the panicles using a flail -vac seed stripper then 
drying the seed for several days (Darris et al., 1995), 
(Anderson per. com.), (Smith Jr. and Smith, 1997), 
(Krautzer et al., 2004).  If windrowed, it i s 
recommended that seed be at soft to mid dough stage 
(late June to mid -July in western Oregon and in 
August in Alaska) and allowed to cure in the field for 
seven to 14 days followed by combining.  Direct 
combining is done when 5 to 10% of the seed has 
sha ttered.   When using a swath/combine or direct 
combine method, leave a stubble height similar to the 
height of the tuft to reduce the amount of herbage 
passing through the combine (Darris et. al, 1995), 
(Krautzer et al., 2004).  Stands should be cut once 
mo re after harvest and the crop aftermath quickly 
bailed and removed, or the stubble cut with a flail 
chopper (forage harvester) and residues piled and 
burned or composted.  T he remaining stubble should 
be a height of 3 to 5 inches.  Overtime, basal tufts of  
robust ecotypes become rank and elevated and thus 
susceptible to damage from chopping or mowing at 
low heights.  Open field burning may be an option for 
post -harvest residue management in some states or 
regions.   
 
Average seed yields can vary widely from 20 to 350 
pounds per acre for highly processed seed lots (Smith 
Jr. and Smith, 1997), (Hunt and Wright, 2007), 
(Darris and Flessner, 2001), (Edminster, per. com.), 
(Krautzer et al., 2004) depending on genetics, 
methods, and region.  Y ields as high as 1000 lbs per 
acre have been achieved in western Oregon for 
highly bred turf type varieties which have much

higher densities of fertile tillers (Edminster, per. 
com).  In general, seed yields the first full growing 
season are substantially less and may be zero 
depending on the planting date, rate of plant 
development, and vernalization requirements of 
specific populations.  
 
Seed processing and storage  
A three -step process is used to clean the seed.  1) 
scalp and remove fines; 2) delint with  a 
huller/scarifier or debearder; 3) re- clean with a 1, 2 or 
3 screen cleaner.  A common weed seed contaminant 
is rattail fescue which can be removed using an 
indent cleaner or Carter -disk (Darris, et. al, 1995).  
Others suggest that scalping and debearding are not 
required (Smith Jr. and Smith, 1997).  
 
Seed of tufted hairgrass stores best under conditions 
of low air humidity (to maintain a seed moisture 
content between 5 and 10%) and cool temperatures 
(preferably 32 to 50° F). Germination rates can 
decline  by 25 to 50  percent in one year without 
climate control (Darris, et. al, 1995) .  However, 
germination rates of seed stored in controlled 
environmental conditions does not change 
appreciably.  Seed of ‘Peru Creek’ harvested in 1997 
with a germination rate of 88 percent, still had 55 
percent germination when tested 10 years later. 
 
Plant Propagation  
Tufted hairgrass can be established from transplants 
o

r sod.  At the Aberdeen, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center, container (plug) plants are easily propagated 
in 10 cubic inch conetainers.  Seed is pressed into the 
surface of a 1:1:1 mix of coconut fiber, compost and 
perlite and kept moist with an overhead mist 
irrigation schedule of 2minutes per hour during the 
day and day time greenhouse temperatures of 90 -
110° F for approximately three months before out -
planting (Tilley, 2010).  
Cult

ivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
‘Nortran’  w
 as developed by the Agricultural and 
Forestry Experiment Station of the University of 
Alaska  – Fairbanks in 1986.  It was selected from 
collections made in Alaska and Iceland that tolerate 
acidic soils, low fertility and cold and wet locations.  
It has the ability to reseed itself on disturbed lands, is 
persistent under continual cutting or foraging and 
may be resistan t to many rusts and snow molds.  
Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained by the 
Alaska Plant Materials Center (Hunt and Wright, 
2007).  
 
‘Peru Creek’  was released by the Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, USDA Forest Service 
and the Colorado Agric ultural Experiment Station in 
1994.  The original source is from Summit County 
Colorado at an elevation of 11,300 feet.  In 
 
comparison trials, Peru Creek was the only accession 
that produced large forage yields and viable seed on 
mine spoils with pH 3.2- 4.0.  Peru Creek is 
recommended for revegetation of high elevation sites 
with low pH (acid) soils.  Breeder and Foundation 
seed is maintained by the Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center.  
 
Tillam
ook Selected Class Germplasm was released 
by the Corvallis,  Oregon Plant Materials Center and 
the Oregon Agricultural Experiment Station in 2002.  
The original source is from a coastal estuary in 
Tillamook Co., Oregon, at an elevation of less than 
10 ft. It was selected for high plant vigor, clipping 
response, and  foliage appearance from collections 
made in western Oregon and western Washington.  
The germplasm is intended for erosion control and 
revegetation along freshwater and slightly brackish 
waterways in coastal zones of Oregon and 
Washington (Darris and Fless ner, 2001).  
 
Willamette Selected Class Germplasm  was 
released by the Corvallis, Oregon Plant Materials 
Center and the Oregon Agricultural Experiment 
Station in 2002.   The original source is from Linn 
Co., Oregon, at an elevation of 225 ft.  Selected from 
the same assembly of populations as Tillamook 
Germplasm, it also ranked high in plant vigor and 
clipping response among other factors. The intended 
uses include streambank and shoreline stabilization,  
revegetation of seasonal freshwater wetlands, and 
wildlife cover in the western interior valleys of 
Oregon and Washington below 1500 ft in elevation 
(Darris and Flessner, 2001).  
 
Besides varieties and germplasm recommended for 
reclamation and restoration , there are least eight turf 
varieties of tufted hairgrass available in North 
America and Europe.  Among them include 
‘Barcampsia’, ‘Shade Champ’, ‘Spike’, and ‘SR 
6000’.  The species is also widely used in ornamental 
and landscape plantings because of its fine wispy 
seed heads, selected variation in flowering color or 
form, and winter persistent yellow, gold, or tan 
stems.  There are at least 20 registered and 
unregistered ornamental cultivars in the nursery 
trade.  
References  
Anderson, J. (per. com.) Owner, Hedgerow 
Farms. Winters, CA.   
Barkworth, M.E., L.K.  Anderton, K.M. Capels, 
S. Long, and M. B. Piep (editors). 2008. 
Manual of grasses for North America.  Utah 
State University Press. Logan, UT. 640 p.  
Bartow, A. (per. com.) Soil Conservationist.  Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Corvallis, OR  
Brilman,  L., and E. Watkins. 2003. Hairgrasses. 
Chapter 14. In M.D. Casler and R.R.

Duncan (editors) Turfgrass biology, 
genetics, and breeding. John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ. 367 p. 
Cronquist , A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., 
Reveal, J.L. and Holmgren, P.K. 19 77 
Intermountain Flora Vascular Plants of the 
Intermountain West, U.S.A. Volume Six. 
Columbia University Press. New York. 584 
p.  
Darris, D.C. 2000. The effect of nitrogen 
fertilization rates and timing on the seed 
yield of tufted hairgrass in western Orego n. 
Unpublished report.  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service.  Corvallis, 
Oregon. 2 p.   
Darris, D.C. and T.A. Flessner. 2001. Corvallis 
Plant Materials Center Annual Technical 
Report: 2000. USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Corvallis, OR.  203 p.  
Darris, D. and Gonzalves, P. 2009.  Plant Fact  
Sheet  - Tufted Hairgrass. USDA- NRCS 
Portland, OR . 2 p. 
Darris, D., Lambert, S. and Young III, W. 1995.   Seed Production of Tufted Hairgrass. 
USDA -NRCS. OR -TN16. Portland, OR.  4 
p.  
Darris, D. and M. Stannard. 1997. Effect of row 
spacing on seed yield of tufted hairgrass.  In: 
1996 Seed Production Research at Oregon 
State University. W.C. Young III, editor.  
Oregon State University Extension Service. 
Corvallis, Oregon. p. 74- 76. 
Davy, A.J. 1980. Biologica l flora of the British 
Isles No 149: Deschampsia caespitosa  (L.) 
Beauv.  Journal of Ecology  68, pp. 1075-
1096.  
Edminster, C. (per. com.). Owner. Pacific  Northwest Natives. Albany, Oregon.  
Gamroth, M.J. (per. com.) Extension Dairy 
Specialist. Oregon State Un iversity,   
Corvallis, OR.  
Hart, J., Mellby, M., Horneck, D., Gingrich, G.  Young III, W. and Silberstein, T. 2005. 
Fertilizer Guide  - Tall Fescue Grown for 
Seed (Western Oregon).  FG 36E.  Oregon 
State University Extension Service. 3 p.  
Hitchcock, C.L., A.  Cronquist, M. Ownbey, 
andJ.W. Thompson. 1969. Vascular plants 
of the Pacific Northwest. Part 1. University 
of Washington Press, Seattle and London. 
914 p.  
Hunt, P. and Wright, S. 2007.’Nortran’ Tufted  Hairgrass  – Uses: Revegetation, Ground 
cover, Forage T hroughout Alaska.  State of 
Alaska, Department of Natural Resources, 
Division of Agriculture, Plant Materials 
Center. 2 p.  
Kaye, T. 1997. Seed dormancy in high elevation  plants. In: T. Kaye et al. (editors), 
Conservation and Management of Native  Plants and
 Fungi. Proceedings from a 
Conference of the Native Plant Society of 
Oregon.  OSU Bookstore Printing, Corvallis, 
OR. 296 p.  
Krautzer, B., G. Peratoner, and F. Bozzo. 2004.  Site-specific grasses and herbs seed 
production and use for restoration of 
mountain  environments. Plant Production 
and Protection Series No. 32. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations.  FAO. Rome, Italy.  
Lawrence, M., no date.  Tufted Hairgrass.  Range  Plant Leaflet 52.  Oregon State University, 
Cooperative Extension Service.  2 p.  
Majerus, M. 2009.  Forage and Reclamation  Grasses of the Northern Great Plains and 
Rocky Mountains.  Valley Printers, Bridger, 
MT.  161 p.  
Ogle, D.G., St. John, L., Stannard, M. 2010.   Grass -Grasslike, Forb, Legume and Woody 
Species for the Intermountain West.  USDA -
NRCS.  ID -TN24.  Boise, ID.  
Oregon Seed Certification Service. 1998.  Certification standards tufted hairgrass 
(Deschampsia caespitosa) URL: 
http://www.oscs.orst.edu/standards/hairgrass
- tufted.standards.pdf  
Perryman, B.L. and Skinner,  Q.D. 2007. A Field 
Guide to Nevada Grasses. Indigenous Rangeland 
Management Press, Lander, Wyoming.  256 p.  
Peeters, A. 2000. Deschampsia caespitosa  L.  
[Online] Available at 
http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Gbas/dat
a/pf000432.htm  (accessed 8 December 2010).  
PLANTS Database.  Conservation plant  characteristics for Deschampsia caespitosa.   
[Online] Available at http://plants.usda.gov 
(accessed 7 December 2010).  
Sampson, A.W., A. Chase, and D.W. Hedrick. 
1951. California grasslands a nd range forage 
grasses. Bull. 724. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California College of Agriculture, 
California Agricultural Experiment  Station. 
125 p  
Smith, S.R. Jr. and S. Smith (editors). 1997.  Native grass seed production manual 
(including selected forbs).  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Ducks 
Unlimited Canada, Manitoba Forage Seed 
Association, and the University of 
Manitoba.  155 p.  
Tilley, D. 2010.  Propagation protocol for  production of container Deschampsia 
cespitosa  (L.) P. Beauv. plants (10 cubic 
inch conetainer); USDA NRCS –  Aberdeen 
Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. In: 
native Plant Network.  [Online] Available at 
http://www/nativeplantnetwork.org  
(accessed 8 December 2010.

Walsh, R.A. 1995.  Deschampsia cespitosa.  In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online].  
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fire Sciences Laboratory.  Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 
8 December 2010.  
 
Prepared By  
Loren St. John, T eam Leader, USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, 
NRCS, Boise, ID  
 
Steve Parr, Manager, Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Meeker, CO  
 
Dale Darris, Conservation Agronomist, USDA NRCS 
Plan t Materials Center, Corvallis, OR  
 
Citation 
St. John, L., D.G. Ogle, D. Darris, S. Parr.   2011 Plant Guide for 
Tufted Hairgrass (Deschampsia caespitosa ). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen, ID Plant 
Materials Center. 83210 -0296
 
Published  January, 2011 
 
Edited: ls14Dec2010; 11jan2011dgo; sp 21Dec2010; dd10Jan2011; ls 
11Jan2011; jab 11Jan2011  
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER