Plant Guide
WHITE PRAIRIE 
CLOVER   
Dalea candida  Michx. ex Willd.  
Plant Symbol = DACA7  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas  
   
Mike Haddock ,  Kansas Wildflowers  and Grasses,  KSU Library Website  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Slender white prairie clover  
and prairie clover  
Uses  
This leguminous forb produces palatable and nutritious  
forage  for all classes of livestock and is an impor tant 
browse species for antelope, deer and upland game birds, 
particularly sharp -tail grouse. This species will decrease 
and disappea r under persistent overgrazing.  It is an 
important legume in native grasslands because of its 
nitrogen fixing characteristi c. This native legume can be 
used as the forb component in reclamation of drastically 
disturbed lands, range renovation and prairie  restoration 
projects. It is also a potentially useful plant for roadside 
and rest area beautification, park plantings and 
re creational garden natural area plantings.   Native Americans used the plant for both medicinal 
purposes and as a food source. Their roots were chewed 
for their pleasant, sweet taste by many Indian tribes that 
lived on the prairie (Kindscher 1987). Kindscher (1987) 
also stated that the leaves were dried and used for mak
ing 
a hot beverage.  The pulverized root was boiled, and after 
the sediment settled, the liquid was consumed to prevent 
disease (Kindscher 1992).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and yo ur State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
The Legume family (Fabaceae). Dalea  is named in honor 
of Samuel Dale , an English botanist (1 659- 173 9), and 
candida  refers to the flower color meaning “of dazzling 
white” (Kindscher 1992).  White prairie clover is a 
perennial, warm season, herbaceous, native legume 
common in the Great Plains (Stubbendieck and Conard 
1989).  Stems, one to several, arise from a thick taproot or 
superficial or subterranean caudex. Stems are herbaceous 
and are simple with a few upright branches near the top 
and are ribbed or ridged longitudinally  and glabrous  (60 
to 90 cm) . Leaves have an alternat e arrangement on the 
stem and are odd- pinnately compound  and 2 to 6 cm long. 
Each compound leaf has 5 to 9 leaflets (commonly 7) 
which are 1 to 3 cm long and 2 to 6 mm wide. Leaflet  
shape is narrowly oblanceolate  to narrowly elliptic with a 
sharp tip. Leaflets are glandular dotted on their lower 
sur face and folded along the midrib . The inflorescence is 
a terminal spike that is cylindrical in shape  (1 to 5 cm)  
and  lax to  densely flowered.  The white flower petals are 
atypical of legume family, having one stan dard and four 
narrow petal -like bodies joined with the five stamen bases 
to form the calyx tube.  Flowering occurs from early to 
mid June and into August. The first flowers to open are at 
the bottom of the spike and proceed upward as the season 
progresses.  The fruit is a legume 2.5 to 4.5 mm long, 
glandular and contains one brown, smooth seed that is 1.5 
to 2 mm long and kidney shaped.  Chromosome number is  
2n=14.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  According to the Flora of the Great Plains (GP) white 
prairie clover has two varieties  in the GP (Barkley 1986). 
The var.  candida  occurs in the eastern half of the GP, 
infrequent in the west. It is located in southeast 
Saskatchewan , southern Manitoba, southern Ontario, 
south to Wisconsin, Illinois, Tennessee, eastern half of 
Kansas and Texas . The var. oligophylla  occurs in the