Plant Guide
PURPLE PRAIRIE 
CLOVER  
Dalea purpurea  Vent.  
Plant Symbol = DAPU5  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas  
  
R. Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: violet prairie clover, red 
tassel flower, thimbleweed, and wanahcha (Lakota)  
Uses  
This leguminous forb produces excellent forage for 
livestock and wildlife. It is high in protein and highly 
palatable, although it may cause bloat. (Stubbedieck and 
Conard 1989) This species will decrease and disappear 
under persistent overgrazing. It is an important legume in 
native grasslands because of nitrogen fixation. Purple 
prairie clover is used i n seed mixtures for re-vegetation 
and prairie restoration. It is a potentially useful plant for 
roadside and rest area beautification, park plantings and 
recreational garden natural area plantings. This species is 
also used in mixtures on dam face structur es and critical 
area plantings. Native Americans ate fresh and boiled  
leaves of purple prairie clover. Bruised leaves were  steeped in water and applied to fresh, open wounds. 
Ponca Indians chewed the roots for their pleasant flavor 
and made tea from the leaves. Pawnee Indians used the 
bundled stems to make brooms. (Stubbendieck et al. 
1989).
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
  General : The Legume family (Fabaceae). Purple prairie 
clover is a native, warm season, herbaceous, perennial, 
leguminous forb. The plant has an erect type growth habit 
that typically grows to a height of  
30 to 90 cm. It can be identified by its alternate, pinnately 
compound leaves and multiple stems which arise annually 
from a woody caudex. The inflorescence is a terminal 
spike (2 -4 cm), numerous, many -flow ered and cylindrical 
in shape. The flower petals which are rose- purple with 
projecting gold -orange anthers are small and simple 
compared to many pea shaped flowers of typical legumes. 
The calyx is densely villous. Flower petals are 6 mm long, 
4 of the peta ls and the five stamens are joined near the 
calyx tip and the banner petal is separate. The first 
flowers to bloom are located at the bottom of the spike 
and the circle of flowers moves upward along the spike as 
new buds open and old flowers fade. Pollinat ion is 
accomplished by a host of native insects ranging from 
bumblebees to beetles (Art, 1991). The fruit is a one 
seeded legume pod enclosed by the persistent calyx which 
is 2 -2.5 mm long. The legume seed is yellowish -green to 
brown and is 1.5- 2.0 mm long and punctuate. Purple 
prairie clover flowers the last of May to September in the 
central Great Plains. It flowers some what later (July -
August) in the northern Great Plains. This plant is deep 
rooted with a 2.0 meter tap root. It also has three to seven 
l ateral roots within the upper 30 cm of tap root which 
extend horizontally up to 45 cm before turning downward 
(Weaver, 1954).   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. Purple pr airie clover ranges from Indiana to 
Saskatchewan and Montana, south to Tennessee, 
Arkansas, Texas and New Mexico. It is also found in 
Alabama and has been introduced east into New York 
State.   
 
Habitat :  Purple prairie clover occurs in prairies, rocky 
open  glades, along railroad tracks, and rocky or open 
woods.