Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA OATGRASS  
Danthonia californica  
Bolander  
Plant Symbol = DACA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Oregon PMC 
 
Alternate Names  
Another common name is California danthonia.  
Synonyms include Danthonia americana  and four 
botanical varieties of  Danthonia californica:  var. 
americana , var. californica, var.  palousensis, and 
var.  piperi . 
 
Uses 
Restoration and wildlife habitat:  California oatgrass 
is an important native constituent of drier upland and 
moist lowland prairies as well as open woodlands.  
Therefore, it is co mmonly recommended for  revegetation, wildlife plantings, and restoration of 
oak savannas, transitional wetlands, and grasslands, 
especially in the Pacific Coast states where it is most 
common. 
 
Native bunchgrasses like California oatgrass are 
valuable for enhancing biodiversity.  Healthy stands 
can reduce invasion by exotic species yet exhibit a 
spatial distribution compatible with forbs (Maslovat 
2001).  Combined with other native grasses and 
forbs, California oatgrass improves habitat diversity 
for feeding, nesting, and hiding by songbirds (Oregon 
Department of Fish and Wildlife 2000), as well as 
other animals.  The grains are eaten by small birds 
and mammals (Mohlenbrock 1992).  Prairies with 
California oatgrass as a definitive species are also 
unique refuges for other endemic organisms.  For 
example, the Ohlone tiger beetle (
Cicindela ohlone) 
is an endangered (federally  listed) predatory insect 
known only to five remnant stands of California 
native grassland in Santa Cruz County (Santa Cruz 
Public Libraries 2003). These rare grasslands, 
including the coastal terrace prairies, remain 
biodiversity “hotspots” and are considered in need of 
protection (Stromberg et al. 2001).   
 
Forage :  As a rangeland plant, California oatgrass is 
well utilized by livestock and certain wildlife.  Prior 
to maturity, the species is rated as good to very good 
forage for cattle and horses in the Pacific Coast 
states, but less palatable for sheep and goats.  Ratings 
are lower for eastern, drier portions of its natural 
range (USDA Forest Service  1988).  Others claim it 
is palatable to all classes of livestock and a mainstay 
grass for range grazing in places like Humboldt 
County, California (Cooper 1960).  California 
oatgrass withstands heavy grazing (USDA Forest 
Service 1988, Cooper 1960).  However, it is also 
reported that animals  seek out and overgraze 
individual plants sometimes leading to rapid stand 
depletion (Crampton 1974).  This species can provide 
green forage year round in some areas.  Under 
moderate grazing it stools  readily, forms a “sod” (ie. 
the bunches coalesce), and can produce a substantial 
volume of high quality forage.  Less desirable species 
diminish as the sod forms.  Higher nutritional content 
and grazing preference make California oatgrass 
desirable in a management system over soft chess 
( Bromus mollis ) (Heady et al. 1963).  Protein analysis 
is high at 8 to 26 percent; the low point coming in 
January after the herbage has been leached by 
precipitation (Cooper 1960).  This species has formed

stands dense enough for haying in California (USDA 
Forest Service 1988).  
  
Pollinators:  California oatgrass is used as food by 
the caterpillar larva of certain butterflies including 
two skippers ( Hesperia lindseyi  and Hesperia 
columbia
) (Robinson et al. 2007).  It is an important 
component of native grasslands that form critical 
habitat for other butterflies including the vulnerable 
Vancouver ringlet ( Choenonymphya tullia insulana ), 
Taylor’s checkerspot ( Euphydryas editha taylori ) 
(Chappell 2006), and the endangered Fender’s blue 
butterfly ( Icaricia icarioides fenderi ) (Collins 2006). 
 
Cover and turf :  Other potential uses include cover 
and erosion control in vineyards, young orchards 
(Edminster 2003), grassy lanes, and parks, as well as 
along trails.  As a candidate for native lawn, this 
species can be planted and mowed to maintain a turf-
like stand in landscape settings or elsewhere 
(Wrysinski 2004, Daniels 2007, Amme 2003).  
California oatgrass persists along compacted hiking 
trails and takes heavy foot traffic, trampling, and 
moderate summer moisture stress.  It also has 
potential as a stay-green firebreak (Edminster 2003, 
Fire Safe Council 2007).  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
California oatgrass (family: Poaceae) is a slow 
establishing yet long lived, cool season (C
3) perennial 
bunchgrass of intermediate texture.  Its stems (culms) 
grow 30-100 (10-130) cm tall and disarticulate 
(separate) at the lower nodes (joints).  The leaf 
sheaths are smooth to densely hairy.  Leaves are both 
basal and attached to the stem with the upper blades 
being 8-25 (10-30) cm long, flat to in-rolled, and 
spreading to abruptly bent.  The ligule (at the throat 
of the leaf blade) is less than 1 mm and fringed with 
small straight hairs. Additionally, 1-3 mm long, soft 
spreading hairs appear at  the leaf collar and throat 
(photo).   Flowering occurs in May or June 
depending on location.  The  panicle (inflorescence) is 
2-6 cm long, loose, and open with 1-5 (3-6) broadly 
spreading spikelets.  Glumes are 14-18 mm long.  
There are 3-8 (5-10) floret s (flowers) per spikelet 
(see photo).  Lemmas are 5-10 (8-15) mm long, hairy 
along the margins with stiff awned teeth and an 
abruptly bent awn that is (4) 8-12 mm long 
(Darbyshire 2003, Hickman 1993, Hitchcock et al. 
1969, Klinkenberg 2007).   
 
California oatgrass 
Reprinted with permission, Un iversity of Washington Press 
 
 
Leaf blades often bend at a broa d angle from the stem and hairs 
fringe or replace the ligule (var.  californica). .Additional tufts of 
hairs appear at the leaf collar.   Photo by Steve Matson used with 
permission. 
 
Flowering and seed formation:   California oatgrass 
produces seed from both open flowers that allow for 
cross-pollination and closed flowers that have 
obligate self-pollination.  Its open pollinated flowers 
are referred to as chasmogamous and the seed they 
produce are chasmogenes (chasmogamic seed).

Closed pollinated flowers are cleistogamous and the 
seed they produce are cleistogenes (cleistogamic 
seed).  The chasmogamous seed is produced in the 
exposed panicle and is sometimes referred to as 
terminal seed.  In contrast, the cleistogamous seed is 
primarily found at the lower nodes of the flowering 
culm and typically remains enclosed in the leaf 
sheaths (Dobrenz and Beetle 1966, Campbell et al. 
1983).   
 
 Spikelets are flattened with 5-10  flowers (florets) each.  Photo by 
Steve Matson used with permission.   
 
There are differences between chasmogamic and 
cleistogamic seed production.  Sometimes referred to 
as hidden seed, cleistogenes are typically shorter or 
longer (narrower) and larger than seed from the 
inflorescence and some lack a developed lemma and 
palea (Dobrenz and Beetle1966).  Most commonly, 
there are 3-4 spikelets per flowering culm and 5-6 
florets per spikelet.  However, a single lower node 
can bear 6-7 cleistogenes and there can be 5-6 such 
nodes per culm.  Therefore, more hidden seed can be 
produced than terminal seed.  Production of 
cleistogenes increases under grazing pressure 
(Dobrenz and Beetle 1966). 
 
Seed coat characteristics may also differ between the 
two seed types as evidenced by contrasting 
germination responses to acid scarification reported 
by Laude (1949).  Bruns (2005) found that seed set 
was lower in chasmogamous spikelets compared to 
cleistogamous spikelets and more maternal 
reproductive effort was put into cleistogamous seed 
production.  However, chasmogamous seed had 
higher and quicker germination rates, as well as a 
higher rate of early seedling growth compared to 
cleistogamous progeny.  In contrast, Weatherwax 
(1928) states there are no co nsistent differences in the 
two types of caryopses (naked seeds) and that both 
types germinate alike and seedling plants are alike in 
appearance and vigor through flowering.   
  By July or August after the panicle has matured and 
some of the terminal seed has shattered (fallen from 
the plant), the remaining culm will disarticulate 
(separate) at the basal n
ode (Darris pers. obs.).  
Dispersal of remaining cleistogenes is probably aided 
by this process (Dobrenz and Beetle 1966).  The dry 
stems with enclosed seed  may wrap around the feet 
or limbs of passing animals (Darris pers. obs.).        
 
Similar species :  California oatgrass can be confused 
with timber oatgrass ( Danthonia intermedia ) which 
has a shorter stature, more erect, compact panicle 
branches, glumes that are longer than the flowers 
which are rarely visible, and hairless leaf sheaths. 
The panicles of poverty oatgrass ( Danthonia spicata) 
and one-spike oatgrass ( Danthonia unispicata) are 
also much narrower and therefore more spike-like, 
the latter having a single sp ikelet in the inflorescence 
(Stewart and Hebda 2000).  The lemmas of California 
oatgrass are smooth along the back with hairs only at 
the margins while the lemmas of poverty oatgrass 
have hairs at both positions (Kozloff 2005). 
 
Distribution :  California oatgrass occurs naturally 
from British Columbia to southern California, east to 
Montana and Saskatchewan and south through the 
Rocky Mountains to New Me xico and Arizona.  A 
form is also found in Chile (Hitchcock et al. 1969).  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation 
General:  California oatgrass has relatively broad 
adaptation and is considered a stress-tolerator.  It 
occurs on a wide array of soil types from excessively 
drained sandy loams to less permeable silts and clays 
and from relatively infertile sites to rich bottomland.  
While the species occurs on more xeric sites such as 
sunny south and west slopes, adequate subsurface 
moisture or winter rains in milder climates are 
common themes.  In California, arid sites do not 
support it; including the inner foothills of the Coast 
Range and Sierra Nevada foothills (Crampton 1974).  
Elevation range for the species is 0-2200 m (7200 ft) 
(Hickman 1993).  Annual precipitation varies from 
43 to 200 cm (17 to 79 in) in its natural range of 
habitats for the West Coast states.    
 
California oatgrass is also found on serpentine soils 
of Oregon and California, suggesting that at least 
some populations or races ar e especially tolerant to 
drought, calcium and other key nutrient deficiencies, 
high magnesium, and high levels of certain heavy 
metals such as nickel.  Serpentine soils are often 
shallow and rocky with low levels of silts and clays

(Brady et al. 2005).  Based on soil types and site 
descriptions, California oatgrass appears to be 
adapted to moderately acid to alkaline soils 
(estimated pH 5.5-8).   
 
Depending on region, the species is classified as a 
facultative upland, facultative, and facultative 
wetland plant.  Fertility requirement is considered 
low as is salinity tolerance (USDA NRCS 2007). 
However, its common occurrence on coastal prairies 
and bluffs suggests some local resistance to salt 
spray.  California oatgrass is rated low for drought 
resistance (8 on a scale of 1-10), relatively high for 
fire resistance (3), low for shade tolerance (8), high 
for wildlife value (2), and relatively low for deer 
resistance (7) (Fire Safe Council 2007).  In contrast, 
others rate drought tolerance as medium or moderate 
(USDA NRCS 2007, Wrysinski 2004) and the 
species is known to inhabit sites that are very dry in 
summer.   Klinkenberg (2007) reports a soil moisture 
regime of 2.1 [0=xeric, 4=mesic, 8=hydric].  
Maslovat (2002) describes California oatgrass as 
having high tolerance to fire along with other 
characteristics making it a good candidate for 
disturbance prone ecosystems.    
 
Habitat and plant communities : California oatgrass is 
a minor to dominant constituent of numerous 
woodland, shrubland, grassland, and transitional 
wetland habitats, particularly in the Pacific Coast 
States.  Included among  the woodland sites are 
several Garry oak ( Quercus garryana) communities 
in California, Oregon, Washington, and southwestern 
British Columbia (Franklin  and Dyrness 1973).  This 
species is also an understory grass in certain 
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta ) communities in the 
interior Northwest as well as Jeffrey pine ( Pinus 
jeffreyi ) grass woodlands on serpentine soils of the 
Siskiyou Mountains region (Northwest Habitat 
Institute 2008, Franklin and Dyrness 1973). 
 
California oatgrass is prominent within a number of 
primarily graminoid communities.  Significant 
populations occur west of the Cascades in Oregon 
and Washington on prairie and oak savanna habitat. 
Most of the annual precipitation is from 43-140 cm 
(17-55 in) (Wildlife Habitat Institute 2008).  In the 
eastern foothills of the Oregon Coast Range where 
winters are cool and relativ ely moist but summers hot 
and droughty, the  Danthonia californica  Valley 
association occupies xeric, rocky, south and west 
facing slopes.  The species  represents up to 70 
percent of the cover on these sites (NatureServe 
2008).  California oatgrass is also a dominant, co-
dominant, or frequent component in grassy bald 
associations such as  Danthonia californica- Eriophyllum lanatum 
and Festuca roemeri-Plectritis 
congesta.   One or both of these associations  occur in 
patches from the Georgia Basin of Southwest British 
Columbia south through the San Juan Islands, Puget 
Sound, western Columbia Gorge, and the Willamette 
Valley of Oregon.  These sites are seasonally moist to 
very dry with shallow soils, rock outcrops, and 
moderate to steep slopes with southern to western 
exposures and an annual pr ecipitation range of 74 to 
185 cm (29 to73 in).  California oatgrass is part of the 
sole remaining native-dominated prairie community 
of the south Puget Sound:  the  Festuca roemeri-
Sericocarpus rigidus  association.  The habitat is 
moderately dry with relatively rich, deep, excessively 
drained, gravelly sandy loam soils (Chappell 2006). 
 
In maritime regions along the northern California 
Coast and into Oregon, winters are mild and wet and 
summers cool and dry.  Here California oatgrass is a 
dominant, often signature plant of the coastal 
grasslands including three associations:  Danthonia 
californica-Festuca rubra, Danthonia californica-
Aira caryophyllea,  and Deschampsia caespitosa-
Danthonia californica  (coastal).  The extent of all 
these West Coast herbaceous communities was 
probably much greater prior  to fire suppression, land 
use conversions, exotic weed invasion, and brush 
encroachment (NatureServe  2008).  In this same area 
are California coastal scru b communities containing 
California oatgrass including the  Baccharis pilularis-
Danthonia californica  association (NatureServe 
2008).  The species is also found in Ceonothus-
Manzanita ( Arctostaphylos spp.)  shrublands or 
chaparral that extend from southwest Oregon 
throughout much of California. 
 In this region the 
climate is typically very warm and relatively dry with 
about 43 to 76 cm (17 to 30 in) of annual 
precipitation.  Soils are generally shallow over 
bedrock or are formed from coarse alluvial deposits 
and some are serpentine (Wildlife Habitat Institute 
2008). 
 
California oatgrass also occupies transitional 
wetlands in western Oregon and western Washington.  
The  Deschampsia caespitosa-Danthonia californica  
association is  found in nutrient rich wetlands and flat 
bottomlands that are temporarily to seasonally 
flooded.
  Dry, hot summers and mild, wet winters are 
the norm.  This and similar communities were 
historically maintained by frequent burning.  Soils 
are usually fine textured silts and clays, moderately 
permeable to impermeable, with a high winter and 
spring water table (NatureS erve 2008).  An example 
of this community is French Flat in Josephine 
County, Oregon, where tufted hairgrass 
( Deschampsia caespitosa ) dominates the seasonally

hydric soils while California oatgrass dominates the 
mesic sites (Mousseaux 2004). 
 
Establishment 
Establishment of California oatgrass from seed can 
be problematic as the result of delayed germination 
and variable seed dormancy, as well as moderately 
slow seedling development combined with early 
competition from other species.  Difficulties with 
reseeding Danthonia  species were reported in the 
early to mid 1900’s when interest grew in 
reintroducing native perennial grasses on depleted or 
weedy grazing lands in California (Laude 1949). 
 
Seed dormancy and germination:  Evidence suggests 
the variable seed dormancy in California oatgrass is 
the result of either single or double (combined) 
dormancy.  The dormancy ma y be variants of seed 
coat imposed dormancy, ph ysiological (embryo) or 
both.  Moreover, the amount and possibly the type of 
dormancy can vary among populations of California 
oatgrass (Trask and Pyke 1998).  It may also depend 
on crop year or seed lot (Laude 1949) within the 
same population because c limatic conditions during 
seed development can infl uence the expression of 
seed dormancy.  Furthermore,  the length of time and 
conditions during storage may affect seed dormancy 
of grasses like California oatgrass by influencing 
after ripening (Simpson 1990).  Amme (2008) reports 
that fresh seed or seed that is sown and watered 
immediately after collection  can germinate readily at 
a high percentage.  In contrast, germination is 
delayed after a period storage, suggesting that 
dormancy can deepen over time. 
 
Field observations indicate dormancy will also vary 
among seeds within the same seed lot of California 
oatgrass.  In some years at Corvallis, Oregon, both 
fall seeding of fields and fall sowing of containers 
resulted in a portion of seedlings emerging within 
three weeks, while additi onal seedlings emerged as 
early as March in each of the following two springs 
(Darris per. obs.).  Others  report more continuous but 
prolonged germination and emergence periods.  
Some variability in the dormancy and germination in 
mechanically harvested lots may be due in part to 
aggressive seed combining and conditioning/cleaning 
processes.  In these instances some dehulling (ie. 
hulling or separating the caryopsis or kernel from the 
lemma and palea), may occur and the seed coat 
(pericarp) is inadvertently scarified or nicked on 
some seeds and not others.  
 
Given the variable dormancy in California oatgrass 
seed, many methods have been used for improving 
germination with varying success.  No treatment may  be needed (Emery 1988, Dyer 2001) and direct 
sowing with untreated dry seed resulted in 60% 
germination in 21 days for Young (2001).  
Mechanical abrasion or “i
njury” with coarse sand 
paper or brush machines in the process of dehulling, 
acid scarification, or puncturing of the seed coat 
alone have improved germination by reducing seed 
coat imposed dormancy.  However, mechanical 
scarification can be difficult to achieve without 
unwanted damage to the seed.  In a study done by the 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center (PMC) (unpublished 
data) germination was greatly reduced by using a 
huller-scarifier (brush machine) to dehull and 
simultaneously scarify seed alone or in combination 
with prechilling (cold moist stratification) treatments.  
The mechanical procedure was far too aggressive and 
caused excessive damage to the seed and therefore 
significantly lower germination.  This supports Laude 
(1949) who indicated mech anical scarification to 
weaken the seed coat did not appear feasible due to 
the protruding embryo being in an exposed position 
resulting in embryo injury.  
 
An alternative physical means of scarification may be 
the use of an oat huller to condition the seed.  It 
appears to dehull more gently and reduce breakage to 
the ends of the seed comp ared to a huller-scarifier 
(Darris pers. obs.).  Further testing is needed to 
confirm if this machine can simultaneously dehull 
and effectively scarify the  seed coat to get good 
germination without resorting to acid treatment.  
 
In one greenhouse study, inflorescence (terminal) 
seed treated for 15 minutes  with concentrated sulfuric 
acid (sp. gr. 1.84) as a means of scarification resulted 
in faster and higher seedling emergence for all 16 
populations after 4 weeks, and for all but 4 
populations after 16 weeks (Laude 1949).  The acid 
both dehulled the seed and etched the seed coat.  
However, 15 minutes seemed too severe for 
cleistogenes.  For terminal seed,  15 minutes of acid 
treatment gave the best results in the field (8-20% 
seedling emergence), 30 to 45 minutes gave the best 
results in a germinator (81% germination), and 20 
minutes resulted in the hi ghest emergence (19-27%) 
in a greenhouse.  In contrast, 5 to 10 minutes gave the 
best results for cleistogenes in the field (4% 
emergence) and greenhouse (10% emergence), while 
10 to 15 minute treatments were best in the 
germinator (71-81% germin ation).  In all cases, 
performance declined fo r acid treatments beyond 
these time frames.  This work underscores the fact 
that different results can occur between controlled 
environments and field conditions and between the 
two seed types of California oatgrass.  It also 
demonstrates the importance of recommending the

best treatments found in field tests for field use 
(Laude 1949).   
 
It would appear dormancy reduction in these trials 
was primarily the result of injury to or weakening of 
the seed coat and not dehulling (Laude 1949).  
Glumes or the seed covering formed by lemma and 
palea (the seed “hull”) can create seed dormancy in 
grasses (Simpson 1990) apart from the coat itself.  
However, whether in a germinator, greenhouse, or 
field and regardless of seed type, both untreated seed 
with lemma and palea intact and dehulled seed barely 
germinated while dehulled se ed nicked with a scalpel 
showed a substantial improvement in percent 
germination and emergence.  The author considers 
nicking the seed and acid treatment to be akin for the 
necessary purpose of weakening the seed coat.  
 
The seed coat imposed dormancy in California 
oatgrass may or may not be a form of physical 
dormancy (seed coat constraint on moisture 
imbibition). Laude (1949) found that dehulled but 
unscarified seed and acid scarified seed both 
adsorbed moisture similarly.  As a result, the author 
suggests the dormancy is caused by restricted gas 
exchange or mechanical  constraints and not the 
prevention of moisture uptake.   However, based on 
structural characteristics of  grass seed coats, Simpson 
(1990) argues that rate  or specific location of 
moisture uptake by the seed rather than gas exchange 
can be explanations.  This suggests the possibility of 
California oatgrass seed possessing a variant of 
“physical” dormancy but further investigation is 
needed.    
 
For reducing physiological dormancy, a solution of 
potassium nitrate (KNO
3) or moist prechilling (cold 
moist stratification) alone have improved 
germination, as has giberellic acid (GA
3) in 
combination with seed scarification, KNO
3 plus 
scarification, or prechilling.  Improvement with a 
combination of chemical  and physical treatments 
supports the notion that California oatgrass can have 
complex or combined do rmancy.  Dobrenz and 
Beetle (1966) found that  for both chasmogamic and 
cleistogamic seed, germination was similar and did 
not occur without blotters being soaked with KNO
3.  
Results were 0% germination for controls and 10% 
germination using a solution of 0.2 % KNO
3.  In a 
study with four populations having 0 to 91% initial 
dormancy, a combination of seed scarification (by 
dehulling and rubbing seeds/caryopses between 
course sandpaper) and GA
3 (300 ppm or 0.03%) 
improved cumulative germination to over 80% in all 
but one seed lot, while breaking over 90% of the 
dormancy.  KNO
3 only enhanced germination in  combination with scarification and GA
3 (Task and 
Pyke 1998).  In a pilot study to enhance germination 
Trask (1996) found GA
3 (400 ppm) alone to be the 
most successful treatment re gardless of whether the 
seed was scarified or not.   A combination of light, a 
20/25°C (68/77°F) night/day temperature regime, and 
seven week prechill is suggested by Chirco and 
Turner (1986-2007).  Unpublished work by the 
Corvallis PMC on two populations of California 
oatgrass demonstrated that moist prechilling of both 
inflorescence seed and cleist ogenes at 5°C (39°F) for 
45 to 90 days was effective in significantly 
improving germination as recorded for the first 28 
days in a germinator.   
 
Other practitioners indicate improved germination 
with 30 days of moist prechilling at 3-4°C (37-39°F) 
in combination with manual removal of the hull 
(Keeley 2000), 12 to 13 weeks of cold moist 
stratification alone, or simple fall sowing  (Boyer 
2007a).  From personal communication with Jebb 
(1995), Rose et al. (1998) report California oatgrass 
does better with a one to three day soak in running 
water followed by three months of cold moist 
stratification at 1-5°C (34-41°F).  Guerrant and 
Raven (1995) achieved good germination with cold 
stratification at 5°C (41°F) for six weeks followed by 
warm stratification for six weeks using 16 hour days 
at 20°C (68°F) and 8 hour nights at 10°C (50°F).   
Knapp and Rice (1994) found seed viability and 
germination varied among populations.  They had 
“high” germination rates by squeezing the caryopsis 
out from the glumes and lemmas, pre-treating with 
400 ppm GA
3, and cold moist stratifying for 2-3 
weeks at 4°C (39°F).   In su ccessful field applications 
using fall sown seed, it may not be clear whether 
germination was enhanced by cold moist 
stratification over winter, or weakening of the seed 
coat by soil influences, or both.  
 
Finally, Maslovat (2001) reported that California 
oatgrass required light to  germinate and associates 
this trait with natural regeneration after disturbance.  
However, for the Corvallis PMC some seed 
germinated in the dark, suggesting light may not 
always be necessary.    
 
Summary : California oatgrass seed can be 
nondormant, for example wh en “fresh”, or commonly 
possess one or more types of dormancy that need to 
be overcome for germination to occur.  The kind or 
amount of treatment(s) required, if any, may be 
specific to population, crop year, seed lot, seed type, 
storage conditions, or age of seed.  The Association 
of Official Seed Analysts  (AOSA) has not set official 
rules for testing the germination of California

oatgrass.  Nevertheless, for many seed lots the most 
practical method to improve germination without 
resorting to chemical enhancements is cold moist 
stratification.  This can be done by fall seeding or 
moist prechilling in a controlled environment for 21-
120 days.  For other seed lots, dehulling/scarification 
of the seed will greatly improve germination if the 
seed coat can be scratched, nicked, or eroded without 
undue injury to the embryo.  Manual methods to 
remove the caryopsis from the hull (squeezing out the 
caryopsis, rolling seed between rubber mats) along 
with the use of sandpaper or scalpels to weaken the 
surface are not practical on a large scale.  A 
mechanical means is needed  for large seed lots but a 
brush machine appears to be too aggressive. Gentler 
mechanical means of dehulling and scarifying, such 
as the use of an oat huller, needs further evaluation.  
Acid scarification requires  special safety precautions 
but merits consideration.  Finally, in some cases a 
combination of both stratification and scarification 
may prove to be the most effective way of reducing 
dormancy. 
 
Natural establishment :  Maslovat (2001) examined 
and described factors influencing natural and assisted 
establishment of California oatgrass in Garry oak 
ecosystems of Southwest British Columbia. 
Characteristics of this grass  suggest it is an important 
colonizer following disturbances such as fire. While a 
modest seed producer, its seed dormancy and need 
for light to germinate help create a persistent seed 
bank (Maslovat 2001). The seed often remains viable 
in the ground for years.   Stands can be resurrected 
from this latent seed by mowing or other disturbances 
(Amme 2003).   
 
Seedling recruitment appears aided by retention of 
shallow litter or moss and variable microtopography, 
especially minor depressions and grooves that favor 
higher moisture storage.  Deeper litter, often 
exacerbated by long term fi re suppression, may act as 
an impediment to root penetration and seedling 
emergence. However, raking of the soil to completely 
remove litter and clippings can reduce seed 
germination and establishment on some sites 
(Maslovat 2001).  
 
The awns found on unprocessed seeds of California 
oatgrass presumably improve dispersal by attaching 
to passing animals.  In addition, the same awns are 
hygroscopic (bend and straighten with wetting and 
drying), a trait implicated in natural seed burial.  
They may also assist in se ed migration and selection 
of more favorable microsites (Maslovat 2001).   
  Site preparation:  Keys to establishing California 
oatgrass for revegetation and other goals are preplant 
weed control and proper seedbed preparation.  
Starting situations can vary greatly, calling for site 
specific strategies.  Among the most difficult cases 
are abandoned fields and other areas dominated by 
exotic weeds that have an extensive weed seed bank 
built up in the soil.  One option for site preparation is 
to fallow the area for one to 
three years with repeated 
tillage operations following each flush of new weeds 
in order to reduce the weed seed bank prior to 
sowing.  A nonselective herbicide (usually 
glyphosate) can be used in combination with the 
tillage (Darris 2003, Campbell 2004, Stromberg et al. 
2002, Stromberg and Kephart 2003). Others suggest 
the weed seeds are usually too numerous and better 
addressed with minimal soil disturbance and two 
years of herbicide application followed by planting 
with a no-till drill (Boyer 2007b). 
 
In restoring oak savanna or other grassland habitats, 
plowing or other major tillage operations are not 
recommended next to existing desirable native trees 
and shrubs, on sites that already have some native 
plant diversity or rare plants, or before ground 
nesting birds have completed their nesting cycle 
(Campbell 2004).  In order to preserve native 
perennial grasses already on  site, herbicides are a 
poor choice where weedy annual grasses are a 
problem because (except for fine fescues) the 
chemicals used to control  one group also control the 
other (McClaran 1981).  Such sites or inclusions are 
better candidates for interseeding, no-till drilling, or 
transplanting. 
 
Besides tillage and herbicides, other site preparation 
methods include burning, grazing, mowing, soil 
solarization or combinations thereof (Campbell 2004, 
Rodgers 1981, Kephart and Amme 1992).  Where 
permitted, burning can be a good choice for site 
preparation depending on existing conditions 
(Campbell 2004, Rogers 1981).    
 
Seed testing : Given the potential for highly variable 
seed dormancy, it is stro ngly recommended that all 
seed lots of California oatgrass be given a TZ 
(tetrazolium chloride) test to determine total viability 
along with a germination test before purchasing and 
planting.  The difference between the two tests will 
give an estimate of the percent dormant seed.  If 
dormancy is low, special st ratification or scarification 
treatments are unnecessary.  If dormancy is high, 
pure live seeding rate calculations need to be based 
on total seed viability and not percent germination.

Direct seeding:  Direct sowing of California oatgrass 
in the Pacific Northwest USA is usually best in late 
summer or fall (August-October) to naturally stratify 
the seed over winter (Maslovat 2001), assuming high 
dormancy in the seed lot.  However, seeding date 
may be extended into the  early winter (November) if 
site conditions have low risk  of disturbance after 
seeding and the time outdoors remains long enough 
for natural stratification to occur (cool moist 
conditions may be required for up to 4 months).  
Emergence in milder winter growing climes typically 
occurs in late February and March (Boyer 2007b).  
Late winter or spring sowing with dormant seed can 
also result in germination the following March 
(Maslovat 2001), but seed losses from predation, 
erosion, weed competition, natural mortality, or other 
factors are potentially greater due to the lengthier 
period of inactivity.  Spring planting may work 
equally well in some regions if seed is primarily 
nondormant or cold moist stratified or scarified in 
advance. 
 
On occasion, de-awing of California oatgrass seed 
may be needed to facilitate movement through certain 
seeding machinery.  However, Maslovat (2001) 
describes the ecological importance of the awn and 
states “restoration of this species will only be 
successful if the disaspores [seeds] remain awned”.  
Despite this pronouncement, germination of some 
seed lots benefit from dehulling/scarifying and 
substantial awn removal cannot be prevented during 
mechanical or acid conditioning.  
 
The most successful stands of California oatgrass are 
usually achieved by drilling, no-till drilling, or 
broadcasting the seed alone ra ther than in a mix. As 
with natural establishment, very shallow soil 
coverage (0.6 cm or 0.25 in or less) is critical because 
of the light requirement.  Broadcast seeding may 
additionally benefit from irregular surfaces.  Mixing 
the species with nondormant  seed of fast establishing 
grasses or forbs, native or  otherwise, can lead to poor 
establishment because quicker germinating species 
will occupy the space first.  To achieve a more 
natural appearance in prairie restoration, California 
oatgrass can be sown alone in irregular patches 
within more favorable soil inclusions then 
surrounded by a variety of higher diversity plantings.  
This is similar to the mosaic seeding approach 
described by Campbell (2004).  Plant diversity can 
also be achieved afterwards by over seeding new 
stands the following spring or fall with forbs and/or 
other native grasses that have nondormant seed.  
Some restoration practitioners suggest seeding forbs 
a year before the grasses for improved species 
richness, as native forbs are more able to establish  without grass competition (Clark and Wilson 2005).  
However, California oatgrass may be an exception 
and could be sown with fo
rbs because of its seed 
dormancy. 
 
For California oatgrass to be sown in a mixture, the 
most viable options may be (1) combining it with 
species that have similar  seed dormancy, (2) using it 
with low rates of a less competitive, more diminutive 
species or short-lived plants useful for winter cover, 
or (3) both.  Species for th e first option could include 
Columbia needlegrass ( Achnatherum nelsonii
) or 
Lemmon’s needlegrass ( Achnatherum lemmonii
).  
Choices for the second option include slender 
hairgrass ( Deschampsia elongata ) (Boyer 2007b, 
Darris 2003) which only lives 1 to 3 years, or better 
yet, annual hairgrass  (Deschampsia danthonioides ).  
However, both native hairgr asses establish readily 
when fall sown and should be limited to 0.5 kg/ha 
(~1/2 lb/ac) in a mix with California oatgrass.  They 
are also prolific re-seeders.    
 
It is reported that California oatgrass has anywhere 
from 198,000 to 363,000 seeds/kg (90,000-165,000 
seeds/lb) (Wrysinski 2004, Heritage Seedlings 2007, 
Darris and Lambert 2000, Guerrant and Raven 1995). 
The number probably depends on the degree of 
physical seed conditioning, genetics, and growing 
conditions at the time of seed formation.  Dehulled 
and de-awned seed lots will be in the high end of the 
range.  Each 1 kg of pure live seed (PLS) sown per ha 
will result in 20-37 live seeds/m2 (1 lb PLS/ac results 
in about 2-4 live seeds/ft
2).  Sown alone, suggested 
seeding rates for drilling are 10-16 PLS kg/ha (9-15 
PLS lbs/ac), depending on goals and site conditions.  
Rates are high because of  unpredictability and should 
be doubled for broadcast seeding. 
 
Amendments:  A starter fertilizer is usually not 
recommended for slow establishing native grasses 
like California oatgrass as it encourages excessive 
weed competition.  A covering of mulch such as a 
thin layer of native straw, hydromulch, or erosion 
blanket is particularly useful on steeper banks.  For 
improved stability, the straw can be crimped into the 
soil or covered with a netting (Kephart and Amme 
1992) such as jute.   
 
Weed control:   Guidelines for the  use of a number of 
herbicides for controlling weeds in native grass 
plantings in California are outlined by Drewitz and 
Anderson (2003).  Pesticide labels vary by state and 
change over time, so th e most current, local 
information must be reviewed and followed.  Seed 
dormancy in California oatg rass can be put to good 
use.  Sowing monotypic stands allows for fall and

early winter germinating weeds to be controlled with 
glyphosate or other nonselective herbicide before the 
oatgrass seedlings emerge (Boyer 2007b, Darris 
2003).  After emergence and early growth of the 
California oatgrass, broadleaf weeds can further be 
controlled with a selective broadleaf herbicide 
applied at the right stage (Peachy et al. 2007).  
Mowing over the top of the oatgrass seedlings is a 
good alternative to control taller weeds, as is wicking 
with an herbicide, especially before the weeds go to 
seed.  Timely, controlled grazing may also be 
beneficial for weed control in newer stands. 
 
Transplanting:  Some practitioners have had more 
establishment success using transplanted seedlings 
instead of seed (Suttle and Thornsen 2007, Buisson et 
al. 2004, Angelo 2005, McClaran 1981).  Reasons 
can include low germinati on rates and slow seedling 
and plant development the first year limiting the 
species ability to compete with weeds and other 
plants.  Container grown seedlings are well suited to 
smaller projects.  Initial costs are higher per acre, but 
site preparation requirements can be less and 
establishment risks lower comp ared to direct seeding.  
If a “sod” appearance is desired, a grid spacing of 12-
15 cm (5-6 in) may be needed.  Amme (2003) 
suggests a good “turf” of California oatgrass can be 
established with a spacing of 20-25 cm (8-10 in).   
 
Management  
As with all species, best management practices for 
California oatgrass can vary widely depending on the 
purpose of the planting or field (erosion control, turf, 
range, wildlife, or habitat restoration), available 
resources, site conditions, climate, stand composition, 
and other factors.  Swards of native perennial grasses 
or grass-forb meadows containing California oatgrass 
can be improved and maintained with properly timed 
mowing, grazing, burning, herbicide applications, or 
combinations thereof.   In California, the Pacific 
Northwest, and possibly other regions, doing nothing 
is often not an option in the long run because of 
ongoing and sometimes increasing competition from 
weedy annuals or invasive perennials, and the spread 
of shrubs or trees previously controlled or excluded 
by fire (Stromberg and Kephart 2003) 
. 
Mowing :  Mowing is a viable option for controlling 
certain annual and perennial weeds as well as 
undesirable woody plants.  For example, invasive 
perennial grasses such as tall oatgrass 
( Arrhenatherum elatius ) are replacing native species 
on grasslands targeted for habitat conservation.  From 
experimental work in western Oregon, Wilson and 
Clark (2001) report that af ter several years of late 
spring mowing at a 15 cm (6 in) height, both  flowering and abundance of California oatgrass 
increased as a result of release from suppression by 
tall oatgrass.  The annual mowing was timed to the 
flowering of tall oatgrass and its maximum above 
ground allocation.   
 
For annual weed control, mowing two to three times, 
especially the first year 
after establishment can be 
beneficial and may be required.  In California, close 
mowing in the early spring (March) generally favors 
perennial grass establishment and enhances vigor.  At 
the same time it reduces direct competition from 
weedy annuals and the production of annual grass 
seed along with their buildup in the soil bank 
(Kephart and Amme 1992).  Annuals should be 
mowed to about 10 cm (4 in) in height after food 
reserves have been moved into their seedheads but 
before the large seeds are viable (Stromberg and 
Kephart 2003).  A fall mowing also improves 
perennial grass growth while providing space and 
light for new seedlings (Kephart and Amme 1992)  
 
When used in a home garden, grass alley, trail side, 
or turf setting, California oatgrass can be mowed as 
low as 6-8 cm (2.5-3 in) in height (Darris pers. obs.).   
Daniels (2007) suggests mowing only once a year in 
early spring.  The species will maintain itself as a 
tough, persistent “sod” of intermediate texture if 
plants are spaced tightly en ough (Darris pers. obs.).  
It can be kept green y ear round if occasionally 
irrigated and cut back (Amme 2003). 
 
Grazing:  Adaptive and flexible grazing techniques 
are an option for improving abundance of native 
grasses like California oatgrass and other desirable 
herbaceous plants in grassland communities 
(Stromberg and Kephart 2003, Menke 1992, 
Bartolome et al. 2004).  However, universal 
prescriptions cannot be made due to variable site, 
timing, climatic, stand composition, and other 
factors.  The amount of cover for this species can 
increase, decrease or remain unchanged under 
grazing. 
 
In California’s Coast Range grasslands, Bartolome 
and others (2004) report that California oatgrass had 
little response over time to seasonal grazing but 
increased when grazing was removed.  In contrast, its 
foliar cover increased under continuous grazing and 
decreased when grazing ceased on California coastal 
grassland (Hatch et. al. 1999).  Similarly, others 
observed higher cover (Hayes and Holl 2003) and 
increased vegetative growth and fewer competing 
annuals under moderate or even heavy grazing 
(Heady et. al 1963).  California oatgrass and other 
native perennial grasses increased, range condition

and health of the herd improved, and annuals 
decreased when heavy grazing was replaced by 
moderate stocking rates and deferred-rotation grazing 
(Cooper 1960). The species will develop a shorter 
more spreading form in response to clipping that can 
make it less noticeable to  grazers (Edwards 1992).  
However, grazing (and burning) practices favorable 
to one native grass species may damage others 
(Hatch et. al. 1999).   
 
According to Menke (1992), grazing can be the 
primary step in a perennial native grass restoration 
project as well as ongoing maintenance.  For 
restoring California native grasslands, he prescribes 
several days of high intensity, short-duration sheep or 
cattle grazing in order to remove the inflorescences 
of alien annual grasses before they set seed.  The 
grazing event must be planned so that it still allows 
enough time for native perennial grasses (like 
California oatgrass) to fl ower and produce seed 
before spring soil moisture is exhausted.  This action 
promotes increased vigor and crown cover of the 
natives.  Secondarily, an intense period of heavy 
livestock grazing during mi dsummer dormancy of the 
perennial bunchgrasses reduces dead stems, litter 
buildup, and self-shading while hoof action enhances 
nutrient cycling by putting dead material in contact 
with the soil.      
 
Prescribed fire :  Controlled burning is widely 
recognized as an important tool to control invasion of 
native and exotic woody plants in order to maintain 
prairies, ranges or other natural systems containing 
California oatgrass.  As a species which evolved in 
western prairie ecosystems  where fire is a natural 
process, it is generally tolerant to late summer 
burning.  In a study by Hatch and others (1999) the 
species was unaffected by fire.  However, it is less 
tolerant to fire than  Nassella pulchra in California 
grasslands (Bainbridge and D’Antonio 2003).  In 
these areas, fire is used to decrease the abundance of 
non-native species and increase or restore native 
vegetation but results are inconsistent (Bainbridge 
and D’Antonio 2003).  Menke (1992) considers late 
spring-early summer burning to reduce alien weed 
seed production a viable enhancement tool for 
California grasslands with significant native 
bunchgrass populations.  Burning is timed to the 
period when most weed seeds are still within the 
flower heads (panicles) so th ey can be destroyed.   If 
litter levels are excessive, high mortality may result 
unless this fuel load is reduced in advance by 
mowing or grazing.  Once stands are improved, 
burning is recommended only once every three to 
four years.  Three years  is about the time for alien 
annuals to recover to pre-fire levels (Menke 1992).     
Herbicides:  Certain invasive non-native species that 
pose a continuing threat to native plant communities 
and other systems with California oatgrass can be 
effectively managed with 
herbicides.  Whenever 
possible, they should be integrated with other 
management measures.  Weed control for natural 
areas is described in depth by Tu and others (2001). 
References such as the Pacific Northwest Weed 
Management Handbook (Peachy et al. 2007) cover 
herbicide recommendations for cropping systems, 
non-crop areas, and other situ ations that can apply to 
California oatgrass.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few pest problems for California oatgrass have been 
recorded.  However, it is one of many native grass 
hosts for the fungus ( Gloeotinia temulenta) which 
causes blind seed disease, a  potentially serious pest in 
ryegrass (Lolium  spp.) seed production fields (Fischer 
1944, Alderman 2001).  Field burning is among 
several effective controls.  The species can be 
infected by a nematode ( Cynipanguina danthoniae ) 
that causes leaf galls (Maggenti et al. 1974). 
 
Amme (1986) indicated that California oatgrass, 
along with other native grasses tested, appeared 
disease resistant during germination, transplanting, 
and growth in liners.  No losses were attributed to 
damping-off.  Rust (Puccinia  sp.) and other stem or 
leaf diseases have not been regularly observed or 
have been of little consequence for seed producers 
(Kanegy 2007) and the Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon (Darris pers. obs.). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
California oatgrass is not considered to be weedy 
within its natural range and is easy to control by 
mechanical or chemical mean s.  However, because of 
seed dormancy, a resilient seed coat, and latent seed 
in the soil, individuals may continue to sporadically 
emerge several years after a stand is removed.  The 
species is not reported to  have toxic properties for 
domestic livestock, wildlife, or humans.   
 
Seed and Plant Production 
As with sowing California oatgrass for revegetation 
and other uses, planting new fields for agronomic 
seed increase and producing container nursery stock 
from seed may be confounded by poor or delayed 
germination due to seed dorm ancy.   If dormancy is 
known or suspected, seed should have a TZ test to 
determine viability and then fall (Sept-Oct) sown or 
cold, moist stratified for 30-120 days.  Dehulling or 
scarification may also  be needed as described earlier.

Seed production:  Suggested seeding rates are high 
(11-20 PLS kg/ha or 10-18 PLS lbs/ac) to insure 
adequate stands since not all seed dormancy may be 
overcome.  Clean, firm, weed free seedbeds and a 
seeding depth of 0.3 to 0.6 cm (0.13 to 0.25 in) are 
ideal.  The suggested row spacing is 30-45 cm (12-18 
in) but wider rows may be needed for cultivators or 
shielded row sprayers used for applying herbicides.  
To fit their irrigation systems and equipment, some 
growers produce the seed in nursery beds usually 
comprised of four narrow rows with wider (91-107 
cm or 36-42 in) rows between the beds (Anderson 
2008).  Given issues of seed dormancy and slow 
establishment, a more reliable alternative is to start 
fields in the fall or spring from greenhouse grown 
plugs set 15-25 cm (6-10 in) apart within row.  
 
Fertilization and irrigation :  Typically, no fertilizer 
is applied until May after new fall plantings when 27-
44 kg of nitrogen/ha (25-40 lbs N/ac) is used.  For 
established seed fields of California oatgrass in 
western Oregon, annual applications of nitrogen are 
made in late February or March at rates of 55-110 kg 
N/ha (50-100 lbs N/ac).  Suggested rates may change 
as more information is learned.  Other fertilizers 
containing potassium, phosphorus, sulfur, or 
micronutrients may be needed according to soil tests.   
 
In western Oregon, no irrigation is required for new 
stands as long as the planting of seedlings or seeding 
is done in fall as recommended.  Spring plantings 
will require irrigation the first year only.  However, 
on droughty soils or in the Central Valley of 
California and other summer dry, low precipitation 
areas, summer irrigation may be needed every year. 
 
Weed and pest control :  Weeds are controlled in new 
and existing stands by tillage, mowing, hand hoeing, 
spot or shielded spray treatments between rows with 
glyphosate herbicide, and applications of broadleaf 
herbicides with general labels for grass seed 
production (Peachy et al. 2007).  Mowing off taller 
weeds and their flower heads that overtop the 
California oatgrass the first year provides some 
control.  A better option is to use a flail forage 
harvester that both mows off and removes weed seed 
stalks, including annual bluegrass ( Poa annua).  
While a number of herbicides are labeled for control 
of this and other annual weedy grasses in established 
fields of perennial grasses grown for seed, only one 
of these products (dimethenamid-P) can be legally 
applied to native California oatgrass in Oregon 
(BASF Corporation 2007).  Supplemental labeling 
expires December 31, 2009 unless renewed.  
Significant disease pests such as rust ( Puccinia spp.), 
ergot ( Claviceps  purpurea ), or smut ( Ustilago spp .)  and insect problems have not been reported.  Always 
read and follow label directions completely when 
applying any herbicide or other pesticide.  
 
Harvesting:
  Harvesting California oatgrass is usually 
done by swathing (windrowing) followed by 
combining a week or two later after the seed and 
stalks have adequately dried.  It is important to 
harvest the hidden seed (cleistogenes) in the stems 
since their numbers are often greater than the amount 
of seed produced in the e xposed inflorescence.  To 
extract both types of seed in a single operation, some 
growers (Kenagy 2007, Anderson 2008) use a 
combine equipped with an ag gressive four row, spike 
toothed cylinder and concave  set at narrow clearance.  
Other options include double harvesting using a 
combine with a rasp cylinder or stripping and 
vacuuming the seed with a  flail-vac seed stripper.  
The stripper, mounted like a front end loader on a 
tractor, has a fast spinning brush which rips, pulls, or 
vacuums the seed from the  seed heads and throws it 
into a hopper.  Newer forms of seed strippers may 
work as well.  However, stripping wastes hidden seed 
unless stems are harvested separately.  This can be 
done later in summer when they readily break off 
near the base of the plant.  The additional seed is then 
extracted with an aggressive stationary seed thresher 
or hammer mill that breaks apart the stems.  
 
Flowering and seed formation is commonly absent or 
meager the first year.  This may be due to the plant’s 
slow development, vernalization requirement, or 
both.  Yields increase in subsequent years and often 
will not peak until the third growing season.  They 
can average 110-330 kg/h a (100-300 lbs/ac).  
Properly managed, fields can remain productive for a 
decade or more. 
 
Crop residues :  Post harvest residue management 
usually involves simple mo wing to remove decadent 
foliage and improve exposure of grass crowns and 
growing points to light and cool temperatures, or flail 
chopping to break up the stems and leaf matter into 
finer material.  Excessive plant litter left on the soil 
surface can reduce the eff ectiveness of certain 
herbicides in grass seed production, so baling heavier 
residues, if present, may also be a good option.  A 
flail forage harvester will both cut and remove the 
crop aftermath in one oper ation.  Given the general 
tolerance of California oatgrass to fire, summer 
burning during plant dormancy  may be an alternative 
but no information on its application or benefit for 
seed production of this species has been reported.  
 
Seed cleaning and conditioning:   Threshed seed is 
usually first run through a scalping machine or screen

to remove stems and other course materials. As 
described earlier, dehulling/scarification of some 
seed lots can improve germination if excessive seed 
damage can be avoided in the process.  Options 
include using a huller/scarifier (brush machine) 
equipped with gentler brushes or run at slower 
speeds, or possibly an oat dehuller.  Seed is often de-
awned in the same process which may be a goal in 
itself to improve flow through certain seeding 
equipment and reduce storage volume.  Final 
cleaning is done with an air-screen machine but care 
is needed to prevent the wasteful disposal of longer 
cleistogenes or smaller dehulled seed (groats or 
kernals).  In Oregon, seed  certification standards for 
California oatgrass require a minimum purity of 90% 
and allow a maximum of 0.15% other crops, 10% 
inert matter, 0.15% common weed seeds, and four 
restricted weed seeds/lb (Oregon Seed Certification 
Service 2008). 
 
Plant production:   Containers or flats of California 
oatgrass can be sown in winter or early spring with 
untreated, dry seed pres umably low in dormancy 
(Young 2001, Dyer 2001) or fresh seed sown 
immediately after harvest before dormancy develops 
(Amme 2008).  Standard, well drained potting media 
amended with micronutrients and optional starter or 
slow release fertilizers works well.  Others suggest a 
medium of 1:1 peat and vermiculite and a light 
application of nitrogen fertilizer weekly (Rose et al. 
1998) or every six weeks with 10-10-5 NPK soluble 
fertilizer (Amme 1986).  Sometimes the seed is 
dehulled/scarified then sown in plastic flats lined 
with newspaper and kept at temperatures from 15-
25°C (59-75°F) (Keeley 2000).  Several shapes and 
sizes of plug type containers are used for production 
of seedling transplants.   
 
The seed should be covered with 0.6 cm (0.25 in) or 
less of potting media or vermiculite and kept moist.  
Germination and sprouting commences in 10-21 
days, but can continue for months (Amme 1986). 
Plants are maintained with irrigation under controlled 
greenhouse conditions at 18-25°C (65-75°F).  
Fertilization is typically discontinued during the 
summer months.  Compared to fall and winter sown 
and potted seedlings (liners) , those similarly handled 
in late spring and early summer had few or no 
flowering culms by fall (Amme 1986).  Cutting the 
plants back once or twice helps prevent containers 
from drying out and encourages new growth of 
culms.  If held over, a single clipping maintained 
good vigor for California oatgrass through the second 
year (Amme 1986). 
  For seed lots where phys
iological dormancy is 
initially high, flats or containers are fall sown at the 
Corvallis PMC with untreat ed or partially dehulled 
seed and left outdoors over winter to naturally 
stratify.  Alternatively, flats or trays of plugs are 
sown, well watered, placed in plastic bags, and 
moved into a walk-in cooler for cold moist 
stratification at 1-4°C (34-40°F) for 90-120 days.  If 
the principal dormancy is seed-coat imposed, it is 
suggested that seed be ca refully acid scarified or 
dehulled in advance and then sown soon after at any 
time of the year.  Once in the warm greenhouse and 
seedlings emerge, it can take  9-12 weeks for plants to 
become well established in 7-10 cubic inch, cone 
shaped containers.  Plants  should be acclimated for 
several weeks or more in a lath house or shadehouse 
prior to spring outplanting or maintained there until 
fall.  For seed with physiological dormancy, 
remaining “empty” containers may be held over until 
next spring as they often contain viable seed that will 
germinate after a second winter period.   
 
California oatgrass propagates readily by division.  
One method is to collect plants during the dormant   
season or maintain them in a lath house until 
dormant.  Bring the clumps into a greenhouse in 
January, and divide them up into segments with a 
single root.  Plantlets are then potted in plug or cone 
shaped containers, kept moist in the greenhouse at 
18-21°C (65-70°F), and later moved back to a lath 
house (Dyer 2001, Rose et al. 1998).  One gallon pots 
can be split into 3-5 plugs (Las Pilitas Nursery 2007). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
In 2000, the NRCS Plant Materials Center at 
Corvallis, Oregon, the US Fish and Wildlife Service, 
and the Oregon Agricultural Experiment Station 
released Baskett Slough Germplasm California 
oatgrass, a selected cla ss pre-variety (Darris and 
Lambert, 2000).   The origin of this “natural” 
germplasm is the Baskett Slough National Wildlife 
Refuge in Polk County, Oregon.  It was not bred or 
hybridized and particular attention was given to 
include genetic diversity indicative of the population.  
Primarily for restoration and erosion control, its 
intended area of use is US EPA Level III Ecoregion 3 
or the southern portion of USDA Major Land 
Resource Area (MLRA) 2 which includes the 
Willamette Valley of Oregon and a part of southwest 
Washington below 1500 ft. elevation.  Seed is 
commercially available.  Several other source 
identified populations of California oatgrass are 
periodically grown and sold as seed in Oregon and 
California.  Native plant nurseries regularly produce 
plants of known origin in plugs and pots.

Population genetics and seed transfer:  
Understanding patterns of genetic variation in 
California oatgrass across the landscape provides 
insight into adaptation and can help guide seed 
movement of populations within and among regions.   
In an analysis of data from a common garden study 
containing 66 populations (accessions) primarily 
from western Oregon and southwest Washington, 
plant vigor and seed abundance significantly 
correlated with winter precipitation, winter minimum 
temperature, and summer maximum temperature.  
However, for the subset of 33 Willamette Valley 
accessions, there were no significant correlations 
suggesting this region could be treated as a single 
seed zone for the species (Johnson undated).  
 
In an evaluation of isozyme (protein enzyme) 
systems in 22 populations of California oatgrass from 
Oregon and California, Knapp and Rice (1994) found 
higher levels of among-population variation than 
within.  Such a pattern is more typical of self-
pollinating species unlike open–pollinated conifers 
which tend to exhibit the opposite.  This makes it 
more likely for California oatgrass to have 
genetically distinct populations resulting in the need 
for smaller seed transfer zones compared to tree 
species.  In addition, variety c alifornica and variety 
americana  were found to have distinct genetic 
compositions.  As a result, for purposes of 
restoration, they advise against mixing the two 
varieties and are in favor of matching each variety to 
the variety growing in the vicinity.  However, most 
taxonomic authorities do not recognize the two 
varieties as separate entities.  Knapp and Rice also 
noted seedlings from one population with narrower 
leaves came from a unique vernal pool location 
suggesting that restorationists should consider 
localized selection pressures when considering seed 
sources for a planting.   
 
References 
Alderman, S.C. 2001. Blind seed disease. 
Miscellaneous Publication No. 1567. United States 
Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research 
Service. URL: http://arsserv0.tamu.edu/is/np/ 
blindseed/contents.htm 
 
Amme, D. 1986. Nursery production of western 
native perennial grasses. In: Proceedings of 
Conference XVI International Erosion Control 
Association 1985. San Francisco, CA. 
 
Amme, D. 2003. Creating a native California 
meadow. Grasslands 13(3):1, 9-11. 
  Amme (2008). Personal communication. California 
Native Grasslands Association and East Bay Parks. 
 
Anderson, J. 2008. Personal communication.  
Hedgerow Farms. Winters, CA.  
 
Angelo, C. 2005. Restoration of 
Danthonia 
californica , Elymus glaucus , and Nassella pulchra  at 
Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Reserve.  
University of California Santa Cruz. Santa Cruz, 
California. 
 
Bainbridge, S. & C. D’Antonio. 2003. Prescribed fire 
for controlling exotics in the California grassland: 
factors influencing success.  Workshop: Use of fire to 
control invasive plants. 7
th International Conference 
on the Ecology and Management of Invasive Species. 
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. 
 
Bartolome, J.W., J.S. Fehmi, R.D. Jackson, & B. 
Allen-Diaz. 2004. Response of a native perennial 
grass stand to disturbance in California’s Coast 
Range grassland. Restoration Ecology. 12(2): 279-
289, 
 
BASF Corporation. 2007. Outlook herbicide for use 
in perennial grasses grown for seed.  Supplemental 
label. BASF Corporation. Research Triangle Park, 
NC. 
 
Boyer, L. 2007a. Personal communication. Heritage 
Seedlings. Salem, OR.  
 
Boyer, L. 2007b. Native Willamette Valley prairie 
and oak habitat restoration site preparation and 
seeding information. Heritage Seedlings. Salem, OR. 
URL: http://www.heritageseedlings.com/PDF/ 
prairieandoakrestorationmethods.pdf 
 
Brady, K.U., A.R. Kruckeberg, and H.D. Bradshaw 
Jr. 2005. Evolutionary ecology of plant adaptation to 
serpentine soils. Annual Review of Ecology. 
Evolution and Systematics 36:243–66. 
 
Bruns, E. 2005. Maternal investment in and fitness of 
chasmogamous and cleistogamous progeny of the 
native perennial grass  Danthonia californica. 
Undergraduate thesis. University of California Santa 
Cruz.  
 
Buisson, E., E. Corcket, T. Dutoit, S. Anderson, & K. 
Holl. 2004. Restoring old fields by seeding and 
transplanting keystone species in the grasslands of 
California central coast. ESA Annual Meeting, 
Portland, OR. Ecological Society of America.

Campbell. B.H. 2004.  Restoring rare native habitats 
in the Willamette Valley. Defenders of Wildlife, 
West Linn, Oregon and Washington D.C.  
 
Campbell, C.S., J.A. Quinn, G.P. Cheplick, & T. J. 
Bell. 1983. Cleistogamy in grasses. Annual Review 
of Ecology and Systematics 14: 411-441. 
 
Clark, D.L. & M.V. Wilson. 2005. Restoration of 
native upland prairies for Fender’s blue butterfly 
(Icaricia icarioides fenderi ). Report for Oregon Fish 
and Wildlife Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Chappell, C.B. 2006. Upland  plant associations of the 
Puget Trough ecoregion, Washington. Natural 
Heritage Rep. 2006-01. Washington Department of 
Natural Resources, Natural Heritage Program, 
Olympia , WA URL: 
http://www.dnr.wa.gov/nhp/refdesk/communities/pdf
/intro.pdf  
 
Chirco, E & T. Turner. 1986 (updated 2007). Species 
without AOSA testing procedures. The Newsletter of 
the Association of Official  Seed Analysts. Vol. 60, 
2:2-66 
 
Collins, M. 2006. Designation of critical habitat for 
the Fender's blue butterfly ( Icaricia icarioides 
fenderi ), Lupinus sulphureus  ssp. kincaidii  (Kincaid's 
lupine), and  Erigeron decumbens  var. decumbens  
(Willamette daisy); Final Rule. U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service. Federa l Register: October 31, 
2006.71(210): 63861-63977. 
 
Cooper, D.W. 1960. Fort Baker ranges return to 
champagne grasses. Journal of Range Management 
13:203-205. 
 
Crampton, B. 1974. Grasses in California. California 
Natural History Guides 33. University of California 
Press. Berkeley, California
. 
 
Daniels, S. 2007. Native grasses suitable for lawn 
substitutes. Wild Lawns Inc. URL: 
http://ww2.lafayette.edu/~danielss/grasses.html 
Darbyshire. S.J. 2003. Danthonia .  In: Flora of North 
America Editorial Committee, eds.  Flora of North 
America North of Mexico.  12+  vols.  New York and 
Oxford.  Vol.  25. 301-306.  
 
Darris, D.C. 2003. Considerations for establishing 
native grasses from seed for restoration, revegetation 
and erosion control in western Washington and 
western Oregon. Plant Materials Technical Note No.  35. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Darris D. and S. Lambert. 2000. Baskett Slough 
Selection of California oa
tgrass. Fact Sheet. USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 
 
Dobrenz, A.K., & A.A. Beetle. 1966. Cleistogenes in 
Danthonia . Journal of Range Management. 19:292-
296.  
 
Drewitz, J. & J. Anderson. 2003. Using herbicides to 
control weeds in native grass plantings. Section 15 
IN: Using native grasses and graminoids in 
restoration and revegetatio n. Workshop proceedings. 
California Native Grasslands Association. Davis CA. 
 
Dyer, D.A. 2001. Propagation protocol for 
production of container  Danthonia californica; 
USDA NRCS Lockeford Pl ant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA. In: Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantne twork.org (accessed 10 
December 2007). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 
 
Edminster, C. 2003. California oatgrass  Danthonia 
californica.  Pacific Northwest Natives.  Albany, 
Oregon. URL: 
http://www.pacificnwnatives .com/California_Oatgras
s.pdf 
 
Edwards, S.W. 1992. Observations on the prehistory 
and ecology of grazing in  California. Fremontia 20:3-
11. 
Emery, D.E. 1988. Seed propagation of native 
California plants. Santa Barbara Botanic Garden. 
Santa Barbara, CA. 
Fire Safe Council. 2007. Fire safe vegetation. El 
Dorado County, California. URL: 
http://www.edcfiresafe.org /fire_safe_vegetation.htm#
nativeVines (accessed 12/18/2007). 
Fischer, G.W. 1944. The blind-seed disease of 
ryegrass  (Lolium sp.) in Oregon. Phytopathology 
34:934-935. 
Franklin J.F. and C.T. Dyrness. 1973. Natural 
Vegetation of Oregon and Washington. General 
Technical Report PNW-8.  USDA Forest Service. 
Portland, Oregon. 
Guerrant, E.O. Jr. and A. Raven. 1995. Seed 
germination and storability studies of 69 plant taxa

native to the Willamette Valley wet prairie. The 
Berry Botanic Garden. Portland, Oregon. 
Hatch, D.A., J.W. Bartolome, J.S. Fehmi, & D.S. 
Hillyard. 1999. Effects of burning and grazing on 
coastal California grassland. Restoration Ecology 
7(4): 376-381. 
Hayes, G.F. & K.D. Holl. 2003. Cattle grazing 
impacts on annual forbs and vegetation composition 
on mesic grasslands in California. Conservation 
Biology 17(6): 1694-1702. 
Heady, H.F., D.W. Cooper , J.M. Rible, & J.F. 
Hooper. 1963. Comparativ e forage values of 
California oatgrass and soft chess. Journal of Range 
Management 16:51-54. 
Heritage Seedlings. 2007. Native Willamette Valley 
seed. Salem, Oregon. URL:
 
http://www.heritageseedlings.com/PDF/SeedPriceLis
t.pdf  
Hickman, J.C. (editor) 1993. The Jepson Manual: 
Higher Plants of California. University of California, 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California. 
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, & J.W. 
Thompson. 1969. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of  Washington Press, Seattle 
and London. 
Jebb, T. 1995. Personal communication.  USDA 
Bureau of Land Management. Sprague Seed Orchard, 
Merlin, OR.  Cited in: Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski & 
D.L. Haase. 1998. Propaga tion of Pacific Northwest 
Native Plants. Oregon State University Press. 
Corvallis, OR. 
Johnson, R. (undated) Summary of common garden 
studies: what do we know about genetic variation in 
the Willamette Valley? Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. USDA Forest Service. URL:  
http://www.nativeseednetwork.org/site_files/Summar
yOfCommonGardenStudies_-_RandyJohnson.pdf 
Kanegy, P. 2007. Personal communication. Kanegy 
Seed Farm, Albany, OR.  
Keeley, M.A. 2000. A study in urban revegetation: 
germination and establishment of South Puget Sound 
prairie plants on a capped landfill. MS Thesis. 
University of Washington. Seattle, WA. 
Kephart, P. & D. Amme. 1992. Native perennial 
grass establishment and management. Grasslands. 
California Native Grass Association. Feb. 1992.  Klinkenberg. B. (editor) 2007. E-Flora BC: electronic 
atlas of the plants of British Columbia 
[www.eflorea.bc.ca]. Lab for Advanced Spatial 
Analysis, Department of Geography, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver (accessed 12/10/2007). 
Knapp, E. & K. Rice. 1994. Isozyme variation within 
and among populations of 
Danthonia californica: 
final report. Department of Agronomy and Range 
Science, University of California Davis. Davis, 
California. 
Kozloff, E.N. 2005. Plants of Western Oregon, 
Washington, and British Columbia. Timber Press. 
Portland, Oregon.  
Las Pilitas Nursery. 2007.  Danthonia californica. 
URL: http://laspilitas.com/pl ants/459.htm (accessed 
12/5/2007). 
Laude, H.M. 1949. Delayed germination of 
California oatgrass,  Danthonia californica . Agron. J. 
41:404-408. 
Maggenti, A.R., W.H. Hart & G.A. Paxman. 1974. A 
new genus and species of gall forming nematode 
from  Danthonia californica , with a discussion of life 
history. Nematologica 19 (1973): 491-497. 
Maslovat, C.Y. 2001. Germination ecology of native 
grass species,  Danthonia californica  and Elymus 
glaucus,  in Garry oak ecosystems and the 
implications for restoration. Master of Science 
Thesis. University of Victoria, Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada.  
Maslovat, C.Y. 2002. Historical jigsaw puzzles: 
piecing together the understory of Garry oak 
( Quercus garryana ) ecosystems and the implications 
for restoration.  In: General Technical Report PSW-
GTR-184. USDA Forest Service. 
McClaran, M.P. 1981. Propagating native perennial 
grasses. Fremontia. 9(1): 21-23. 
Menke, J.W. 1992. Grazing and fire management for 
native perennial grass restoration in California 
grasslands. Fremontia. 20(2):22-25. 
Mohlenbrock, R.H. 1992. Western wetland flora: 
field office guide to plant species. USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. West Region, 
Sacramento, California. 
Mousseaux, M. 2004. French Flat. Kalmiopsis 11:46-
53.

NatureServe. 2008. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.0. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. URL: 
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: 
April 7, 2008). 
Northwest Habitat Institute. 2008. Habitat 
descriptions. Interactive Biodiversity Information 
System. Corvallis, Oregon.  URL: 
http://www.nwhi.org/index/ibis 
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 2000. 
Landowner’s guide to creating grassland habitat for 
the Western Meadowlark and Oregon’s other 
grassland birds. Salem, OR.  
Oregon Seed Certification Service. 2008. Pre-variety 
germplasm seed standards. Oregon State University. 
Corvallis, Oregon. URL: 
http://www.oscs.orst.edu/standards/pvg-
seed.standards.doc 
Peachey, E., et al. 2007. (compilers) Pacific 
Northwest weed management handbook. Extension 
Services of Oregon Stat e University, Washington 
State University, and University of Idaho.  
Robinson, G.S., P.R. Ackery, I.J. Kitching, G.W. 
Beccaloni & L.M. Hernán dez. 2007. HOSTS-a 
database of the world's Lepidopteran hostplants. The 
Natural History Museum, London, England.  URL: 
http://www.nhm.ac.uk/research-
curation/projects /hostplants/#9 
Rodgers, D. 1981. Notes on planting and 
maintenance of bunchgrasses. Fremontia. 9(1):24-28. 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D.L. Haase. 1998.  
Propagation of Pacific Northwest natives. Oregon 
State University Press. Corvallis, OR. 
Santa Cruz Public Libraries (compiler). 2003. Ohlone 
tiger beetle. Endangered species in Santa Cruz 
County. URL: 
http://scplweb.santacruzpl.org/ref/endang/endang.sht
ml 
Simpson, G.M. 1990. Seed dormancy in grasses. 
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge and other 
cities. 
Stewart, H. & R.J. Hebd a. 2000. Grasses of the 
Columbia Basin of British Columbia. Working Paper 
45. Royal British Columbia Museum, Natural History 
Section. Victoria, BC, Canada.  Stromberg, M.R. & P.H. Kephart. 2003. Landowners 
guide to native grass enhancement and restoration. 
Hastings Natural History Reservation, University of 
California, Carmel Valley, California. URL: 
http://www.hastingsreserv
e.org/NativeGrass/GrassM
anageIntro.html 
Stromberg, M. R., P. H. Kephart, & M. Sicular-
Mertens. 2002. Restoration of native grasses in 
California old fields II: cheap tills. Unpublished 
Manuscript. 
Stromberg, M.R., P.H. Kephart, & V. Yadon. 2001. 
Composition, invasibility, and diversity in coastal 
California grasslands. Madrono. 48(4): 236-252. 
Suttle, K.B. & M.A. Thornsen. 2007. Climate change 
and grassland restoration in California: lessons from 
six years of rainfall manipulation in a north coast 
grassland. Madrono. 54 (3):225-233. 
Trask, M. 1996. Germination enhancement trials pilot 
project. Grasslands. VI(1):1-3. 
Trask, M.M. & D.A. Pyke. 1998. Variability in seed 
dormancy of three Pacifi c Northwestern grasses. 
Seed Science Technology. 26:179-191. 
Tu, M., C. Hurd, & J.M. Randall. 2001. Weed control 
methods handbook: tools and techniques for natural 
areas.  The Nature Conservancy. URL:
 
http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/handbook.html 
USDA Forest Service. 1988  (reprint). Range Plant 
Handbook.  Dover Publications, Inc. New York. 
USDA, NRCS. 2007. The PLANTS Database 
(http://plants.usda.gov, 10 December 2007). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
Weatherwax, P. 1928. Cleist ogamy in two species of 
Danthonia . Botanical Gazette. 86: 104-109. 
Wilson, M.V. & D.L. Clark. 2001. Controlling 
invasive  Arrhenatherum elatius  and promoting native 
prairie grasses through mowing. Applied Vegetation 
Science 4.1:129-138. 
Wrysinski, J. 2004. Know your natives. A pictorial 
guide to California native plants. Yolo County 
Resource Conservation District. Woodlands, 
California.  
Young, B. 2001. Propagation protocol for production 
of container  Danthonia californica  Boland plants; 
USDI NPS – Golden Gate National Park, San 
Francisco, CA. In: Native Plant Network. URL:

http://nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 10 December 
2007). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery
. 
Prepared By 
Dale C. Darris and Peter Gonzalves, USDA, NRCS, 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dale C. Darris, Conservation Agronomist, USDA, 
NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Edited:  6/18/08, 7/21/08 DCD. 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.