Silky prairie clover    
    
Dalea villosa (Nutt.) Spreng.   
     
Plant Symbol = DAVI      
    
Common Names:  hairy prairie clover    
      
Scientific Names:  Dalea villosa var. villosa 
                             Petalostemon villosum  
Description 
General:  Silky prairie clover, a member of the Fabaceae (Pea) family, is a 
native, warm season, perennial legume.  This plant produces numerous 
lateral roots extending outward 2 to 3 feet in the first foot of soil and a 
taproot system penetrating 4 to 5 feet deep (Weaver and Albertson 1956). 
Erect, branched stems 8 to 20 inches tall arise from a dense root crown.  The 
alternate, odd-pinnately compound leaves are 0.75 to 1.5 inches long and 0.5 
to 1 inch wide covered with silky hairs. The individual leaflets are elliptic, 0.25 to 0.5 inch long, less than 0.1 inch wide (2.5 
mm) with smooth margins and blunt tips. The flower spike is 1 to 5 inches long and composed of tightly packed flowers of 
pink, lavender, or white. The seedpod (fruit) is about 0.12 inch long (3 mm) and covered in woolly hairs. At maturity, the 
pods contain small, smooth brown seeds. (Diggs et al. 1999, Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses 2016 and Minnesota 
Wildflowers 2016). 
Distribution:  The prairie clover genus, Dalea, contains approximately 160 native species from Canada to Argentina (Diggs 
et al. 1999).  Silky prairie clover is found from southeast and east Texas north through the Great Plains to Montana and east 
to Michigan (Diggs, Jr. et al. 1999, USDA-NRCS PLANTS database 2016). For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Silky prairie clover is found on sites with deep, sandy soils such as deserts, shifting or partially stabilized sand 
dunes, dry prairies, and open woodlands on sparsely vegetated sites. Associated plants include prairie sand reed (Calamovilfa 
longifolia), sand bluestem (Andropogon hallii), needle and thread grass (Stipa comata), white sagebrush (Artemisia 
ludoviciana), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), and prairie junegrass (Koeleria macrantha) (Smith 1998, Kansas Wildflowers 
and Grasses 2016, Montana Field Guide 2016). 
Adaptation 
Silky prairie clover prefers sandy soils (Smith 1998) but will grow well on silt loam soils (Lindgren et al. 2003). It is 
considered drought tolerant (Todd et al. 2010).  Potter (1953) observed silky prairie clover seedlings recovering completely 
after being in a permanently wilted state for three days. Smith (1998) notes silky prairie clover grows in low precipitation 
areas receiving only 11.8 inches of annual rainfall.  
Uses 
Livestock 
Silky prairie clover has fair forage value (Vallentine and Burzlaff 1964) and may replace other plants that have weakened or 
died in a stand. It is a preferred forage for cattle and sheep during spring and summer (USDA-NRCS 2016a). 
 
 
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Silky prairie clover plant. (Photo credit: Alan 
Shadow-ETPMC).

Wildlife 
Deer, elk, bison, and antelope readily graze the entire plant during spring and 
summer (USDA-NRCS 2016a). Deer browse on the flowering stems and seed 
heads. Hamm (2011) mentions mule deer also feed on silky prairie clover. 
Robson (2014) reported bees and wasps were the main pollinators of silky 
prairie clover. Silky prairie clover begins flowering from the bottom and 
proceeds to the top of the bloom spike. Forbes (1967) noted that a band of 
florets around the spike would open, then wither as another band above it 
opened. This flowering sequence is clearly shown on the center spike in the 
photo at right. 
 
Special Uses 
Prairie clovers are useful for roadside vegetation, parks, recreation areas and soil 
stabilization, and silky prairie clover for native landscaping (Lindgren et al. 
2003). Remnant populations of this species have been found in east Texas on 
sites with deep, sandy soils.  These sites exist in regions that were historically 
longleaf pine.  Silky prairie clover prefers disturbed sites with little vegetative 
competition and could play a role as a soil stabilizer on sandy sites (Lindgren et 
al. 2003).     
Ethnobotany 
Silky prairie clover was used for medicinal purposes by the Lakota tribe (Black Elk and Flying By, Sr. 1998).  A decoction 
made from the root of the plant was used as a laxative and the leaves and blossoms were consumed to reduce throat swelling.  
 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  It is considered endangered in Iowa (PLANTS Database 2016) and of special concern in 
Wisconsin (Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources 2016). 
Wetland Indicator: Not listed on the Army Corps of Engineers 2016 National Wetland Plant List (Lichvar et al. 2016) 
Weedy or Invasive:  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
Silky prairie clover is very similar in growth form and seed size to purple and white prairie clovers, Dalea purpurea and 
Dalea candida, and would follow similar guidelines for planting.  Silky prairie clover requires a sandy soil.  Begin field 
preparation well in advance of planting to establish a weed free seedbed with tillage and (or) herbicide application.  Prior to 
planting, the seedbed must be firmed and have accumulated soil moisture for improved establishment success. Planting 
should be done in the spring from mid-February to mid-May (USDA-NRCS 2014). As with D. purpurea and D. candida, 
silky prairie clover contains a high percentage of hard seed.  Seed should be scarified before planting to improve germination 
and early stand establishment (Schellenberg and Biligetu 2015). Mechanical scarification using sandpaper or a laboratory 
scarifier is acceptable. Seed should be inoculated with Rhizobium strain Type F prior to planting (Wynia 2008a). Cool-moist 
seed stratification is not necessary and may decrease seed germination (Lindgren et al. 2003).  
Silky Prairie clover seed is very small.  Planting depth is critical and planting too deeply can result in stand failures.  A grain 
drill equipped with depth bands and a legume box is the preferred method for planting. Drilling seed provides good seed 
placement and seed-to-soil contact. Seed should be planted approximately ½ inch deep (Forbes 1967). Avoid planting into a 
Silky prairie clover spikes in bloom. Notice the 
flowers began at the bottom of the spike and 
continue upward. (Photo credit: Alan Shadow –
ETPMC)

fluffy or loose seedbed.  Soil can sluff off into tracks left by the planter press wheels and bury the seed too deeply after the 
first rain event resulting in stand failures.   
Silky prairie clover seed may also be broadcast planted. If seed is broadcast planted, a carrier agent such as sand or cat litter 
is required to help prevent planting at too high a rate and improve seed distribution. If possible, seed should be incorporated 
with a drag or cultipacker after broadcast planting. Timing broadcast plantings to rain events will help incorporate seed into 
the soil and improve establishment. Spraying slurry mixtures through hydromulchers may also be effective where applicable.    
Plant silky prairie clover at a rate of 30 PLS seeds per ft2 (drilled) or 5 PLS lb/ acre respectively. Seeding rates should be 
increased by 25% or more when broadcast planting. When planting seed mixes, adjust the seeding rate according to the 
percent of silky prairie clover in the mixture. There are approximately 253,500 seed/lb. 
Management 
Do not graze silky prairie clover the year of establishment and limit livestock grazing until plants are well established. Silky 
prairie clover constitutes 1 to 2% of the plant community in the Central High Tableland area of western Nebraska, Kansas 
and eastern Colorado and contributes 19 to 38 pounds of forage per acre (USDA-NRCS 2009). Persistent overgrazing and 
trampling by sheep and cattle will reduce the vigor of silky prairie clover stands (Hamm 2011). Box (1967) noted this plant is 
adversely effected when grazed during a drought.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Lindgren (2003) mentions seedling damping off disease as a problem during establishment. In field trials, silky prairie clover 
has shown moderate susceptibility (51 to 75% stand reduction) to aminopyralid herbicides (Halstvedt 2012). 
Environmental Concerns 
Silky prairie clover is listed as endangered in some areas of its range of occurrence.  Weeds such as leafy spurge (Euphorbia 
esula), an aggressive invasive species, threaten silky prairie clover habitat and potentially reduce native populations 
(Manitoba Conservation Wildlife and Ecosystem Protection Branch 2007).  Silky prairie is considered a desirable plant 
within its native range and has no known negative effects on the environment. 
Control 
Silky prairie clover may be controlled by mechanical means such as mowing or by applying a broad spectrum herbicide.  
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what herbicides works best in your area 
and how to use them safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method. Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seed and Plant Production 
Use soil test recommendations to determine soil fertility and pH of the planting site. If needed, amend pH to a level of 6.0 to 
8.0 with lime according to soil test recommendations. For seed production, amend fertility (P and K) according to soil tests 
after plants have had at least one growing season to establish. This will minimize competition from warm season weeds 
during the growing season. 
To establish a seed production field by direct seeding, plant silky prairie clover seed into rows 18 to 30 inches apart (Wynia 
2008) using a planting rate of 6 PLS lb/acre.  Allow enough space between rows for cultivation, herbicide application, and 
harvesting equipment. Silky prairie clover may be transplanted as seedlings to establish seed production fields where 
applicable. Transplanting reduces the time needed to achieve a solid stand, allows for use of pre-emergent herbicides and 
reduces the amount of weed competition typically seen in fields planted from seed. Transplants may be grown in the 
greenhouse using standard greenhouse production practices. Before planting to a seed production field, seedlings are 
hardened off in a shade house for approximately two weeks.  
Once plants are beyond the seedling stage, cultivation and selective post-emergence herbicides are recommended to reduce 
weed competition and maintain stand integrity. Annual warm season grasses and broadleaf weeds are the biggest challenge 
for establishment and seed production of prairie clovers (Wynia 2008). Consult your local extension weed specialist for 
recommended herbicides. Always read and follow label directions when applying herbicides.

Seed production can be expected the second year (Wynia 2008). Seed can be collected by hand stripping pods from mature 
plants, processing them with a hammermill, and cleaning with an air-screen cleaner.  Seed can be combined harvested, dried, 
and cleaned with an air-screen cleaner.  For seed longevity, store seed in a temperature (60 F or less) and relative humidity 
(40 % or less) controlled environment (Row and Wynia 2006, Harrington 1960, Tallgrass Prairie Center 2016). 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Seed of silky prairie clover is commercially available. ‘Sandhills Satin’ silky prairie clover is a release from the University of 
Nebraska and Nebraska Statewide Arboretum.  It is a seed propagated line descending from one seedling plant from a 
population in northern Lincoln County, NE (Lindgren et al. 2003). Improved materials should be selected based on the local 
climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted materials for use in your area or for recommendations when 
considering using native harvested seed for planting. 
 
 
Literature Cited 
Black Elk, L. and W. Flying By, Sr. 1998. Culturally important plants of the Lakota. Sitting Bull College. Fort Yates, ND. 
Box, T. 1967. Influence of drought and grazing on mortality of five west Texas grasses. Ecology 48:654-656. 
Diggs, G., B. Lipscomb, and R. O’Kennon. 1999. Shinner’s and Mahler’s Illustrated Flora of North Central Texas. Center for 
Environmental Studies and Department of Biology, Austin College (Sherman, TX) and Botanical Research Institute of 
Texas. Fort Worth, TX. 
Forbes, R. 1967. Germination and early development of the silky prairie clover. Journal of the Minnesota Academy of 
Science 34:84-87. 
Halstvedt, M. 2012. Native forb and shrub tolerance to milestone® herbicide. Dow AgroSciences LLC. Indianapolis, IN. 
Hamm, H. 2011. COSEWIC assessment and status report on the hairy prairie-clover Dalea villosa in Canada. Canadian 
Wildlife Service, Environment Canada. Ottawa, Ontario Canada. 
Harrington, J. 1960. Drying, storing, and packaging seed to maintain germination vigor. Seedsman’s Digest 11:16. 
Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses. Silky prairie clover. Agriculture Network Information Collaborative and Kansas State 
University Libraries. Accessed online on 5/18/2016 at http://kswildflower.org/flower_details.php?flowerID=91 
Lichvar, R.W., D.L. Banks, W.N. Kirchner and N.C. Melvin. 2016. The national wetland plant list: 2016 wetland ratings. 
Phytoneuron 2016-30:1-17. Published 28 April 2016. 
Lindgren, D., D. Schaaf, and J. Locklear. 2003. Dalea villosa ‘Sandhills Satin’. HortScience 38(2):313-314. 
Lindgren, D., K. Todd and E. Killinger. 2010. Wildflowers for the home landscape: perennials for sunny sites. University of 
Nebraska-Lincoln Extension Bull. G1074. University of Nebraska. Lincoln, NE. 
Manitoba Conservation Wildlife and Ecosystem Protection Branch. 2007. Manitoba species at risk-hairy prairie-clover Dalea 
villosa. Manitoba Conservation Wildlife and Ecosystem Protection Branch Environment Canada. Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada. 
Masters, R., S. Nissen, R. Gaussoin. D. Beran, and R. Stougaard. 1996. Imidazolinone herbicides improve restoration of great 
plains grasslands. Weed Technology 10(2):392-403. 
Minnesota Wildflowers. Dalea villosa (Silky Prairie Clover). Accessed online on 5/17/2016 at 
https://www.minnesotawildflowers.info/flower/silky-prairie-clover 
Montana Field Guide. 2016. Silky prairie clover-Dalea villosa. Montana Natural Heritage Program. Accessed online on 
5/17/2016 at http://FieldGuide.mt.gov/speciesDetail.aspx?elcode=PDFAB1A1Q0 
Potter, L. 1953. Seedling growth and soil drought resistance of northern great plains legumes, alfalfa and four grasses. 
Journal of Range Management 6: 399-404.

Robson, D. 2014. Mutualistic and antagonistic networks involving the rare silky prairie clover (Dalea villosa var. villosa) and 
its co-flowering plants and insect visitors. Botany 92:47-58. 
Row, J. and R. Wynia. 2006. Viability of native forb seeds stored under two different environments. Prairie Invaders: 
Proceedings of the 20th North American Prairie Conference, University of Nebraska at Kearney, July 23-26, 2006. Eds. J. 
and E. Springer. University of Nebraska at Kearney. Kearney, Nebraska. Pg. 177-186. 
Schellenberg, M. and B. Biligetu. 2015. The effects of temperature and scarification on seed germination of three Dalea 
species. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 95:1117-1120. 
Smith, B. 1998. COSEWIC status report on the hairy prairie-clover Dalea villosa var. villosa in Canada. Canadian Wildlife 
Service, Environment Canada. Ottawa, Ontario Canada. 
Tallgrass Prairie Center. 2016. Drying, cleaning and storing prairie seed: tallgrass prairie center’s restoration guide. Tallgrass 
Prairie Center, University of Northern Iowa. Cedar Falls, IA. 
Todd, K., D. Lindgren and E. Killinger. 2010. Perennials in water-wise landscapes. University of Nebraska-Lincoln 
Extension Bull. G1214. University of Nebraska. Lincoln, NE. 
USDA-NRCS. 2009. Ecological site description for MLRA-72-central high tableland. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service Nebraska Technical Guide Section II. 
USDA-NRCS. 2014. NRCS Texas field office technical guide: appendix 1-planting rates for seeding and sprigging in Texas, 
zone 4. USDA-NRCS Texas. Temple, TX. 
USDA, NRCS. 2016. The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.gov, 15 May 2016). National Plant Data Team. Greensboro, 
NC. 27401-4901 USA. 
USDA-NRCS. 2016a. Section II: Ecological site interpretations. Accessed online 6/8/2016 at 
https://esis.sc.egov.usda.gov/ESDReport/fsReport.aspx?id=R067BY022CO&rptLevel=interpret&approved=yes USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service Ecological Site Description System. 
Vallentine, J. and D. Burzlaff. 1964. Common range plants in Nebraska. University of Nebraska-Lincoln Extension Bulletin 
E.C. 64-161. University of Nebraska. Lincoln, NE. 
Weaver, J. and F. Albertson. 1956. Grasslands of the Great Plains. Johnson Publishing Co. Lincoln, NE. 
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 2016. Silky prairie clover (Dalea villosa var. villosa) Accessed online 
6/15/2016 at http://dnr.wi.gov/topic/EndangeredResources/Plants.asp?mode=detail&SpecCode=PDFAB1A1Q2 
Wynia, R. 2008. Plant guide for white prairie clover (Dalea candida Michx. ex Willd.) USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center. Manhattan, KS. 66502. 
Wynia, R. 2008a. Plant guide for purple prairie clover (Dalea purpurea Vent.) USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center. Manhattan, KS. 66502. 
 
Citation 
Brakie, M. 2016. Plant Guide for silky prairie clover (Dalea villosa). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, East 
Texas Plant Materials Center. Nacogdoches, TX 75964. 
Published: July 2016   
 
Edited: jld  
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER