Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUEDICKS 
Dichelostemma capitatum  
(Benth.) Wood  
Plant Symbol = DICA14  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & University of California-Davis Arboretum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Names 
Brodiaea, wild hyacinth.   There are two recognized 
subspecies:  Dichelostemma  capitatum  ssp. capitatum  
and  Dichelostemma  capitatum  ssp. pauciflorum  
(Torr.) G. Keator. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Large quantities of corms were 
gathered with digging sticks in over half of 
California, parts of the Great Basin and Southwest.  
These corms formed an important starch source in the 
diet of native people.  California Indians dug and 
continue to dig the corms before flowering, during 
flowering, or after seeding depending upon the tribe 
and individual family.  Traditional gathering sites 
were visited annually, over long periods of time and 
there are references to ga thering tracts of different  kinds of corms and bulbs specifically owned and 
maintained by particular 
families.  Today different 
kinds of brodiaeas have gained popularity as cut-
flower crops. 
 
Wildlife : Corms are eaten by both small and large 
mammals included black bears, mule deer, exotic 
wild pigs, and pocket gophers.  The corms of blue 
dicks are highly desirable to vertebrates, and it 
appears that some corms are sacrificed to corm-eating 
animals as a price for the dispersal of others.  The 
mammals detach the tiny corms as they go, aerating 
soil, preparing the seedbed, thinning the plant 
population, and leaving cormlets behind.  Once 
dislodged, cormlets may take less time to reach 
flowering size.   
 Beatrice F. Howitt.  © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General:  Lily Family (Liliaceae).  Blue dicks is an 
herbaceous perennial.  Major identifying features of 
blue dicks include a dense  cluster of purple-blue or 
occasional white flowers with  six fertile stamens, a 
twisted and fleshy stem, two basal leaves, a set of 
membranous, petal-like st amen appendages around 
the anthers, and angular black seeds.  It reproduces 
from seed and vegetative means in the form of corms.  
The cormlets are attached to the parent corm by 
stolons or sessile, produced in the axils of the old leaf 
bases on the mature corm. 
 
Blue dicks may reach two feet in height, thrives in 
open disturbed environments, and it frequently occurs 
on inventory lists as a common post-fire successional 
species in chaparral studies 
 
Distribution 
It is found from Oregon, throughout most of 
California including the southern halfway of the Baja 
California peninsula, southeast into New Mexico, 
Arizona, and Sonora, Mexico.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Blue dicks occur from sea level up to 
2,100 meters.  It inhabits a wide variety of plant

communities including vernal pools, coastal strand, 
mixed evergreen forest, chaparral, valley grassland, 
desert scrub, coniferous forests, oak woodlands, 
montane scree, and on the fringe of coastal salt marsh 
and redwood forest.   
It appears that it does not colonize after fire by seed, 
but rather is a permanent resident all along, occurring 
as inconspicuous corms in the soil throughout mature 
chaparral, often not flowering until an appropriate 
disturbance.  With fire, plants are released from 
unfavorable shaded environments with brush 
competition, and vigorously flower in open 
environments with incr eased soil nutrients. 
 
If possible, obtain the s eed and corms from local 
sources near where they will  be planted, to maintain 
genetic diversity of blue dicks and for the best 
adaptation to local conditions.  Some plant nurseries 
may label their corms and seeds according to 
geographic source. 
 
Propagation by seed : Seeds sown in the fall usually 
readily germinate and do no t need special treatment.  
If sown at other times of the year the seeds may need 
one month's stratification.  If planting seeds, they will 
take several years to reach flowering size.  Scatter 
seeds and rake them lightly into the soil in full or 
partial sunlight.  If plantin g seeds in pots--then place 
them in reduced sunlight on the east or north side of a 
building or under a deciduous  tree.  Plant the seeds at 
a depth, which equals the width of the seeds.  They 
should be planted in a well-drained soil.  Water the 
seeds after planting and don't let the soil dry out 
completely.  Water them again when the surface is 
dry to the touch.  Water the seeds gently so as not to 
exhume the seed.  If using a watering can, diffuse the 
water flow with a sprinkler fan or head.  Protect the 
seeds from animals and co ld, dry winds, and from 
weed competition.  The seedlings should be watered 
through the spring.  At the beginning of hot weather, 
the leaves will start to ye llow.  At this time, cease 
watering.  If the seeds are in  pots, then move them in 
summer to a darker area, such as a carport or garage 
and keep a screen on them to keep out foraging 
animals.  When the weathe r cools down once again, 
move the pots back outside and go through a full rain 
or watering cycle once again.  After 24 months, the 
corms can be planted in full sun or filtered shade in 
October or November.  Plant them about six inches 
apart or scatter the corms  and plant them where they 
fall to give them a look of a "natural" distribution.  
After one bloom, the plants should be well 
established so that they don't need to be weeded or 
watered unless it is a dry winter.  If it is a dry winter, 
then water every three weeks. 
 
Corms are the easiest to start.  Plant bigger corms 3-4 
inches deep and smaller corms 1-2 inches deep in 
well-drained soil in full sun in the autumn, and the 
plants can tolerate aftern oon sun.  Space the corms 
one-inch apart.  If pocket gophers are a problem, you 
may want to dig a hole and line it with chicken wire 
mesh, before planting corms.  (Plastic mesh won't 
stop gophers.)  Water the plants (wet, but not soggy) 
and then wait for the winter rains.  The plant is 
common in climates that have rain in winter and 
spring, and a summer dry season.  Therefore, 
simulate these conditions in the garden.  The plant is 
intolerant of frequent summer water and should not 
be planted near lawns or plants that require a lot of 
moisture during the summer.  Weed around the plants 
regularly. 
 
Management 
There are five major types of indigenous 
management activities conducted in California that 
were designed to ensure future corm production at 
traditional gathering sites: 1) conscious breaking off 
cormlets from the harvested parent corms and 
replanting them; 2) sparing whole plants; 3) 
harvesting the corms after plants have gone to seed 
and dumping the seeds in the hole; 4) burning areas; 
and 5) irrigation.  Periodic digging and thinning of 
the corms, and popping off the cormlets, and 
replanting them may enhance blue dicks numbers and 
densities.  Digging corms may in fact be a form of 
tillage, which will increase the size of the gathering 
tract, aerate the soil, lower weed competition, and 
prepare the seedbed to increase seed germination 
rates.  If blue dicks populations require periodic 
disturbance to maintain and increase their 
populations, then indigenous harvesting regimes, if 
reenacted, may help maintain populations.  At the 
very least, populations that become overcrowded and 
show reduced vigor should be divided and separated. 
 
Traditionally, various tribes in California have 
burned areas of blue  dicks to reduce plant 
competition, facilitate gathering, recycle nutrients, 
and increase the size and number of corms.  Today 
grasslands that have been burned may exhibit 
thousands of blue dicks plants where none appeared 
to occur before.  Corms and bulbs may sit for a 
decade or more and wait for fire or other favorable 
environmental conditions before breaking ground.  
Suppression of fire may cause increased shade and 
plant competition and decrease population numbers 
of blue dicks.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
DICA14 is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. 1997.   From tillage to table: the 
indigenous cultivation of geophytes for food in 
California.   Journal of Ethnobiology 17(2):149-169. 
 
Anderson, M.K. & D.L. Rowney 1998.   California 
geophytes: their ecology, ethnobotany, and 
conservation .  Fremontia 26(1):12-18. 
 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh: Cahuilla 
Indian knowledge and usage of plants.  Malki 
Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Chestnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the United States National Herbarium, Government 
Printing Office 1900-1902.  Vol. 7:295-422.  
Reprinted in 1974 by the Mendocino County 
Historical Society Inc.,  Fort Bragg, California. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.  Subsistence.  Pages 64-97, IN 
W.L. D'Azevedo, editor.   Handbook of North 
American Indians.  Vol. 11: Great Basin.  
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Heffner, K. 1984.   Following the smoke: 
contemporary plant procurement by the Indians of 
Northwest California .  Unpublished report, USDA, 
Six Rivers National Forest, Eureka, California. 
 
Keator, G. 1989.   The brodiaeas.  The Four Seasons 
8(3):4-11. 
 
Keator, G. 1992.   Blue dicks brodiaea 
(Dichelostemma capitatum): A common but 
problematical species.  The Four Seasons 9(2):31-42. 
 
Keator, G. 1993.   Dichelostemma.  Pages 1190-1192, 
IN J.C. Hickman, editor.   The Jepson Manual: 
Higher Plants of California.   University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Lawton, H.W., P.J. Wilke, M. DeDecker, & W.M. 
Mason 1993.   Agriculture among the Paiute of 
Owens Valley.   Pages 329-378, IN  T.C. Blackburn 
and K. Anderson, editors.   Before the wilderness: 
Environmental management by Native Californians .  
Ballena Press, Menlo Park, California. 
 
Mayes, V.O. & B.B. Lacy 1989.   Nanisé: A Navajo 
herbal.   Navajo Community College Press, Tsaile, 
Arizona. 
 
Niehaus, T. 1971.   A biosystematic study of the genus 
Brodiaea (Amaryllidaceae) .  University of California 
Publications in Botany 60, Berkeley, California. 
 
Peri, D.W. 1985.   Pomoan plant resource 
management.   Ridge Review 4(4).  Mendocino, 
California. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Warren Roberts  
Davis Arboretum, University of California 
Davis, California  Edited 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.