Plant Guide
PANICLEDLEAF  
TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium paniculatum (L.) DC. 
Plant Symbol = DEPA6 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Rose Lake Plant 
Materials  Center and Norman Berg National Plant 
Materials Center.  
 Photo by Rick Mark rick.mark@comcast.net image used with permission  
Alternate Names 
Panicled  ticktrefoil  
Uses  
Panicledleaf  tick trefoil  attracts birds and is a grazing and 
browsing plan t for livestock  and mammalian wildlife 
(USDA, 2 013).  Panicledleaf t icktrefoil enriches the soil 
through nitrogen fixation  (Shockley et al. ,  2011) .  Long -
tongued bumblebees ( Bombus impatiens and  Bombus 
pensylvanica ) collect pollen from the flowers.  Other long 
tongued bee pollinators include leaf -cutti ng bees 
( Megachile brevis brevis, Megachile mendica , and 
Megachile  petulans), and digger bees ( Melissodes 
bimaculata  bimaculata). Short tongued bee pollinators 
include: sweat bees ( Nomia nortoni nortoni ) and Campus 
bees ( Calliopsis andreniformis )  (Hilty, 2 013a). The 
caterpillars of several skippers feed on the leaves: Hoary 
Edge  (Achalarus lyciades) , Silver-Spotted Skipper 
( Epargyreus clarus) , Southern Cloudywing ( Thorybes 
bathyllus) , and Northern Cloudywing ( Thorybes pylades).  
The caterpillars of the butt erfly Eastern Tailed Blue 
( Everes comyntas)  also feed on the foliage, while the 
caterpillars of the butterfly Gray Hairstreak ( Strymon 
melinus ) eat the flowers and developing seedpods. Other 
insect feeders include many kinds of beetles, and some  species of
 thrips, aphids, moth caterpillars, and stinkbugs.  
The seeds are eaten by some upland  game birds 
(Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and small rodents (White -
Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while the foliage is readily 
eaten by White -Tailed Deer and other hoofed mam malian 
herbivores. The Cottontail Rabbit also consumes the 
foliage  (Hilty, 2013b) .
 
Panicledleaf ticktrefoil Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
Panicledleaf  ticktrefoil  is a native, perennial, wildflower 
that grows up to 4  feet ta ll  (USDA, 20 13) . The genus 
Desmodium : originates from Greek meaning "long branch 
or chain," probably from the shape and attachment of the 
seedpods.  The taxonomy of this species is quite variable 
with several varieties based on leaflet size and shape 
(Voss, 1985).  The stems are light green and usually 
hairless.  Alternate compound leaves occur at intervals 
along the stems; they are trifoliate and their leaflets are 
extended horizontally in relation to the ground.  
Individual leaflets are up to 3½  inches long and ¾ inch 
wide.  The petioles of the compound leaves are up to 2  
inches long.  The upper  stems terminate in either racemes 
or narrow panicles of flowers.  Individual flowers are ¼  
inch long and have a typical pea- like structure.  The petals 
are pink to purple.  The blooming period occurs from 
mid -summer to early fall and lasts about 1 –  1 ½  months.  
Seeds form in seed pots (flat loments) that are about ½  - 1 
½ inches long.   Each seed pod consists of 2 –  6 rounded 
segments with a single seed in each segment.   This 
wildflower is a pioneer species that prefers some 
disturbance from wildfires, se lective logging, and others 
causes  (Hilty, 2013b) .   The sticky seedpods  cling to the 
fur of animals and the clothing of humans  and  are carried 
to new locations  (USDA, 1961) . 
Ethnobotany  
The Houma Indians of Louisiana used an infusion of the 
roots in whiske y to treat weakness and cramps  (Moerman, 
1988;  Speck, 1941) .
 
Distribution:    
Its range is from New England to Minnesota and from 
Florida to Texas.  It is commo n throughout the Midwest 
States (USDA, 2013).  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.