Plant Guide
SEARLS’ PRAIRIE 
CLOVER  
Dalea searlsiae (A. Gray) Barneby  
Plant Symbol = DASE3 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program and USDA -ARS Forage and Range 
Research  Laboratory  
 
Gerald and  Buff  Corsi  ©  California  Academy  of  Sciences  
Alternate Names  
Petalostemon searlsiae A. Gray  
Kuhnistera searlsiae (A. Gray) Kuntze  
Uses  
Plants  of Searls’ prairie clover are grazed by  many 
animals including rabbits, deer , sheep and cattle.   This 
legume forms a symbiotic association with soil bacteria 
( Rhizobium spp. ) that allows fixation of atmospheric 
nitrogen,  which can enhance forage nitrogen content for 
wildlife and livestock.  Flowers are visited by pollinators, 
primarily bees, during bloom from June -July.   Searls’ 
prairie clover may have been  more widely spread than its 
current distribution in the Great Bas in, Colorado Plateau  
and the northern Mo jave Desert prior to the arrival of    
European settlers
. The decline may be due to overgrazing.   
Searls’ prairie clover can be used to diversify seeding 
mixtures for rangeland revegetation  as well as for 
pollinator h abitat enhancement, home landscaping and 
roadside planting . 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicat or values). 
Description and Adaptation 
General:  Legume family (Fabaceae).  Searls’ prairie 
clover is a native, herbaceous legume with decumbent to 
erect stems.   It was named after Fanny Searls who first 
collected it near the Pahranagat Mines in southeaster n 
Nevada in 1871 (Tiehm 1985).   Plants range from 10-24 
inches tall and arise from a shallow, woody base.  The 
leaves are odd -pinnate with 3 or more glabrous leaflets 
with glands on the underside.  Flower stalks bear a spike-
like cluster of small pink - to  purple -colored flowers  that 
bloom from the base to the tip of the cluster .   Although 
two ovules are present in each flower, only one seed 
matures per flower (Barneby 1977).   The fruit is a small 
hairy pod with one seed , and there are  approximately 
1 48,000  seeds per pound  based on seed counts from 17 
wildland collections . 
 
 
Searls’ prairie clover distribution map from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
Distribution:  Searls’ prairie clover is a perennial legume 
that occurs in portions of the Great Basin , Colorado