Plant Guide
DILLENIUS’  
TICK TREFOIL 
Desmodium glabellum 
(Michx .)DC. 
Plant symbol = DEGL4 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose  Lake Plant  Materials 
Center.  
  David G. Smith, copyright 1997- 2009 
www.delawarewildflowers.org  
 
Alternate Names  
Panicle   tick trefoil, per plexed tick trefoil, tall tick clover, 
Di llen 's   tick trefoil (Connecticut), smooth tick trefoil.  
Uses  
Dillenius’  tick trefoil attracts birds and is a grazing and 
browsing plan t for livestock  and mammalian wildlife .  
Dilleneus’ ticktrefoil enriches the s oil through nitrogen 
fixa tion (Hilty, 2013) .  Long-tongued bumblebees 
( Bombus pensylvanica) collect pollen from the flowers.  
Other long tongued bee pollinators include leaf -cutting 
bees ( Megachile brevis brevis, Megachile mendica , and 
Megachile petulans) ,  and digger bees ( Melissodes 
bimaculata bimaculata).  The seeds of the Dillenius’ 
t ickt refoil are eaten by upland game birds, small rodents, 
wild turkey, rabbits, groundhogs and livestock. It is also 
an excellent deer browse  (Hilty, 2013).  
 
Status  
Dilleniu s’ ticktrefoil is considered a species of concern on 
the list of threatened, endangered, or species of concern 
plants in Connecticut, due to its low population in the 
State (CT Dept. of Env. Prot., 1988).   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state  
noxious status, and wetland indicator value.)  
Description  
Dille nius’ tick trefoil is a member of the pea family.  This 
native perennial forb grows  between 2 ½ to 5 feet in 
height.  The leaves are alternate, composed of three entire 
leaflets. The leaflets are about 1 ½   - 3 ½ inches long and 
about half as wide.  The petioles of the compound leaves 
are about ½ -  1 ½ inches in length.  They are egg s haped 
with little or no point. Its tiny flowers are pink or purple 
and irregular in shape.   These flowers have a typical 
structure for members of the bean family.   The flowers 
turn light blue when spent. Bloom time is from mid -
summer to early f all and lasts about a month. Seeds form 
in seed pods (flat loments) that are about ¾ -  1 ½ inches 
long.  Each seed pod consists  of 2 –  5 rounded segments 
with a single seed in each segment. Long tongued bees 
are the primary pollinators (Hilty, 2013).  The seed pods 
are  covered with tiny hooked hairs that enable them to 
stick to the fur of passing animals and the fabric of 
humans, thus providing a mechanism for dispersal  
(USDA, 1961) .   
Distribution :
  Its range is from New York  to  Iowa  and 
from Florida to Texas.  It is co mmon throughout the 
Midwest States  (USDA, 2013) . 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation 
Dillenius’  tick trefoil prefers partial sun and dry to slightly 
dry conditions.  It usually  grows in soil that contains 
loam, clay -loam, or some kinds  of rocky material.  Its 
habitats include savannas, rocky upland forest, edges of 
wooded areas, thickets, and limestone glades  (Hilty, 
2013) . 
Establishment  
A clean, firm seedbed is essential f or establishing 
Dillenius’ tickt refoil.  A good seedbed can be prepared by 
disking and harrowing, following by cultipacking.  
Planting into no -till conditions can be effective provided 
weeds are controlled and residue is managed prior to

planting.  Good seed-to-soil contact is important for 
germination and establishment  (USDA, 2008) .  
 
The seedbed should be firm enough to  allow the seed to 
be planted ⅛ to ¼ inch  deep.  Cultipacker seeders and 
band seeders followed by press wheels or a cultipacker 
help ensure shallow seed placement and good seed -to -s oil 
contact.  Apply phosphorus  and p otassium fertilizer  only 
as recommended by a so il test (USDA, 2008) .  Nitrogen 
fertilizer is not recommended  since ticktrefoil species fix 
nitrogen from the atmosphere . 
 
Inoculating seeds with Rhizobium  before planting is 
recommended.  Consult inoculant supplier for 
recommendations on specific Rhizobium  strains for 
Dillenius’ tick -trefoil  (Shockley et al., 2011).   
 
See ding rates for Dillenius’ tickt refoil should be as part of 
a wildflow er, legume, and grass mix developed to meet 
the objective of the planting .  Seed can be planted in the 
spring or early  fall.  Early Fall seeding may be preferable 
for longer establishment period to potentially hot and dry 
summer conditions.  If fall planting is not possible due to 
weather, store seed dry at 34 –  36
o F and plant in the 
spring.  
Management  
Reduce weed competi tion by mowing at a height that will 
not affect the tick -trefoil seedlings.  For grassy weed                     
control use a grass herbicide and follow label 
recommendation, as weed control will encourage a good 
stand.  Note:  Some herbicide products may  not be 
registered on this legume species in your state.    
  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Japanese beetle adults feed on flowers and leaves.   
White mold has been observed on some Desmodium  
species  (Observations at the Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East  Lansing, Michigan) .  
Environmental Concerns  
None at this time . 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Dillenius’ tickt refoil produces seed annually.   Protection 
from deer browse may be needed to ensure seed 
production.  Seed pods stay attached to the stem late into 
th e fall, so shattering loss  is not a big concern.  Harvest 
seeds by hand or with a combine harvester when seed 
pods and stems are brown and dry.  A plant desiccant may 
be used to aid plant dry down.  Seeds may or may not 
separate from the seed pod during ha rvest.  Seeds can be 
separated from the pod using a brush separator, hammer 
mill, or similar equipment.  Seed can be further cleaned 
using a fanning
 mill  (Observations at the Rose Lake Plant 
Materaials Center, East Lansing, Michigan) .  Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)
 
Alcona Germplasm Dillenius’ t icktrefoil  is a tested class 
release from the Rose Lake Plant Materials Center in East 
Lansing, Michigan.  It was collected from na tive stands in 
Alcona County, Michigan  and released in 2006.   
M arion Germplasm Dillenius’ tick trefoil is a selected 
class release from the Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
in East Lansing, Michigan.  It was collected from na tive 
stands in Marion County, Illinois  and released in 2009.   
References  
Connecticu t Department of Environmental Protection.  
1988. Endangered, threatened, and special concern 
plants. State of Connecticut.  www.ct.gov/deep 
/cwp/view.asp?a=2702&q=323482&depNav_GID=1
628.  Verified 2/22/2013.  
Hilty, J. Editor.  2013.  Perplexing Tick Trefoil  
( Desmodium perplexum ).  World Wide Web 
electronic publication.  Illinoiswildflowers.info  
/savanna/plants/perplexing_ttrefoil.htm. Verified 
2/22/ 2013.  
       USDA.  1961.  Seeds.  The Yearbook of Agriculture.   U.S. Printing Office. Washington, DC.  591 pp.   
        Shockley, F. W., R. L. McGraw, and H. E. Garret.  2011.   Growth and Nutrient Concentrations of two Native 
Forage Legumes with Rhizobium and Mycorrhiza in 
Missouri, USA.  Agroforestry Systems 60:137- 142. 
        USDA- NRCS. 2008. Conservation Practi ce Standard 327 
–  Conservation Cover.  NRCS -MI Field Operations 
Technical Guide.   
         USDA -NRCS.  2013.   PLANTS Database.  
www.plants.usda.gov.  Verified 2/22/2013.  
 
Prepared By : USDA- NRCS Rose Lake  Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan.  
Citat ion 
Leif, J. 2013, Plant  Guide for Dillenius’ ticktrefoil 
( Desmodium glabellum ).  USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service , East Lansing, Michigan. 48823.  
Published March , 2013. 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local  NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.   
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or ava ilability 
of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER