Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ORCHARDGRASS 
Dactylis glomerata L. 
Plant Symbol = DAGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Rose Lake Plant Materials Center, 
Idaho State Office & Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center; USDA ARS Forage & Range Laboratory 
 
Alternate Names 
Cocksfoot 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Hayland: The primary use of orchardgrass is 
for forage production.  It is used for pasture, hay and 
silage. It is highly palatable to all classes of livestock.  
Orchardgrass is one of the best forage grasses for use 
in the Northern states under intensive rotational 
grazing systems. 
 
Erosion control : Because of its dense network of 
non-rhizomatous roots, orchardgrass provides good 
erosion control on those soils to which it is adapted. 
 
Wildlife : Elk and deer find orchardgrass highly 
palatable and will utilize it most of the year.   
Orchardgrass is sometimes used in grass-legume  
mixes for nesting brood rearing, and escape and 
winter cover in upland wildlife and conservation 
plantings.  However, upland birds and waterfowl 
prefer taller grasses that develop sparser stands such 
as basin wildrye and tall wheatgrass. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
Dactylis glomerata , orchardgrass, is a long-lived, 
introduced, cool season bunchgrass.  Under dryland 
conditions, it usually develops distinct clumps and 
flower culms 15 to 18 inches tall.  Leaves usually 
stand less than 12 inches in height.  When grown 
under irrigation or in moist-fertile situations, it attains 
a much larger stature and grows in a more closed 
stand. Orchardgrass is one  of the earliest species to 
initiate growth in the spring and makes tremendous 
growth during cool conditions.  Due to deep roots 
(most within 2 feet of the su rface) it is also capable of 
strong summer growth when conditions are favorable 
(i.e. somewhat cool). Under extremely hot 
conditions, orchardgrass will have a bigger 
production slump than meadow brome. Orchardgrass 
has 540,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation 
Orchardgrass is found from Maine to the Gulf Coast 
states and from the Atlan tic Coast to the Pacific 
Coast.  It is common throughout the Appalachian 
Mountains and is especially well adapted to 
Maryland, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Virginia, 
Kentucky, and Tennessee.  It is also found in the 
high-rainfall regions of the western mountains and in 
irrigated areas throughout the West.  Areas of 
greatest adaptability in the West are soils that had 
supported the sagebrush, grass, pinyon-juniper, 
ponderosa pine, aspen and Douglas fir communities.   
 
Orchardgrass is winter hardy and is adapted to 
moderate to well-drained basic to acidic soils.  It will 
not tolerate soils that are saturated for extended 
periods of time.  It produces best in areas with very 
little frost in the spring. Spring frost will not kill 
orchardgrass, but it does reduce overall production.

In areas with significant spring frost such as 
mountain valleys, meadow brome is a better species 
selection. 
 
Orchardgrass performs well on soil textures ranging 
from clay to gravely loams and on shallow to deep 
soils.  It does not grow well in saline soils and areas 
with high water tables within the rooting zone.  It has 
the ability to establish and persist in areas that receive 
as little as 16 inches of annual precipitation, but 
performs best with 18 inches of rainfall.   
 
Orchardgrass performs best in a pH range of 5.8 – 
7.5, but will tolerate pH as high as 8.5. It is adapted 
to shady areas or areas with reduced light.  
 
Establishment 
A clean, firm, weed-free se edbed is recommended.  
Dryland and erosion control seedings should be made 
in the late fall or very early spring.  Irrigated seedings 
should be made in early to mid spring. Do not seed 
after the spring moisture period is well advanced or a 
failure may occur because of dry seedbed conditions 
and hot summer temperatures  before the grass is well 
established.  A deep furrow  or double disc drill with 
press wheels may be used,  however, orchardgrass is 
easily established with common agricultural drills.  
The recommended seeding rate for orchardgrass is 4 
pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre.   If broadcast 
seeded or planted for critical area treatment, double 
the seeding rate.  Adjustments in seeding rate should 
be made when seeding in mixtures.  Seeding depth 
should be 1/4 to 1/2 inch.   
 
Management 
Under dryland conditions the new planting should not 
be grazed until late summer or fall  of the second 
growing season.  The plants may be severely 
damaged by overgrazing especially in the seedling 
year. Under irrigated conditions the new planting 
should not be grazed un til late summer or fall of the 
first growing season.  The plants may be severely 
damaged by grazing too soon. 
 
Use no more than 60% of  the annual growth during 
the winter season or 50% during the growing season.  
Close grazing in the fall is consistently associated 
with winterkill.  This plant responds well to rotation-
deferred grazing systems.  Periodically the grass 
should be allowed to mature and produce seed for 
continuation of the stand. 
 
Orchardgrass responds very well to good fertility 
management.  It is one of the most responsive pasture 
grasses to nitrogen applications. One strategy to even  out the forage production is to fertilize the stand after 
the first and second cutting or grazing period to boost 
late spring and summer production.  Apply fertilizer 
based on soil tests. 
 
Seed Production 
When planting for seed increase, recommended row 
spacing is 28 to 40 inches.  Seeding rate is 1.5 to 2 
pounds PLS per acre to seed 25 to 30 PLS per linear 
foot of row.  Irrigated seed yields are commonly 250 
to 300 pounds per acre.  Se
ed matures evenly and is 
ready for harvest in mid-July.  Windrowing followed 
by combining is the preferred method of harvest.  
When direct combining the seed should be dried to 
12 percent moisture in bins and 15 percent moisture 
in sacks before storing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Brown stripe, scald, rust and leaf spot are the most 
prevalent and destructive disease in orchardgrass.  
Resistance to these varies among cultivars.  Japanese 
and green June beetle larv ae feed on orchardgrass 
roots; sawflies feed on their tops.  Little is known, 
however, about the economic loss caused by these 
insects. 
 
Orchardgrass does not spread vegetatively and is 
much less invasive than many other grasses.  Consult 
the PLANTS Plant Profile for references pertaining 
to invasive qualities.  Seeds can collect on animal 
coats and be transported long distances.  Watering 
and bedding areas are typical sites where 
orchardgrass may colonize. 
 
Orchardgrass seed is  a common contaminant of 
turfgrass seed.  While mowing prevents further 
spread, individual orchardgrass plants persist and 
lower the aesthetic value of the turf.     
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are many orchardgrass releases available. 
Consult local experts to se lect the best release for 
your area. Orchardgrass cultivars fall into two types: 
early maturing and late maturing.  The late maturing 
cultivars are more common. The most common 
releases used in the Intermountain West are described 
below. 
 
‘Latar’  was released in 1957 and is still commonly 
seeded in pasture and hayland plantings.  It has a low 
lignin (fiber) content and digestibility is very high.  It 
matures 10 to 14 days later than common 
orchardgrass and is usually in the pre-bloom stage 
when alfalfa is at the  optimum growth stage for 
cutting hay.  Therefore a mixture of ‘Latar’ and

alfalfa makes a high quality hay.  Forage yields of 
‘Latar’ are at least as much per acre as the earlier 
maturing varieties and forage quality is generally 
superior. The venerable old ‘Latar’ has lost some of 
its market-share to newer cultivars, which exhibit 
disease tolerance and winter hardiness.  'Latar' 
Breeder seed is maintained by the Pullman, 
Washington Plant Materials Center. 
 
‘Paiute’  is a cultivar that produces an abundance of 
basal leaves and leafy upright stems.  Its intended use 
is for forage production on arid lands. 'Paiute' is 
considered somewhat more drought tolerant than 
other varieties of orchardgrass. However, it generally 
does not perform well below 16-inch rainfall areas. 
At very high elevations (6500 feet plus), it may 
perform well at slightly lower rainfall amounts.  It 
matures too early to be compatible with alfalfa.  
'Paiute' Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained 
by the Aberdeen, Idaho Plant Materials Center. 
 
 ‘Potomac’  is a productive, persistent, rust-resistant 
cultivar that produces good yields but matures too 
early to be compatible with alfalfa for hay.  When 
alfalfa is ready to cut, ‘Potomac’ is too mature to 
produce good quality hay.  When seeded in a 
monoculture, 'Potomac' often produces very high 
yields. This variety should be used where early 
maturity is needed and as a single species hay. 
Oregon Foundation Seed and Plant Materials Project 
and Washington Crop Improvement Station maintain 
Breeder and Foundation seed. 
 
‘ Berber ’ is a long lived, drought resistant, cool 
season perennial bunchgrass, native to Europe. It has 
been tested in the mediterranean climate area of 
California for erosion control on natural and man-
made disturbed areas, and for dryland range use. It 
appears that Berber could be used for erosion control 
and fire control in areas adjacent to housing 
developments. It is very drought tolerant and would 
remain green throughout the summer with small 
amounts of supplemental water.  Berber seed is 
maintained by the Lockeford Plant Materials Center 
in California. 
  
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in 
your area and how to use it safely.  Always read and 
follow label and safety inst ructions for each control 
method. Trade names and control measures appear in 
this document only to provide specific information.  
USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named and other 
products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:   
Tony Bush  
USDA NRCS Rose Lake PMC 
East Lansing, Michigan 
Dan Ogle  
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John 
USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Mark Stannard 
USDA NRCS Pullman PMC 
Pullman, Washington 
 
Dr. Kevin B. Jensen 
USDA ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory 
Utah State University, Logan, Utah 
 
Species Coordinator:   
Mark Stannard 
USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Pullman, Washington 
 Edited: 10Aug00 jlk; 24septo2 lsj; 22oct02 ms; 24jan03 kbj; 
03jan03 dgo; 11feb03 jsp; 27apr05 rln; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.