Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
THREEFLOWER TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium triflorum (L.) DC.  
Plant Symbol = DETR4 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Meibomia  triflora , Sagotia  triflora,  threeflower 
beggerweed, creeping tick tr efoil, tropical trefoil, 
atiponna, kuddalia, amor-do-campo, hierba cuartillo  
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Hydraulic roughness is a measure of 
a plants ability to control rill erosion.   Threeflower 
ticktrefoil exhibited significantly greater (P<0.05) 
hydraulic roughness than either star grass 
( Dactylontenium aegyptium ) or stubborn grass 
( Sporobolus pyramidalis ) when planted in vegetated 
waterways in Nigeria.  Ogunlela & Makanjuola 
(2000) describe threeflowe r ticktrefoil as a creeper 
and star grass and stubborn grass as bunch grasses.  
Threeflower ticktrefoil’s hydraulic roughness was 
approximately 1.6 times greater than the average of 
star grass and stubborn grass.  The stem height of 
threeflower ticktrefoil was approximately 1.3 in. and 
the average of the bunch gr asses 9.0 in.  The plants 
with the greater stem height would have been 
expected to possess higher water retardant values.  
The converse was observed, which suggests that stem 
height is important in intercepting raindrop impact 
while vegetal density is more important for retarding 
surface flows.       
 
Weed control : Dried chopped leaves of 4 allelopathic 
plant species were evaluated for their effect on weed 
emergence in paddy soil in a greenhouse and in a rice 
field in Vietnam (Hong, Xuan, Tsuzuki, Terano, 
Matsuo, & Khanh, 2004).  These 4 four species were 
harlequin glorybower ( Clerodendrum trichotomum ), 
jimsonweed ( Datura stramonium ), Chinaberry (Melia 
azedarach ) and threeflower ticktrefoil.  In the 
greenhouse experiment, jimsonweed, threeflower 
ticktrefoil and Chinaberrytree exhibited similar levels 
of weed inhibition, more than 90% control, when 
applied at 0.45 tons of dried leaves per acre.  
Harlequin glorybower leaves achieved about 70% 
weed reduction when applied  at 0.9 tons per acre. In 
a paddy rice field, threeflower ticktrefoil leaves 
applied at 9.0 tons per acre produced the highest level 
of weed control and rice yield of all the treatments; 
the treatments included a commercial herbicide for 
rice.  The threeflower ticktrefoil treatment had 94% 
less weed dry weight and 28% more rice yield than 
the no leaves applied control; differences between 
control and the threeflower ticktrefoil treatment were 
significant (P<0.05).    
 Forest & Kim Starr @ Pacific Island Ecosystems at Risk  
Several ground covers were evaluated as live mulch 
in maize production in a series of experiments in 
Nigeria (Akobundu & Okigbo, 1984).  Maize planted 
into threeflower ticktrefoil ground cover exhibited 
shorter height and lower grain yield (P<0.05) than 
maize in plots treated with paraquat herbicide and 
maize stover applied to the soil surface prior to maize 
planting.  Weed infestation was heaviest in the 
broadleaf carpetgrass  ( Axonopus compressus) , 
threeflower ticktrefoil and trailing indigo ( Indigofera 
spicata) ground cover treatments; moderate in the 
Arachis repens  treatment; and very low in the flor de 
conchitas (Centrosema pubescens ) and psophocarpus 
( Psophocarpus palustris ) treatments.  Weed 
competition was minimized and good maize yield 
obtained with both the flor de conchitas and 
psophocarpus legume ground covers and proper 
ground cover management.  The authors conclude 
that legume ground covers can suppress weeds and 
protect tropical soils.   
 
Cover crop : The NRCS Field Office Technical Guide 
for Hawaii recommends threeflower ticktrefoil as a 
cover crop for perennial crops such as orchard trees.  
The University of Hawaii recommends broadleaf 
carpetgrass as a cover crop in macadamia, coffee, 
coconut, oil palm and rubber orchards.  Threeflower

ticktrefoil combines well with broadleaf carpet grass 
in an orchard cover crop.  
 
In a coconut plantation in the Solomon Islands, 
replacement of the mat forming golden false 
beardgrass (Chrysopogon aciculatus ) with 
threeflower ticktrefoil as the cover crop increased 
copra yield from 747 to 1,956 tons per acre.  The 
plantation managers used cultivation to replace the 
golden false beardgrass with threeflower ticktrefoil.  
The authors suggest that the increase in copra yield 
was due to three factors: nitrogen fixation by 
threeflower ticktrefoil, less competition from the 
threeflower ticktrefoil, soil aeration and nutrient 
release from the cultivation, or a combination of all 
three.     
 
Silvopasture : Threeflower ticktrefoil is frequently a 
part of the pasture component of coconut-pasture, 
rubber-pasture and oil palm-pasture silvopasture 
systems.  Threeflower tickt refoil is naturalized in 
many of the coconut growing areas.  Threeflower 
ticktrefoil exhibits prostrate growth and low forage 
yield.  But, it is palatable to livestock, persistent 
under heavy grazing and tolerant to moderate shade.  
Reports indicate that threeflower ticktrefoil is a 
successful legume when  intercropped with the 
following grasses: broadleaf carpetgrass, palisade 
signalgrass ( Urochloa brizantha), hilograss 
( Paspalum  conjugatum ) and St. Augustine grass 
( Stenotaphrum  secundatum ). 
 
Human consumption:  Tribal people in southern India 
consume threeflower ticktrefoil as a green.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Threeflower ticktrefoil is listed as an invasive species 
by the Plant Conservation Alliance: Alien Plant 
Working Group.  The USDA-FS Pacific Islands 
Ecosystems at Risk project  indicates that threeflower 
ticktrefoil is present in the Pacific Islands, but does 
not class it as invasive.   
 
Threeflower ticktrefoil plant may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Servi ce office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding its  status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.
 
 
Description 
General: Threeflower ticktrefoil as described by B.C. 
Stone (1970) is a “Creeping herb; much-branched, 
somewhat mat-forming; leaves of 3 leaflets, the 
lower leaves sometimes unifoliolate; leaflets obovate, 
to obcordate, rounded and  emarginate at tip, mostly 
less than 1 cm long, up to 9 mm wide, sometimes
 
with 2 white marks; flowers few in fascicles, opposite 
leaves, pedicels 3-8 mm long, lengthening in fruit to 
just over 1 cm; puberulent; corolla reddish-violet or 
pale pink, standard obovate, 4-5 mm long; pods up to 
17 mm long, about 2.3 mm broad, 3-7-jointed, 
indehiscent.” 
 
Distribution : Threeflower ticktrefoil is native to the 
Old World tropics and subtropics.  Currently, it is 
pantropical, extending northward to Florida.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Threeflower ticktrefoil’s habitat is described 
by A.C. Smith, W.L. Wagner and W.A. Whistler.  In 
Hawai'i, it is “naturalized and common in dry, 
disturbed sites near the co ast and on dry slopes and 
lava flows, also in lawns, pastures, waste places and 
along roadsides, 6-1,443 ft".  In Fiji, it is “abundantly 
naturalized at elevations fr om near sea level to 1,968 
ft in lawns, waste places, and villages, on grassy 
hillsides, and along roadsides and forest tracks".  It is 
“common in lawns and other disturbed places". 
 
Adaptation 
The NRCS Field Office Technical Guide for Hawaii 
indicates that threeflower ticktrefoil is adapted to a 
soil pH range of 45 to 7.0, an elevation range of 0 to 
2,500 ft, and requires at least 60 inches of annual 
rainfall.  Other sources describe threeflower 
ticktrefoil as drouth resistant but will not tolerate 
extended dry periods.  Threeflower ticktrefoil 
exhibits fair to moderate shade tolerance.   
 
Establishment 
Threeflower ticktrefoil can be propagated by seed 
and stolons.  The NRCS Field Office Technical 
Guide for Hawaii indicates that threeflower 
ticktrefoil seed should be inoculated with the cowpea 
inoculant group.  The recommended seeding rate 
when planting threeflower ticktrefoil as a cover crop 
for orchards is 20 lb of pure live seed per acre; the 
recommended stolon planting rate is 40 to 80 bushels 
per acre.  Threeflower ticktrefoil’s rate of 
establishment is described as medium.

Management 
The NRCS Field Office Technical Guide for Hawaii 
indicates that threeflower ticktrefoil stands require a 
low amount of maintenance.  Threeflower ticktrefoil 
is persistent and resistant to heavy grazing.     
 
Environmental Concerns 
The southern green stink bug (Nezara viridula) is a 
serious pest of agriculture worldwide and one of the 
most serious pests of macadamia nuts in Hawaii.  
Threeflower ticktrefoil serves as a host for the 
southern green stink bug.  Also, threeflower 
ticktrefoil is a host for the soybean rust ( Phakopsora 
pachyrhizi ). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
No information 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
The effect of aerial applications of ocean salt water 
on the percentage cover of native plant species was 
evaluated at Kalaupapa National Historic Park in 
Hawaii.  The study site contained the native plants: 
tropical fimbry (Fimbristylis cymosa ), yellow ilima 
( Sida  fallax ), dune tetramolopium ( Tetramolopium 
rockii  var. rockii); non-native plants: southern 
crabgrass ( Digitaria ciliaris ) and threeflower 
ticktrefoil.  Weekly appli cations for 18 weeks of 
either 2 or 4 gal salt water m
2 decreased the 
percentage cover of non-native plants.   
 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Akobundu, I.O. & Okigbo, B.N.  1984. Preliminary 
evaluation of ground covers for use as live mulch in 
maize production.  Field Crops Research  8:177-186. 
 
Congdon, B. & Addison, H. 2003. Optimising 
nutrition for productive and sustainable farm forestry 
system. RIRC/Land & Water Australia/FWPRDC 
MDBC Joint Venture Agroforestry Program.   
http://www.rirdc.gov.au/
 
C/T/AH/R University of Hawaii. 2005. Cover crops 
& green manures, broadleaf carpet grass:  Axonopus 
compressus . 
http://www2.ctahr.hawaii.edu/sustainag/Database.asp
 
Hong, N.H., Xuan, T.D., Tsuzuki, E., Terano, H., 
Matsuo, M. & Khanh, T.D . 2004. Weed control of 
four higher plant species in paddy rice fields in 
Southeast Asia . J. Agronomy & Crop Science  190: 
59-64.  
 
Jacobi, J.D . 1998. Use of salt water to control non-
native plants in a costal strand community . The 1998 
Hawaii Conservation Conference, Honolulu.   
http://www.hawaii.edu/scb/docs/library/1998_abstrac
ts.htm
 
Jones, V.P., Westcott, D.M., Finson, N.N. & 
Nishimoto . 2001. Relationship between community 
structure and southern green stink bug (Heteroptera: 
Pentatomidae) damage in macadamia nuts.  Environ. 
Entomol . 30: 1028-1035.    
 
Ogunlela, A.O. & Makanjuola, M.B . 2000. Hydraulic 
roughness of some African grasses.  J. Agric. Engng. 
Res. 75:221-224. 
 
Ohler, J.G. 1999 . Modern coconut management: 
Palm cultivation and products . ITDG Publishing.  
 
Ravishankar, T, 2005. Tribal women’s contribution 
to agricultural biodiversity conservation in India. 
2003 IN  Conservation and Sustainable Use of 
Agricultural Biodiversity . CIP-UPWARD.  
http://www.eseap.cipotato.org/upward/Abstract/Agro
bio-sourcebook.htm 
 
Reynolds,S.G.. 2005. Pasture-cattle-coconut systems. 
FAO.  
http://www.fao.org/documen ts/show_cdr.asp?url_file
=/DOCREP/
 
Smith, A.C. 1985. Flora Vitiensis nova: A new flora 
of Fiji.Lawai, Kauai, Hawaii.  National Tropical 
Botanical Garden . 3:193-194. 
 
Starr, F. & K. 2005. Image of Desmodium triflorum 
IN USDA FS Pacific Island Ecosystems at Risk . 
Accessed: 15SEP05.

http://www.hear.org/starr/hiplants/images/600max/ht
ml/starr_020803_0112_desmodium_triflorum.htm
 
Stone, B. C. 1970. The flora of Guam.  Micronesica 
6:332. 
 
Stur. W.W. & Shelton, H.M. 2003. Review of forage 
resources in plantation corp s of Southeast Asia and 
the Pacific. IN  Forage For Plantation Crops  
(Chapter 4).  
http://www.aciar.gov.au/web.nsf/doc/JFRN-5J476S
 
USDA APHIS.  2005. Soybean rust data sheet. 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/ppq/ep/soybean_rust/
 
USDA FS. 2005. Pacific island ecosystems at risk . 
http://www.hear.org/pier/
 
USDA NRCS . 2005. Field office  technical guide for 
Hawaii.   
 http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/efotg/
 
Wagner, W.L., Herbst, D.R & Sohmer, S.H . 1999. 
Manual of the flowering plants of Hawai'i. Revised 
edition. University of Hawai'i Press, Honolulu. 
 
Whistler, W. A . 1988. Checklist of the weed flora of 
western Polynesia. T echnical Paper No. 19 . South 
Pacific Commission, Noumea, New Caledonia. 
 
Prepared By:  
James Henson and Kellie King, USDA NRCS, 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 
Species Coordinator:  
James Henson, USDA NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 Edited: 15sep05 jsp; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.