Plant Guide
VELVET PANICUM 
Dichanthelium scoparium   
(Lam.) Gould  
Plant Symbol = DISC3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  
 
 Melinda Brakie  – USDA/Natural Resources Conservation Service   
 
Alternative Names  
  Velvet rosettegrass and broom panic -grass   
Uses   
Wildlife Value:  
Because of their wide distribution, Dichanthelium  spp. 
provides  an important source of food for songbirds, small 
mammals and game birds (Miller, 1999).   
 
Erosion Control:  
This species has a high tolerance of low pH conditions 
and is suitable for erosion control along roadsides and 
timber harvest areas.   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator value).  
Description   
General : Grass Family ( Poaceae). To date, there are 26 
identified species of Dichanthelium  spp. in the 
southeastern United States (Miller, 1999). This species is 
distinguished from other North American grasses by its 
unique growth pattern. A basal rosette is produced during 
fall and wi nter with stems developing in the spring 
(Gould, 1978).    Velvet panicum is a native perennial bunchgrass. 
However, the plant’s lifespan is considered to be short 
when compared to other perennial plants. It has erect 
coarse stems up to 4.5 feet tall. The gr
ay-green stems and 
leaves are covered with fine hairs. The leaves are .25 to 
1.0 inch wide which are smaller than broadleaf 
rosettegrass ( D. latifolium) and Bosc’s panicgrass ( D. 
boscii)  (USDA -NRCS, 2007 and Grelen, 1984). The plant 
produces seed in the su mmer (May to June) and also in 
the fall. The fall seeds are found within the spikelet 
sheath. Velvet panicum is considered a C3 (cool season) 
photosynthetic pathway plant (Gould, 1978).   
Velvet panicum is a diploid (2n = 18). The plant tends to 
flower late r than the other Dichanthelium  species if they 
are present in a stand (Gould, 1978). There are 
approximately 380,000 seeds per pound; however, velvet 
panicum is considered a low volume seed producer 
(USDA -NRCS, 2007).   
 
Distribution  
  For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Adaptation:   
Velvet panicum is adapted to the eastern United States 
from New York to Florida west to Kansas and Texas. 
This adaptation area corresponds to USDA Hardiness 
Zo nes 5b to 10b.   
 
Velvet panicum grows in areas with precipitation ranging 
from 30 to 55 inches. It prefers coarse and medium 
textured soils with pH range of 4.5 to 7.5. Velvet panicum 
is not tolerant of salinity (USDA -NRCS, 2007). This plant 
is found in sa ndy woods, bogs, marshes, and disturbed 
sites. It is often found scattered throughout new forest 
plantations (Miller, 1999). Velvet panicum is seldom 
found on burned or grazed forest range (Grelen, 1984).   
Establishment   
Fertilize planting area according t o soil test for 
establishment. Maintain fertility levels at medium 
conditions and soil pH near 6.0. To reduce weed 
competition, do not over apply nitrogen fertilizer.  
 
Cold stratification is not required in preparation for 
planting (USDA -NRCS, 2007). Plant  the seed at a rate of 
3.0 pure live seed pounds per acre in the fall when the 
ground is moist. Drill or hand plant seeds at a depth of ½” 
or less. If broadcasting, use a cultipacker to increase seed 
to soil contact.