Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ILLINOIS 
BUNDLEFLOWER  
Desmanthus illinoensis  
(Michx.) MacMill. ex B.L.  Rob. & Fernald  
Plant Symbol = DEIL 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow, NRCS East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX. 
 
Alternate Names  False sensitive plant, Illinois 
mimosa and Illinois desmanthus. 
 
Uses:  Recommended for use in range seedings and 
for wildlife food and cover. Illinois bundleflower is a 
nutritious plant and is readily eaten by all classes of 
livestock, deer an d pronghorn antelope. It decreases 
under heavy grazing and is an important range 
condition indicator. Its seeds are readily consumed by 
birds and rodents. It is considered one of the most 
important native prairie legumes (Stubbendieck and 
Conard, 1989). It is frequently used in range 
revegetation projects.  Illinois bundleflower was a 
minor medical plant for Native Americans 
(Kindscher, 1992). The Omaha and Ponca tribes 
called it rattle plant because the seeds in the dried 
pods were used by children as rattles while imitating 
the dance rituals of adults. Pawnees used the boiled 
plant leaves to produce a wash which was used to 
relieve itching. Illinois bundleflower is being studied 
as a potential human grain crop by the Land Institute 
of Salina, Kansas (Jackson, 1985). 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : The Legume family (Fabaceae). Illinois 
bundleflower is a warm season, self-pollinating, 
herbaceous, perennial, leguminous forb. Multiple 
stems grow from a woody  caudex which is attached 
to the perennial root system of this legume species. 
Stems are glabrous, angled, longitudinally grooved 
and erect. The plant stands .6  to 1.3 meters in height. 
Its bipinnately compound leaves are alternately 
attached to the stem. Leaves are sensitive to external 
stimuli such as sunlight or touch which causes          
infolding of the leaflets. Flowers are white and five 
parted with 5 sepals, petals and stamens. The 
peduncles or stalks suppor ting the inflorescences are 
located in the leaf axil.  The white globose heads 
produce clustered flat scythe-shaped pods which are 
slightly spirally twisted. Two to several seeds are 
contained within the dry dehiscent pods. The dark 
brown pods are broadly oblong and flat being 3 to 4 
times longer than wide. Seeds are brown and 3 to 5 
mm long, nearly as wide and mature in August. 
Kulakow (1999) indicated th at certain accessions of 
bundleflower exhibited an indehiscent legume pod 
which would provide a means of breeding shatter 
resistant lines of bundleflower.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  Desmanthus illinoensis  is the 
most widely distributed of  Desmanthus species in the 
United States. It ranges southward from South 
Dakota and Minnesota through Colorado, New 
Mexico and Texas, and eastward to Ohio, Kentucky, 
Tennessee, and the Carolin as and into Florida. 
 
Habitat: It is found on rocky, open wooded slopes, 
prairies, ravines, stream banks, roadsides and waste 
places. The great diversity of habitats in which it is 
found indicates a wide temperature and moisture 
tolerance (Lattig, 1961).  
 
Adaptation 
Natural populations are most often found in prairie 
remnants, glades, sloughs, woodlands edges, and  
disturbed areas in the east. In the west it is found in 
moist alkaline bottoms, rocky open woods, 
grasslands, and along streams and rivers. Latting

(1963) indicated that soil acidity or alkalinity did not 
appear to be a significant edaphic factor in the 
distribution of Illinois bundleflower, since stands 
were found in more or less equal abundance on  both 
sandstone and limestone parent material soils. It 
thrives on medium textured soils and is tolerant of 
most except coarse sands and heavy clays. It has fair 
tolerance to burning in the dormant state and will 
grow less vigorously in shady situations. More 
vigorous and more abundant growth is realized in 
50+ cm rain fall zones. Good drought tolerance can 
be expected in open communities with reduced levels 
of competition. Bundleflower is normally found in 
association with native warm season grasses such as: 
Andropogon gerardii, Sorghastrum nutans, Panicum 
virgatum, and  Schizachyrium scoparium.  
 
Establishment 
It is easily established from seed, and seed is 
commercially available (Stubbendieck and Conard, 
1989). Bundleflower may be seeded alone at a drill 
depth of 1.27 to 2.54 cm deep on heavier, moister soil 
and sandy or drier soils, respectively. Plant into a 
prepared seed bed or dead stubble for mulch may 
help establishment. Additional mulch and irrigation 
will aid establishment on critical sites or tough mine 
spoil sites. Plantings made in early to mid spring time 
would provide the seedlings optimum moisture, while 
late fall or winter planting would pre-chill and 
stimulate better germination of “hard” legume seed. 
Lattig (1961) did treatment experiments with fresh 
seed of Illinois bundleflower to study germination 
differences. Her treatments included: control, 
freeze/thaw, hot water, sulfur ic acid, and scarification 
of the fresh seed. She found that scarification and 
sulfuric acid treatments increased germination of the 
bundleflower seed. Her experiments found that hot 
water and freeze/thaw treatments actually reduced 
germination compared to the control (no treatment).  
 
Management 
Posler et al. (1993) found that the inclusion of 
legumes improved crude protein (CP) concentrations 
of forages compared to that of grasses alone. 
However, forage samples containing the legumes 
roundhead lespedeza and  Illinois bundleflower 
showed lower  In vitro dry matter digestibility 
(IVDMD) than grasses alone. This may be influenced 
by the amount of tannins accumulated by the legume 
species. Tannin concentration can limit digestibility 
of forages in high concentrations. Fischbach et al. 
(2005a) found that preliminary tannin analysis of 
Illinois bundleflower leaves contained 63 g catechin  
equivalent (CE) tannins per kg dry matter (DM) 
compared with leaf values  of 1 and 139 g CE per kg 
DM for alfalfa and sericea lespedeza. Fischbach et al,  (2005a) also speculated that lignin may also be a 
factor in Illinois bundleflowers limited digestibility. 
Fischbach et al. (2005b) indi
cated that forage yields 
were high enough to make bundleflower a viable mid 
summer forage species in Minnesota, but that 
persistence in the winter months could be a problem.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Rabbits, rodents, grasshoppers and leafhoppers 
selectively attack legume s and especially seedling 
stands. Mankin (1969) indicated that  Cercospora 
desmanthi  a leaf spot causing fungus was isolated 
from Illinois bundleflower in Brookings, South 
Dakota. Latting (1963) found that seed heads were 
heavily infested with larvae and adults of a small 
beetle of the family Bruchidae, Order Coleoptera. 
The larvae were located within the seed, a single 
larvae fitting snugly within each seed case. Seed loss 
by the bruchid species  Acanthoscelides can be quite 
heavy at times. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There were no environmental concerns expressed 
about this leguminous, native prairie plant. It is 
compatible and competitive with climax grasses of 
the tall grass prairie. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed yield and seed size differences were 
characteristics that DeHaan  et al. (2003) found in 
accessions of northern Illinoi s bundleflower tested in 
Minnesota. DeHaan et al. (2003) stated that seed and 
forage yield and forage quality of unimproved 
accessions is remarkably high , indicating that Illinois 
bundleflower could become an economically 
important species with a modest plant breeding 
effort. Seed fields can be harvested by direct 
combining and seed processed by a fanning mill. 
Seed production records  at the Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center indicate that purity of harvested 
seed is routinely 98 percent or greater and 
germination numbers of 75 to 92 percent (includes 
both germination and hard seed) are not uncommon. 
There are approximately 216,000 seed per kg which 
is about 85,000 seed per pound for this species. 
Illinois bundleflower has demonstrated seed yield 
potential in Minnesota of 1350 kg per ha per year 
(Fischbach et al. 2005b). Call (1985) indicated that 
Illinois bundleflower seed stored longer than one year 
at 16 degrees C and 40 percent relative humidity 
should be scarified prior to planting since hard 
seededness apparently increased under these storage 
conditions. Beyhaut et al. (2006) sought inoculant 
quality rhizobia for this legume among isolates 
collected from the natura l range of this legume 
species in the American Midwest. The study by

Beyhaut et al. (2006) placed the predominate 
microsymbiont recovered from the nodules of 
Desmanthus illinoensis  within the species Rhizobium  
giardinii  which had not previously been recovered 
from native legumes in the USA.     
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
“United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
‘Sabine,’ Illinois bundleflower is a cooperative 
cultivar release by the  USDA-NRCS, Knox City 
Plant Materials Center (PMC), Texas Parks and 
Wildlife Department and the Texas Agricultural 
Experiment Station. Sabine was collected from a 
native stand near Crystal Beach, Texas. Sabine is 
hardy from southern Texas to southern Oklahoma. 
The plant is used for rang e seeding mixtures, wildlife 
food, and is an excellent legume for use in mixtures 
on reclaimed surface mined areas. Foundation seed is 
available from the  Foundation Seed Service, Vernon, 
Texas.  
 
Reno Germplasm Illinois bundleflower is a tested 
class release by the USDA-NRCS, Manhattan PMC 
in Manhattan, Kansas. Reno  originated from seed 
collected from native plan ts growing near Lake 
Cheney in Reno County, Kansas. 
Reno germplasm has application for use in 
Oklahoma, Kansas, and the eastern 2/3 of Nebraska. 
The plant is recommended for use in rangeland 
restoration, wildlife hab itat improvement, critical 
area seeding treatments, and in roadside, park, and 
recreational areas for beautification and stabilization. 
Generation 2 seed, equivalent to foundation seed, is 
available from USDA, NRCS PMC at Manhattan, 
Kansas. 
 
References 
Beyhaut, E., E. Tlusty, P. van Berkum, and P. H. 
Graham. 2006.  Rhizobium giardinii  is the 
microsymbiont of Illinois bundleflower ( Desmanthus 
illinoensis  (Michx.) Macmillan) in the Midwestern 
prairies.  Can. J. Mirobiol . 52:903-907. 
 
Call, C.A. 1985. Storage Life of Illinois 
Bundleflower and Western Indigo Seed.  J. of Range 
Man.  38: 500-503.  
 
DeHaan, L.R., N.J. Elke , C.C. Sheaffer, R.L. 
DeHaan, and D.L. Wyse. 2003. Evaluation of  Diversity among and within Accessions of Illinois 
Bundleflower. 
Crop Science. 43:1528-1537.  
 
Fischbach, J.A., P.R. Peterson, N.J. Ehlke, D.L. 
Wyse, and C.C. Sheaffer. 2005a. Illinois 
Bundleflower Forage Potential in the Upper Midwest 
USA: II. Forage Quality.  Agron. J. 97:895-903 
 
Fischbach, J.A., P.R. Peterson, C.C. Sheaffer, N.J. 
Elke, J. Byun, and D.L. Wyse. 2005b. Illinois 
Bundleflower Forage Potential in the Upper Midwest 
USA: I Yield, Regrowth, and Persistence.  Agron. J. 
97:886-894. 
 
Jackson, W . 1985.  New Roots for Agriculture. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie: An Ethnobotanical Guide.  Lawrence: 
University Press of Kansas.  
 
Kulakow, P.A. 1999.  Variation in Illinois 
bundleflower ( Desmanthus illinoensis  (Michaux) 
MacMillan): A potential perennial grain crop. 
Euphytica . 110:7-20. 
 
Latting, J. 1961. The biology of  Desmanthus 
Illinoensis . Ecology . 42:487-493. 
 
Mankin, C.J. 1969. Fungus Diseases on Non-grass 
Plants in South Dakota. Tech. Bull. 36. South Dakota 
State University Ag. Exper. Stat.  
 
Posler, G.L., A.W. Lenssen, and G.L. Fine. 1993. 
Forage Yield, Quality, Compatibility, and Persistence 
of Warm-Season Grass-Legume Mixtures.  Agron. J. 
85:554 -560. 
 
Stubbendieck, J. and E.C. Conard. 1989.  Common 
Legumes of the Great Plains . Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Edited: 080108 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities

who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.