Plant Guide
PLAINS LOVEGRASS 
Eragrostis intermedia A.S. Hitchc.  
Plant Symbol = ERIN  
 
Contributed by: NRCS USDA Tucson Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Plains  Lovegrass  reflects a pink  hue in the mixed grasslands of 
S outheast Arizona.  
 
Alternate Names  
Plains Lovegrass  
 
Uses  
Forage:  Important early spring forage grass for livestock 
and wildlife. Its seeds are eaten by upland game birds.  
Restoration:  Establishes well following fire (Bock et al 
2009).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Plains Lovegrass is a native, warm season 
perennial bunchgrass. Plains Lovegrass typically grows 2 
to 3 ½ feet tall.  The inflorescence is an erect, open, 
diffuse, pyramid -shaped panicle 8 to 16 inches long and 
6 -12  inches wide. The spikelets have 3 to 9 flowers 
(Hitchcock 1951).  The fresh inflorescence is pinkish in 
color.  
  Distribution
: 
Plains Lovegrass  occurs from eastern California to 
Florida, north into Missouri and south into scattered 
locations of Central America. For  updated distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page  for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
For current distribution, please  consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : Plains Lovegrass is common in the desert 
grasslands of southern Arizona, the interior chaparral of 
Arizona and mixed -grass and short grass prairie of the 
southwest USA. It o ften grows in areas where annual 
precipitation is bimodal, with wet seasons in both winter 
and summer. The bulk of the forage is produced in the 
summer months. In areas where plains Lovegrass grows 
productively, mean annual precipitation usually exceeds 
15  inches.  
 
Adaptation   
Plains  Lovegrass  occurs on clay, sandy and rocky soils 
and often on disturbed sites, at 0 to 6069 feet elevation. I n 
southern Arizona , it is most productive on sandy and 
sandy loam soils with poorly developed profiles, and least 
produ ctive on shallow, rocky soils , at 3,800 to 6,000 feet 
elevation . 
 
Establishment  
Seed of Plains Lovegrass is reddish -brown, rectangular -
prismatic in shape, and very small (3,386,000 per lb).  
Natural dispersal occurs when the fruiting stalks detach 
and tumb le across the ground, releasing seed.  
 
Recommended seeding rate is 0.3 pure live seed (PLS) lb 
per acre if planted with a drill, and approximately 0.6 PLS 
lb per acre if seed is broadcast.  When  used as part of a 
mix  the seeding rate should be adjusted  to  the desired 
percentage of the mixture.  Due to the small seed size use 
of a carrier, such as rice hulls, should be considered to 
obtain better control of the seeding rate.  Seed should be 
planted onto a firm, weed -free seedbed.   Broadcast 
seeding should be followed lightly with a cultipacker or 
harrow to provide seed with a shallow covering of soil.    
 
Management  
Due to its high seed stalk to leaf ratio, this species is only 
intermediate in forage preference to cattle. However, it is 
often heavily grazed because it is one of the first species 
to green up in the spring. Where grazing occurs, it often 
declines. Becau se of its importance as an early spring 
forage plant, ranges where this species is still present 
should be managed in order to preserve or increase it. 
These ranges should be deferred from grazing during July