Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STRAWBERRY BUSH
Euonymus americana L. 
Plant Symbol = EUAM7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Addis Field Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
wahoo, bursting heart, fish wood, burning bush, 
hearts-a-burstin-love, brook euonymus 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Strawberry bush seeds are reportedly 
consumed sparingly by wild turkey and some 
songbirds.  Leaves are r eadily consumed by white-
tailed deer and eastern cottontail rabbit, however, 
strawberry bush is not abundant enough to be 
recognized as important in their total diet.  
Strawberry bush may be considered an important 
indicator of deer presence because it virtually 
disappears in areas overstocked with deer.  
 
Medicinal:  The seed is a strong laxative.  A tea made 
from the roots is used in cases of uterine prolapse, 
vomiting of blood, painful urination, and stomach 
aches.  The bark is diuretic, expectorant, and tonic.   
It was used as a tea in the treatment of malaria, liver 
congestion, constipation, etc.  The  powdered bark, 
applied to the scalp, was believed to eliminate 
dandruff.  An infusion of the plant has been used to 
stimulate menstruation and therefore should not be 
used by pregnant women.  
 
Ornamental:  Strawberry bush is an excellent 
ornamental species.  The leaves turn dark red in  autumn.  The red capsules and scarlet arillate seeds 
add to the “burning effect,” contributing to several of 
its common names.  Strawberry bush is best used in 
natural settings, in the shade of larger shrubs and 
trees.  Large specimens can have hundreds of 
“bursting” red capsules.  In the winter, the bright 
green twigs are also attractive. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
  © William S. Justice  
@ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
Description 
General : Strawberry bush, family Celastraceae, is a 
native perennial shrub 2-6 feet high.  The leaves are 
egg-shaped to broadly lance-shaped, usually pointed 
at the base and sharply pointed at the tip, finely and 
sharply toothed on the margin, bright green and 
smooth on top, slightly paler and smooth beneath, 1 
to 3.5 inches long, and almost stalkless.  The flowers 
are yellowish green or gree nish purple, borne at the 
end of long stalks and appear from March to June.  
The petals are 5 in number and nearly triangular in 
shape.  The fruits are ro unded capsules with a warty 
surface.  The capsules sp lit open at maturity to 
expose bright red seeds and take on the appearance of 
a strawberry, ripening in September or October. 
 
Distribution : Strawberry bush is Native and occurs 
throughout much of the  Eastern United States  
(Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, 
Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New 
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, 
Virginia, and West Virginia).  It is also known to 
occur in Ontario. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Strawberry bush grows in deciduous woods, 
sandy thickets, swamps, woodlands, shady edges, 
ravines, and stream sides.  
 
Adaptation 
Strawberry bush occurs in moist forests, including 
bottomland hardwood forests and adjacent to small 
streams.  Once established, it can tolerate poor 
drainage or moderate droughts and alkaline terrain.  
However, well-drained summer irrigated beds of

humus rich soil produce better growth and fruits.  
Fruits grow best in partial-to-full sun, but are shade 
tolerant.  The species spreads by animal dispersed 
seeds.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seed: Strawberry bush seeds require 
three months of cold treatment to germinate.  A 
stored seed requires 8-12 weeks warm followed by 8-
16 weeks cold stratification and can be sown in cold 
frames.  When seedlings are large enough to handle, 
place the seedlings into individual pots and grow 
them in the greenhouse for at least their first winter.  
Out-plant seedlings into their permanent positions in 
late spring or early summer, after the danger of frost 
passes. Fruits only develop on 2 to 3-year-old plants.  
Root clumps can be divided to make more plants in 
the winter. 
 
Management  
Strawberry bush tolerates different types of well- 
drained soils but does not tolerate drought well; water 
and mulch this plant in hot, dry environments.  The 
species requires a site receiving partial shade and can 
withstand heavy pruning.  No pruning is required, 
unless size containment is required.  Strawberry bush 
transplants well when it is balled and burlapped.  
Winter is the optimum trimming time, but cutting can 
be done any time the plant is in leaf. 
 
Pest and Potential Problems 
Strawberry bush is extremely susceptible to 
Euonymus scale and crown gall.  Both of these 
problems are of considerable importance. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Although abundant amounts grow in the wild, the 
plant may require special ordering from a customer 
service oriented nursery. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allen, C.M., D.A. Newman, and H.H. Winters. 2002. 
Trees, shrubs and woody vines of Louisiana . Allen 
Native Ventures, Pitkin.   
 
Britton, N.L. and A. Brown. 1913.  Illustrated flora of 
the northern states, Canada, and the British  possessions
. vol. 2, ed. 2. Dover Publications, 
Scribner.  
 
Chittenden, F.J. and P.M. Synge. 1956.  Dictionary of 
gardening. vol. 2, ed. 2. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
 
Gleason, H.A., and A. Cronquist. 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada . ed. 2. New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx. 
 
Grimm, W.C. and J.T. Kartesz. 1993.  The illustrated 
book of wildflowers and shrubs . Stackpole Books, 
Mechainsburg. 
 
Justice, W. 2002.  USDA- NRCS PLANTS Database , 
Version 3.5 (
http://plants.usda.gov, 30 November 
2004
).  National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge. 
 
Louisiana State University. 2003. Louisiana 
ecosystems & plant identification. 
(http://rnrstreamer.lsu.edu/ ecosystems/webtour/index.
htm, 11October 2004). School of Renewable 
Resouces, Baton Rouge. 
 
McNeely, M.R. 2003.  Maggie’s garden. (http:// 
www.maggiesgarden.com, 2 November 2004) Fort 
Worth. 
 
Miller, J.H. and K.V. Miller. 1999.  Forest plants of 
the southeast and their wildlife uses . Southern Weed 
Science Society, Champaign. 
 
Shelter, S.G. and S.S. Orli. 2000.  Annotated checklist 
of the vascular plants of Washington- Baltimore 
area. part. 1. ferns, fern allies, gymnosperms, 
dicotyledons.  Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Prepared By 
Zakia Williams 
USDA NRCS Addis Field Office, Addis, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 1Dec2004 rln; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of

race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.