Plant Guide
ENGELMANN’S DAISY 
Engelmannia peristenia (Raf.) 
Goodman & C.A. Lawson  
Plant Symbol = ENPE4 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
 1  
USDA NRCS 2009  
Alternate Names 
Cutleaf daisy  
 
Uses  
Livestock:   Engelmann’s daisy is rarely found on 
overgrazed pastures due to its palatability by livestock  
(Lady Bird  Johnson Wildflower Center , 2010).  Cattle, 
sheep, and goats can all benefit from the high protein and 
digestibility obtained from thi s species.  Crude protein 
can reach as high as twenty -five percent in early spring  
(TPWD, 2009).   Engelmann’s daisy is an important food 
plot during the winter and early spring, before other 
native plants have begun to initiate growth (USDA SCS, 
1970).  
 
Wi ldlife:   Deer and rabbits will browse on the foliage of 
Engelmann’s daisy (Agrilife, 2009).  Like livestock, 
wildlife can use the high protein earlier  in the year before 
the warm season grasses initiate growth .  Engelmann’s 
daisy has a wild life index value of  3.59.  This gives it a 
“fair” rating for wildlife use  (TPWD, 2009).   Dense 
foliage will also provide cover for small mammals and 
birds.   Engelmann’s daisy flowers provide  nectar to a 
wide variety of pollinators including  bees, butterflies, and 
hummingb irds (Lady Bird  Johnson Wildflower Center , 
2010) . 
 
Erosion Control:   Engelmann’s daisy is used on slopes, 
such as roadsides and embankments, to help reduce soil  erosion.
  The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department has 
given Engelmann’s daisy a “good” rating d ue to an 
erosion index of 5.24 (TPWD, 2009).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator value s). 
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description  
General :  Engelmann’s daisy is a native, cool -season 
perennial which can grow up to three feet tall.  The plant 
produces a basal rosette of leaves that can grow eight 
inches long.  Leaves are very deepl y cleft or almost 
divided.  Coarse hair can be found on both the leaves and 
stems of the plant.  The vegetation remains green 
throughout the  year with new growth beginning in the 
spring (Hatch, 1993) .  The flower head elongates during 
the spring months.  E ngelmann’s daisy flower heads are 
made up of eight  yellow rays, each ray about 1 cm long  
(Correll, 1970) .  They measure  one to two inches in 
diameter.   Flowering occurs from April to November 
(Rickett, 1969).  During extreme heat, the petals of the 
plant fo ld downward.   Engelmann’s daisy  reproduces 
from seed which  is distributed by wind and birds (TPWD, 
2009). Volunteer plants can also be found in areas wher e 
plants were previously grown  and the soil has been 
disturbed (USDA SCS, 1970).  
 
Distribution :  Engel mann’s daisy is most commonly 
found throughout north central Texas and the Edward’s 
Plateau.  It is also found as far north as  South Dakota, as 
far west as Arizona, and as far east as Louisiana  (USDA 
NRCS, 2009) . 
For current distribution, please consult th e Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : Engelmann’s da isy can be seen growing 
throughout much of Texas with the exception of the piney 
woods area.  Its  main habitat is areas such as prairies, 
upland sites, and  open roadways (Hatch, 1993).