SPIKE LOVEGRASS 
Eragrostis spicata  Vasey 
Plant Symbol = ERSP2  Spike lovegrass, photo by South Texas Natives 
 
Description  
General :  Spike lovegrass ( Eragrostis spicata Vasey) is a 
caespitose, robust perennial with short rhizomes.  Culms 
are unbranched, erect, and glabrous, growing 80-120 cm 
(31-47 in) tall.  The leaf blades are 2-7.5 mm (0.08-0.29 
in) wide, 25-40 cm (9-16 in), and are flat, rolled (when 
desiccated), or involute. Leaf color is grayish green and 
leaves are glabrous with serrate margins.  Ligules are a 
0.5 mm (0.2 in) fringed membrane. Inflorescence sheaths 
are glabrous to ciliate-pilose near the ligules.  Panicles 
range 20-50 cm (7-20 in) in length by 5 mm (0.2 in) wide, 
and are spike-like, linear, and have several branches per 
node.  The spikelets are densely imbricate. Spikelets are 
small, less than 1 mm (0.03 in). (Everitt et al. 2011).  
There are about 4,000,000 seeds per 0.45 kg (lb).   
Distribution :  Spike lovegrass  is found from South Texas 
into Mexico, Paraguay, and Argentina.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.    Adaptation 
Spike lovegrass is found in moist areas in clay or clay 
loam soils throughout South Texas
. 
Spike lovegrass is 
well adapted to saline or alkaline soil conditions common 
in western South Texas. 
Uses 
Spike lovegrass is recommended for wildlife plantings 
since it provides good cover for birds and small mammals 
as well as providing seed for graminivorous bird species.  
It  can also be used in range plantings because it has the 
ability to recover from defoliation and reseeds itself.    
 
Spike lovegrass  is useful for critical site revegetation and 
bank stabilization because of the  dense vegetation near 
the soil surface which  helps stabilize the soils. This is 
especially benefical for  saline and alkaline sites . 
It is a 
native species that is well adapted to moist soil areas and 
saline soils  resulting from oil and gas production 
activities and pipeline right- of-way construction.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/ ) 
and your State Department of  Natural Resources for this plant’s current st
atus (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  Planting Guidelines 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting is  done in late fall or spring in South 
Texas. Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by either 
tillage or herbicides. Prior to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture
.  Spike lovegrass 
is  seeded using a drill or broadcast seeder.  If broadcast 
seeded, some type of  additional coverage such as culti-
packing or light dragging is recommended to ensure good 
seed- to-soil contact. 
Seed is  planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep. It is better to plant 
too shallow than too deep. For calibration purposes, spike 
lovegrass contains approximately 4,000,000 seeds per 
bulk pound. A seeding rate of 0.5-1 pounds pure live seed 
(PLS) per acre is recommended for establishment of pure 
stands; when used as part of a seeding mixture the seeding 
rate should be adjusted according to the desired 
percentage of the plant on the planting site. 
Management 
Areas planted to spike lovegrass should be deferred form 
grazing until plants become established and are allowed to 
set seed.  Established plants should be allowed to produce 
seed annually.

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no potential pests or problems with this species. 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no evnirontmental concerns associated with this 
species. 
 
Seed increase field of Ramadero Germplasm spike lovegrass ,                    
photo by South Texas Natives 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed production can be started from transplants or direct 
seeded on beds or flat ground.  Well maintained transplant 
plot can be expected to produce a marketable crop in the 
first production year, however the majority of a direct 
seeded plot will not mature during the first season.  Seed 
is best harvested using  a Woodward Flail-Vac Seed 
Stripper (Ag-renewal, Inc., Weatherford, Oklahoma).     
Following harvest trash can be removed using a Clipper 
seed cleaner (A. T. Farrell, Bluffton, Indiana).   
 
Over three years, plots of  about 200 plants in South 
Texas produced an average of 1 .1 PLS pound of seed 
annually and averaged an extremely high percent of pure 
live seed (93.6%) .  Yields were estimated at 80 pounds of 
PLS per acre per year  on 36” bedded rows with a plant  population of 14,000 plants per acre (plants established 
using transplants spaced 1’).
  Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Ramadero Germplasm spike lovegrass (TX) was 
cooperatively released by the E. 
“Kika ” de la Garza Plant 
Material Center and  South Texas Natives in 2015.  It was 
selected for its vigor, forage production, and seed quality 
thoughout the intended area of use.  Ramadero 
Germplasm is recommended for use in Rio Grande Plains 
(MLRA 83A, B, C and D), Coastal Sand Plain (MLRA 83 
E) and Gulf Coast Prairies and Marshes of Texas (MLRA 
150A and B) in critical site revegetation and for inclusion 
in range seeding mixes.  Ramadero Germplasm is adapted 
to clay and clay loam soils, including saline clay soils in 
the Rio Grande Plains. Spike lovegrass does not naturally 
occur north of the Rio Grande Plains in North America, 
and use of the species beyond this limit of distribution of 
the species is unlikely to be successful. 
 
Literature Cited 
Ev eritt, J.H., D.L. Drawe, C.R. Little, and R.I. Lonard. 
2011.  Grasses of South Texas. Texas Tech University 
Press. Lubbock, TX. 
Citation 
Maher S., and J. Reilley. 2015. Plant guide for spike 
lovegrass ( Eragrostis spicata ). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service , 
E. “Kika” de la Garza  Plant 
Materials Center. Kingsville, TX.   
 
Published August  2015
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov .
  PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER