Plant Guide
BLUEWEED 
Echium vulgare L. 
Plant Symbol = ECVU 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office  
 
 
Blueweed plants growing in Washington. Photo courtesy of Stevens 
County, Washington, Noxious Weed Control Boar d, 2000 . 
 
Alternate Names  
Common viper’s bugloss, blue thistle, blue devil, and 
snake flower . 
 
Uses  
Blueweed has been used as a horticultural plant . 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current 
status (e.g. ,  threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  This plant 
can be weedy and invasive, and is listed as noxious in 
Washington and Montana.  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in som e 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and us e. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web Sites on 
the Plant Profile for this species for further information.  Description
 
General : Blueweed  is a member of the borage family 
(Boraginac eae). It is an introduced species native to 
Europe. Blueweed can be a biennial or short -lived 
perennial. It has a significant rooting system comprised of 
a tap root and smaller fibrous roots. The tap root is black 
and can range in length from 12 to 32 inches (30.5 to 81 
centimeters), allowing deep soil penetration. Vegetation 
forms initially as a basal rosette. Rosette leaves are 
simple, entire, oblanceolate, approximately 2.5 to 10 
inches in length and 0.5 to 3 inches  in width, with a single 
vein and a sho rt petiole. Stem leaves are alternate in 
arrangement becoming progressively smaller and bract -
like towards the top of the stem. Mature plants grow one 
to many erect, branching flowering stems reaching over 
36 inches in height. Both the stems and leaves are  covered 
with stout, spreading hairs that have swollen, red, purple 
or black bases, underlain by smaller fine appressed hairs. 
The swollen bases of the spreading hairs give the stems a 
spotted appearance.  
 
The stem terminates in a panicle inflorescence, each 
branch of the panicle forms a short helicoid cyme, shaped 
like a scorpions tail, subtended by an upper foliage leaf. 
There can be as many as 50 cymes per stem, and each 
cyme bears  up to 20 flowers . The showy flowers range in 
size from 0.4 to 0.8 inch. T he funnel-shaped, five -lobed, 
pubescent flowers are typically bright blue, but may also 
be purple, pink, or rarely white. Flowers widen as they 
mature, and the upper lobes are noticeably longer. 
Another identifying characteristic is the five pink or red 
st amens, one of which is noticeably shorter than the four 
which are long -exerted beyond the corolla tube. The 
superior ovary is four -lobed with the style arising from 
the center of the lobes.  
 
The seeds of blueweed are called nutlets. They are brown 
or gray  with a rounded pyramid shape, and are very small, 
(< 0.1 inch long and wide, or 2.4 x 1.6 x 1.5 millimeters). 
The surface of the nutlets is rough and very hard. This 
characteristic provides blueweed seeds with moderate 
survival times in the seed bank, with  a three year survival, 
typical at depths of 6 inches (15 centimeters) or more.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site . 
Life history : Blueweed is a monocarpic perennial, 
mean ing it flowers once and dies. This typically takes two 
years (biennial) but can take as long as five years. No 
blueweed plant that has flowered has been observed to 
survive and grow a secondary rosette. Populations of 
blueweed have been observed to be cycl ic similar to 
yellow sweetclover; one year an infestation will be