Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA YERBA SANTA 
Eriodictyon californicum  
(Hook. & Arn.) Torr.  
Plant Symbol = ERCA6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Mountain balm, Palo Santo, holy plant 
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Yerba Santa was highly valued by 
many California tribes including the Salinan, Ohlone, 
Miwok, Pomo, and Yokuts who continue to use it for 
various medicinal purposes.  The Spanish who came 
to early California were so impressed with the plant 
that they gave it the name Yerba Santa, meaning holy 
plant.  Yerba Santa was  introduced to the Spanish 
Padres at Mission San Antonio de Padua by the 
Salinan tribe and it becam e one of three major 
medicinal herbs used at the mission (Heinsen 1972).   
 
The plants can be harvested  at any stage, but are best 
in the fall when the leaves are sticky and aromatic 
(Hedges & Beresford 1986).  The Kashaya Pomo 
recommend gathering the leaves just before the plant 
begins to produce flowers (Goodrich et al. 1980).   
 
The leaves, stems and flowers are used (Heizer & 
Elsasser 1980).  They are either eaten or made into a  tea, decoction, or poultice.  The flowers and the 
bitter, aromatic leaves may be used fresh or dried.  
The leaves and flowers were made into a “bitter or 
sweetish-soapy” tasting tea that was drunk to relieve 
headaches and other symptoms of tuberculosis.  
Infusions of Yerba santa leaves and flowers were 
used to treat fevers, coughs, colds, stomachaches 
asthma, rheumatism pleurisy, an
d to purify the blood.  
The Kawaiisu drank Yerba Santa tea instead of water 
for a month to treat gonorrhea (Zigmond 1981).  The 
Salinan used an infusion of the leaves as a balm for 
the eyes.  Later, those at the San Antonio mission 
made eye balm by placing th e leaves in corked glass 
bottles and allowing them to sweat in the sun.   
 Br. Alfred Brousseau © Saint Mary’s College 
@ Calflora 
 
Leaves were smoked or chewed to relieve asthma, 
coughs, colds, headaches,  and stomachaches.  Heated 
leaves were placed on th e forehead to relieve 
headaches (Bocek 1984) and other aches and sores 
(Barrett & Gifford 1933).  The sticky leaves 
conveniently stay in place upon the skin.  Mashed 
leaves were applied externally to sores, cuts, wounds, 
and aching muscles.  Mashed leaves were also used 
to reduce the swelling and relieve pain caused by 
bone fractures (Barrett & Gifford 1933).  Yerba 
Santa, used alone or combined with other herbs, was 
applied to infected sores on humans and animals.  
The branches and leaves were burned in steam baths 
to treat rheumatism.  The Ohlone wove the leaves 
into skirts and aprons.   
 
Wildlife:  Bees visit the flowers of Yerba Santa, which 
make a deliciously spicy amber honey.  Seedlings 
and young plants are relatively nutritious and 
palatable but the bitter compounds in mature Yerba 
Santa shrubs discourage most large herbivores.  
However it is an important forage crop for black-
tailed deer in the winter when other food sources are 
unavailable.  Birds and small mammals eat the seed 
capsules.   
 
Livestock:  Goats will sometimes eat the leaves and 
stems.  Cattle will avoid Yerba Santa in favor of 
more palatable plants, which can be a problem in 
highly grazed areas where it can become the 
dominant plant (Howard 1992).   
 
Other : Yerba Santa can be used for rehabilitating and 
stabilizing disturbed areas (Howard 1992).  The seeds 
germinate readily in disturbed soils.  The shallow, 
spreading root system can  help to stabilize areas 
subject to erosion caused by runoff.

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Waterleaf family (Hydrophyllaceae).  Yerba 
Santa is a perennial evergreen shrub (5 to 22 dm) 
native to California and Oregon.  The stems are black 
with shredding outer bark.  The lance shaped leaves 
(4 to 15cm long) are thick and leathery with a 
glutinous upper surface.  The leaves are dark green 
above with lighter green beneath and can have either 
smooth or saw-toothed edges.  Older leaves often 
turn black due to a condition called sooty fungus.  
The white to purple trumpet-shaped flowers (8 to 
17mm) grow in branched panicles at the stem ends.  
The flowers bloom from May to June or July.  The 
small capsulate fruits (2-3mm) ripen in September 
and contain from 2 to 20 small black seeds.   
 
Distribution : Yerba Santa occurs from the Coast 
Ranges in California from Monterey County to the 
Klamath range in Siskiyou County as well as in the 
Sierra Nevada Range from Kern County in California 
to the Oregon counties of  Klamath and Jackson in the 
north (Howard 1992).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Yerba Santa grows below 1600-m elevation 
on dry rocky hillsides and ridges.  It can be found in 
patches on chaparral slopes, forests, canyons, and 
along riverbanks.  It is abundant in some annual 
grasslands and oak woodlands.  Yerba Santa is often 
found in disturbed areas and early to mid 
successional communities.   
 
Adaptation 
Yerba Santa is adapted to  the hot, dry summers and 
mild, wet winter’s character istic of the Mediterranean 
climate of California.  Yerba Santa is a “fire-
following” species (Emery 1988).  Seeds stored in the 
soil for decades germinate readily during the first 
spring after a fire (Howard 1992).  Older plants can 
sprout from their underground stems, called 
rhizomes, following disturbances such as fire.   
 
Establishment 
Gather seeds in September and October as the fruit 
capsules ripen.  Yerba Santa seeds can be planted in 
the fall or early spring.  The seeds will store 
indefinitely if kept in a dry, cool location.  Prior to 
sowing, mix the seeds with several parts of moist  sand.  This helps to ensure even distribution.  Seeds 
can be sown directly into a 
prepared bed or into flats 
filled with a mixture of equal amounts of soil, sand, 
and leafmold.  Heating the seeds in an oven for 5 
minutes at 194 °F may increase germination rates 
(Emery 1988).  Alternatively the seed coat can be 
scarified in order to allow moisture and air to enter 
(Mirov & Kraebel 1939).   This may be accomplished 
by rubbing the seeds between two pieces of 
sandpaper.  Adding charate (burned and ground plant 
stems) to the soil may also increase germination 
success.  When the seedlin gs are large enough to 
handle they should be transplanted into larger pots.  
The plants can be placed into the ground the 
following spring.   
 
The plants are sunloving and do not tolerate shade.  
Plants may be grown in any texture of soil but prefer 
it to be slightly acidic and moderately fertile.  The 
shallow roots allow them to establish in thin as well 
as deep soils.  The plants are tolerant of serpentine 
soils.   
 
When selecting a site keep in mind that after two 
years Yerba Santa can reproduce vegetablely through 
rhizomes.  These undergrou nd stems can spread as 
much as 2.5 m in one year under excellent conditions 
(Howard 1992) and may overrun other plants (Halse 
1993).  This vegetative spread results in cloned 
patches with plants spaced from 20 to 25cm apart.   
 
Management  
The plants should only be pruned in the spring or 
early summer.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.  
Yosemite Association,  Yosemite National Park, 
California.  388 pp. 
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.   Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.

Brousseau, Br. A. 1995.  Eriodictyon californicum St. 
Mary’s College of California.  Digital Library 
Project, University of California, Berkeley. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.calfl ora.org.  Accessed [15 
December 2001]. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Halse, R.R. 1993.   Hydrophyllaceae waterleaf 
family.  In: Hickman, J.D., Editor.   The Jepson 
manual: Higher plants of California.   University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California.  Pp. 683-686.   
 
Hedges, K. & C. Beresford 1886.   Santa Ysabel 
ethnobotany.   San Diego Museum of Man Ethnic 
Technology Notes No. 20.  San Diego, California.  58 
pp.   
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   Mission San Antonio de Padua 
Herbs: Medicinal herbs of early days .  Third edition.  
Lockwood, California.  142pp. 
 
Heizer, R.F. & A.B. Elsasser 1980.   The natural 
world of the California Indians .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California.  271 pp.   
 
Howard, J.L.  1992.   Eriodictyon californicum . In: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory 2001, May.   Fire Effects Information  
System, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [20 December 
2001]. 
 
Knudtsen, P.M. 1988.   The Wintu Indians of 
California.   Naturegraph Publishers, Inc. Happy 
Camp, California.  92 pp.  
 
Mirov, N.T. & C.J. Kraebel 1939.   Collecting and 
handling seeds of wild plants.   Civilian Conservation 
Corps Forestry Publication No. 5.  US. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  42 pp.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
[6 January 2002].   
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Mendocino County Historical Society, Fort Bragg, 
California.  81 pp. 
Munz, P.A. & D.D. Keck 1963.   A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, California.  1681 pp. 
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  425 
pp. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.   Tribes of California.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California.  480 pp.   
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah.  102 
pp.  
 
 
Prepared By:   
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
 Edited: 15apr02 ahv; 19may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.