Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RATTLESNAKE-MASTER  
Eryngium aquaticum  L. 
Plant Symbol = ERAQ  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Corn-snakeroot, bitter snakeroot, marsh eryngo, sea 
holly 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Cherokee, Choctaw, Koasati and 
other Southwestern Native Am erican tribes used a tea 
made from the plants to treat “stomach disorders.”  
The root was chewed for st omachache.  An infusion, 
made from the roots, was used to cause vomiting for 
nausea, as a powerful expect orant to clear the lungs, 
and a diuretic.  The root was used as a stimulant as 
well as an “anti-poison” to treat snakebite.  The  Choctaw used the plant to treat gonorrhea.  The 
Alabama and Koasati tribes used the plant 
ceremonially as well as medicinally.  The Koasati 
believed the plant to contain magical powers, which 
could kill an enemy merely by striking him with it.  
The roots are collected in 
the autumn.  Some Native 
Americans still use the plant today. 
  
Other : The unique shape and color of 
rattlesnakemaster flower sprays make them an 
unusual addition to fresh and dried flower 
arrangements.  For best results, cut the flowers before 
they open completely.   
 @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Carrot or parsley family (Apiaceae, 
formerly Umbelliferae).  These hardy, perennial or 
biennial herbs, resembling a cross between a yucca 
and a thistle, can be a little over a meter to two 
meters tall.  The solitary, erect stem has parallel ribs 
and branches near the top, ending in globe-shaped 
flowers.  The stem has alternate leaves, which are 
narrow, lance-shaped and pinnately veined.  The 
broad, stiff basal leaves (20-90cm long, 9cm wide), 
are usually absent at the time of flowering.  Leaves 
can be slightly toothed along the edges.  The plants 
flower from spring to fall.  The white to blue flower 
heads are 1-1.5 cm with 2m m-long flower petals.  
Spiny, bluish, leaflike  bracts extend beyond the 
flowering heads giving them an unusual appearance.  
Fruits are short and oblong, from 2 to 4mm, with 
scales.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  The species grows in wet soils, along 
waters edges in fresh to brackish marshes, low 
woods, meadows, bogs, swamps and ditches.   
 
Adaptation 
E. aquaticum  is adapted to marshy or seasonally 
flooded areas.  It grows in soils that are regularly 
saturated to irregularly inundated.

Establishment 
Both the sword-shaped foliage and the unusual 
flowers of Rattlesnakemaster make them a unique 
and beautiful sculptural addition to the garden.  
Plants may be propagated from seed or by 
transplanting purchased container-grown plants.  To 
collect your own seeds, gather the flower heads after 
they have turned brown and dried upon the plant.  
Sow seeds in the fall.  The plants like moist, rich, 
light soils in sunny locations.  For heavy soils, add 
compost before planting.  Take care to select a place 
where the plants can remain as the root system 
dislikes disturbance.  The plants may be propagated 
by carefully divided them in the spring.  Root 
cuttings can be taken in the winter.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
E. aquaticum  is susceptible to tobacco mild green 
mosaic tobamovirus 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)   
Most  of the material cultured under this name is  
E. yuccifolium, which is adapted to drier habitats .   
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Aquatic nurseries can be a good 
source for these plants. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey  1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Botany Com. 2001.   The encyclopedia of plants : 
Eryngium.  J.L. Clairmont Holdings Inc.  
http://www.botany.com/eryngium.html.  (May 19, 
2001). 
 
Brunt, A.A., Crabtree, K., Dallwitz, M.J., Gibbs, 
A.J., Watson, L. &  Zurcher, E.J. (eds.)  1996.   Plant 
Viruses Online: Descriptio ns and Lists from the 
VIDE Database. Version: 20th August 1996 .  Also, 
Dallwitz (1980) and Dallwitz, Paine and Zurcher 
(1993) 
http://biology.anu.edu.au/Groups/MES/vide/.  
(May 19, 2001). 
 
Campbell, T.N.  1951.  Medicinal plants used by 
Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Creek Indians in the early  nineteenth century.  Journal of the Washington 
Academy of Sciences 41: 285-290. 
 
Center for New Crops & Plant Products, at Purdue 
University  1998.  
Button Snake-root.  From Sievers, 
A.F.  1930.  The Herb Hunters Guide. Misc. Publ. 
No. 77 .   USDA, Washington  DC.   
http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/herbhunters/but
tonsnakeroot.html.  (May 19, 2001).  
 
Cullina, W.  2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers in the United States and Canada .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, New York.  
322 pp. 
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote  1975.   Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.  University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten  1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol 2.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  933 
pp. 
  
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist  1953.  Flowers of 
the South: Native and Exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Mellow Marsh Farms.  2001.   Mellow Marsh Farm 
plant list.   
http://www.mellowmarshfarm.com/MMF95-
2_xls.pdf (May 19, 2001).  
  
Moerman, D.E.  1998  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.    Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp 
 
Taylor, L.A.  1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes . Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 88 
pp.   
 
Tiner, R.W. 1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States . University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst.  328 pp.

Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California
  Edited: 29May2001 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.