Plant Guide       
 
SULFUR FLOWER BUCKWHEAT  
Eriogonum umbellatum  Torr. 
Plant Symbol = ERUM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Alternate Names 
Buckwheat bush, sulfur  buckwheat, slender 
buckwheat, sulphur-flower buckwheat 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : The seeds are an important food source for 
many species of birds and small mammals. Quail, 
grouse, deer and mountain sheep eat the leaves. 
 
Landscaping : It can be used for environmental 
enhancement, erosion control and foundation 
plantings around mountain homes.  It is an excellent 
dry flower for arrangements as it holds its color and 
structure for many months.  Sulfur flower buckwheat 
plants withstand sun, heat, drought, and wind, 
making them ideal plants for dry sunny slopes. The 
showy flowers and seed h eads, and compact growth 
habit make this plant a good choice for rock gardens.  
Bees produce a strong, dark honey from sulfur flower 
nectar.  
 
Ethnobotanic Uses: Modern knowledge of the 
ethnobotanical uses of  Eriogonum is entirely 
attributed to Mexican and  Native American herbal 
traditions.  The Cahuilla used an infusion of the 
flowers as an eyewash, as well as for cleaning out the 
intestines, and made an infusion of the whole plant to  shrink the uterus and reduce dysmenorrhea.  Several 
California tribes used the tea to wash newborn 
babies.  The Hopi used 
Eriogonum for hip and back 
pain, especially during pregnancy, and it was known 
to expedite birthing.  Due to its water solubility and 
its lack of toxicity,  Eriogonum can be taken as often 
as needed, and is safe to use in the last trimester of 
pregnancy as a diuretic to aid water retention. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © St. Mary’s College of California @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Description 
Buckwheat Family (Polygon aceae).  Sulfur flower 
buckwheat is a native, low-growing woody perennial 
commonly found on hot dry sunny exposures on 
rocky slopes and ridges throughout the west.  It is 
native to western mountainous regions at elevations 
of 2,500 to 10,000 feet.  Sulfur flower buckwheat 
requires well-drained sandy or gravelly soils with low 
fertility and will not tolerate saturated soils.   
 
The plant forms low, broad mats with individual 
clumps reaching one foot hi gh to two feet across. 
Leaves are one inch long, shiny green on top and 
woolly underneath.  Flower stems 3 inches to 16 
inches tall, are topped by  clusters of tiny sulfur-
yellow flower heads.  Flowers range from yellow to 
orange or reddish, both in bloom and in mature seed 
heads.  Flower displays can color entire slopes 
starting in June at lower elevations and continue into 
August at higher elevations.  
 
Distribution 
Sulfur flower buckwheat is found in dry, open and 
often rocky places.  It is found in California to 
western Canada and also Colorado and New Mexico.  
This species has about thirty subspecies distributed 
across the western United States.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Sulfur flower buckwheat grows well in medium to 
coarse textured and well-drained soils.  
 
Establishment 
Sulfur flower buckwheat can  be raised from seed or 
purchased as container grown plants at local 
nurseries.  Collect the sharply angled small black

seeds from dried flower heads by rubbing the papery 
dried flower heads between your fingers.  They 
generally germinate without pretreatment and can be 
sown in spring or fall.  However, the rate of 
germination is improved if they are first cold 
stratified. 
 
Cold stratify seeds by placing them in a plastic bag 
with moist peat moss or sand in a refrigerator three 
months.  Plant out in the early spring.  Seeds are 
naturally cold stratified by fall planting.  Select a hot, 
sunny, well-drained planting site and broadcast the 
seeds directly on the ground where they are to grow 
permanently.  
 
Sulfur flower buckwheat seeds will germinate better 
if the seedbed has been cleared of weeds, and/or roto-
tilled, or spaded to a depth of eight to ten inches, and 
mixed with additional compost.  Scatter seeds evenly 
over the seedbed and rake and water lightly.  Cover 
seeds with sand or weed-free compost to a depth 
equal to one or two times the seed diameter (about 
one eighth inch).  
 
Keep the seedbed moist by sprinkling two to three 
times daily until seeds germinate.  After the seeds 
germinate, continue to water once every two to three 
days for the next few weeks; then once a week for 
another month.  Continue to water a few times a 
month through the fall.  Plants are drought tolerant 
when established and will need only occasional 
watering.  
 
Sulfur flower buckwheat  blooms the second year 
from seed.  It can be pruned back after flowering to 
promote a denser, more compact plant.  
 
Sulfur flower buckwheat has a long taproot and thus 
mature plants are difficult to transplant.  When 
container-grown plants are ready to plant, dig a hole 
two to three times the diameter of the root ball and at 
least six inches deeper.  Backfill the hole with six 
inches of native soil.  Ma ke a few one-eighth inch 
deep vertical cuts in the rootball, or carefully loosen 
roots away from the rootball with your hands to 
encourage roots to grow into the new soil.  Set the 
plant into the hole and fill in around the roots with 
planting mix, firming the soil with your hands as you 
fill, until the hole is half fu ll.  Fill the hole with water 
and allow it to settle.  This will settle the soil and 
eliminate air pockets around the roots.  Backfill with 
enough soil so that the plant will set at the same level 
at which it was growing in the container.  Water it to 
allow the soil to settle, then add more soil if 
necessary.  Build a berm of soil to form a watering  basin around the outer edge of the hole.  Break the 
basin down after two or three years.  
 
Management 
Control of weeds and irrigation is necessary in the 
first year of establishment
.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Sulfur flower buckwheat is grown at the Lockeford 
Plant Materials Center for foundation seed 
production.  The field was established with 
transplants and has produced an average of 150 
pounds of seed per acre.  Seed has been vacuumed or 
hand harvested in June-July and does not shatter 
easily.  Germination has averaged about 35 percent 
with varying amounts of seed and seed rapidly loses 
viability within a few years.  There are about 140,500 
seeds per pound. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Sierra’ Cultivar: Sierra was collected from native 
plants on August 23, 1972 at South Lake Tahoe, 
California.  The original collection was increased at 
Lockeford through seed and plants.  It is a low 
growing shrub found on dry slopes and ridges, 1,200 
to 10,000 feet.  The gray -green leaves are ovate, 
smooth above and finely hairy beneath.  Plants are 8 
to 12 inches high, spreading up to 2 feet in diameter.  
Yellow flowers in umbels erect or ascending from a 
woody base, turn orange red at maturity.  Flowers are 
used in dry flower arrangements. 
 
References 
University of California at Santa Cruz. 2005. 
Arboretum: Buckwheat brush . http://ucsc.edu. 
Accessed: 08 Aug2005 
http://www2.ucsc.edu/arboretum/eriogonum_umbella
tum.html.  
 
USDA NRCS.  Proposed release of ‘Sierra’ sulfur 
flower buckwheat, Eriogonum umbellatum Torr. For 
conservation and beautification use on critically 
eroded areas . Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
California  
 
USDA NRCS and Nevada Cooperative Extension. 
Plants of the Lake Tahoe Basin .   
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California.

Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 Edited: 28Mar2005 ro; 23sep05 jsp  For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.