Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAND LOVEGRASS 
Eragrostis trichodes (Nutt.) 
Alph. Wood  
Plant Symbol = ERTR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX 
 
Alternate Names 
Sand love grass, tall love grass, sandhill lovegrass 
 
Uses 
Sand lovegrass is a native, warm-season, perennial 
bunch grass that is palatable and preferred by grazing 
livestock in the central and  southern Great Plains. It 
begins growth as much as two weeks earlier than 
other warm-season grasses. Sand lovegrass remains 
green into the fall and retains fair forage value even 
after maturity (Stubbendieck  et al. 1982). It is known 
to cure well on the stem and provide winter forage 
for livestock and wildlife. It is included in range 
reseeding mixtures to provide quick cover and early 
forage production (Leithead et al. 1971).  It is 
occasionally cut for hay. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
Description 
General
: Grass family (Poaceae). Sand lovegrass is a 
native, warm-season, short-lived, perennial, bunch 
grass found on sandy soil sites in the central and 
southern plains states. The erect culms are 80 to 120 
cm tall, solid or hollow below. The leaf blades are 
flat to involute or rolled in at the margins, with a 
prominent midrib. The leaf blade is 20 to 46 cm long 
and 1.5 to 6 mm wide and taper to a slender point. 
The narrow leaf blade will roll inward under dry 
conditions to conserve moisture; this gives the leaf 
blade a threadlike appearance. The panicle type 
inflorescence is open or diffuse, oblong and usually 
half as long as the entire culm (Pohl 1978). The 
panicle is branched 3 or 4  times and the branches are 
curved alternately in opposite directions. The 
spikelets are 3.8 to 10 mm long, 1.5 to 6 mm wide 
and contain from 4 to 6 flow ers (Barkley et al. 1986). 
The individual florets ar e frequently purplish with 
yellow glumes (Pohl 1978). The caryopsis is dark 
brown, strongly grooved on the side opposite the 
embryo and .8 to 1.1 mm long. Chromosome number 
is 2n=40. Sand lovegrass possesses the C-4 
photosynthetic pathway for carbon fixation (Waller 
and Lewis 1979). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Natural distribution of sand 
lovegrass is from the sandhills in northwestern 
Nebraska, east to Illinois  and then south to central 
Texas.  
 
Habitat: Grows principally on deep sands and sandy 
loam soils on sandy prairies and open sandy woods. 
 
Adaptation 
This tall, leafy grass has been reported to grow in ten 
central Great Plains states  from Colorado to Illinois 
and south to Texas. It grows best on sandy soils in 
the 45 to 90 cm rainfall areas. It is sometimes found 
growing on heavier type soils. It is best adapted to 
growth on north and east facing slopes (Moser and 
Perry 1983). Sand lovegrass has a shallow, widely 
spreading root system (Weaver 1968). It will show 
decrease in stand number s under intense grazing 
pressure. Sand lovegrass occurs in mixed native 
stands with hairy grama ( Bouteloua hirsuta), western 
wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum smithii ), Scribners panicum 
( Dicanthelium oligosanthes ), sand dropseed 
( Sporobolus cryptandrus ) and needle and thread 
( Hesperostipa comata ).

Establishment 
Propagation of Eragrostis trichodes  is accomplished 
by seed and by the previous year’s growth increasing 
in size by tillering and sometimes rooting at the 
nodes of basal stems (Adams 1956). Perez et al. 
(1998) conducted a seedbank study in the Nebraska 
sandhills to determine in part the diversity and size, 
seed dormancy and germination, and seedling 
emergence in this fragile ecosystem. Seed quantity 
was greater in the shallower seedbank (0 to 5 cm) 
than in the deeper seedba nk (15 to 20 cm). Sand 
dropseed ( Sporobolus cryptandrus ) and sand 
lovegrass were the most common perennial grass 
species identified in both seedbank levels across 
years. However, the basal coverage for these species 
in the above ground vegetation was relatively low. 
With respect to total germination sand dropseed and 
sand lovegrass were the most prominent grass 
seedlings identified. Some atrazine tolerance is 
present in some warm-season grasses, but not in sand 
lovegrass (Martin et al. 1982). Seedbed preparation 
should provide a weed free, firm surface on which to 
plant. Since seed size is small the planting depth 
should be 2.5 to 5 mm to allow seedling emergence. 
Neoteric seed of  E. trichodes often shows 
considerable dormancy. This quality may be 
considered desirable for range seedings since 
seedlings continue to emerge over a longer period of 
time (Ahring et al. 1963).  
 
Management  
Sand lovegrass provides highly palatable forage for 
livestock and is sometimes re ferred to as “ice cream 
grass” because of its pala tability. Total nonstructural 
carbohydrate (TNC) accumu lation or carbohydrate 
reserves of a plant have been shown to play an 
important role in grass management and survival. 
Carbohydrate reserves of perennial grasses are 
important for winter survival, spring regrowth, and 
regrowth after herbage removal by clipping or 
grazing. According to Perry and Moser (1974) sand 
lovegrass has its greatest percentage of carbohydrate 
reserves located in their stem bases. Thus, sand 
lovegrass should not be closely grazed at any time 
during the growing season (Moser and Perry 1983). 
They further stated that  defoliation once early in the 
growing season (June) appeared to be less 
detrimental to plant survival than late summer 
defoliations. In rangelands where good stands exist, 
sand lovegrass would yield and persist best in a 
rotational grazing system where defoliation was 
limited to once a year and it should have some leaf 
tissue remaining at the en d of the grazing period. 
Sand lovegrass is a short lived plant even with light 
defoliation. Seed production should be permitted to  allow for the possibility of new seedling 
development.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshoppers, leafhoppers and other forage eating 
insects are very destructive to seedling stands. 
Rabbits and rodents are also damaging to seedlings. 
Vogel and Kindler (1980) observed subterranean root 
aphids
 (Geoica utricularia ) at the Mead Field 
Laboratory when digging and moving sand lovegrass 
selections to a crossing block from a selection 
nursery. Subsequent investigations indicated that the 
white, pear shaped aphids were infesting the roots of 
all sand lovegrass plots. Later experiments using two 
insecticides and a control (non-treated plots) 
indicated that the aphids  were significantly reducing 
forage yields in the untreated plots of sand lovegrass.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Sand lovegrass does not pose any known negative 
concerns to the environment. Its ability to grow and 
survive on sandy sites provides increased ground 
cover which reduces both wind and water erosion on 
these sites.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed can be harvested with a standard combine and 
cleaned with a fanning mill. Seed of sand lovegrass is 
extremely small with 3,810,000 seeds per kg or 1.5 
million seeds per pound. A five year average seed 
yield for ‘Bend’ sand lovegrass at the Manhattan 
Plant Materials Center (PMC) was 197 kg per ha. 
This average yield was reported with supplemental 
irrigation and additional fertility as a management 
option. Ahring et al. (1963) found that sand lovegrass 
seed germinated better unde r alternating temperature 
regimes and when moistened with a Ca(NO
3)2 
solution. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government”. The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
‘Nebraska 27’ sand lovegrass was cooperatively 
released by the Nebraska Agriculture Experiment 
Station, USDA Agriculture Research Service, and 
USDA Soil Conservation Service (SCS) in 1949. The 
original collection was made in northern Holt 
County, Nebraska. Nebraska 27 is described as a 
winter hardy, relatively long-lived strain of sand 
lovegrass. Well adapted to a range of soil types and

produces palatable and highly nutritious livestock 
forage. 
 
‘Mason’ sand lovegrass was cooperatively released 
by USDA Soil Conservation Service and the Texas 
Agriculture Experiment Station in 1971. The original 
collection was made by SCS personnel from native 
stands near Mason, Texas. Mason is described as 
leafier, having better seed and forage production and 
begins growth earlier in the spring than common sand 
lovegrass lines. 
 
‘Bend’ sand lovegrass was cooperatively released by 
the Kansas Agriculture Experiment Station and 
USDA’s Agriculture Research Service and Soil 
Conservation Service in 1971. The original 
collections were made from the Arkansas and 
Cimarron River basin in south central Kansas and 
adjacent areas in Oklahoma. Two cycles of selection 
for vigor and persistence were conducted on         
non-irrigated sandy soil. Bend is described as 
uniform in maturity, a good seed producer, good 
establishment characteristics and relatively disease 
free. Bend had acceptable dry matter yield and good 
vigor in comparative tests
. 
 
References 
Adams, K.S. 1956.  Native grasses: legumes and  
forbs: section 2 of a series . Phillips Petroleum Co., 
Bartlesville, Oklahoma. 
 
Ahring, R.M., N.L. Dunn, and J.R. Harlan. 1963. 
Effect of treatments in br eaking dormancy in sand 
lovegrass,  Eragrostis trichodes (Nutt.) Wood.  Crop 
Science  3: 131-133. 
 
Barkley, T.M., R.L. McGr egor, R.E. Brooks, and 
E.K. Schofield. 1986. Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Perez, C.J., S.S. Waller, L.E. Moser, J.L. 
Stubbendieck, and A.A. Steuter. 1998. Seedbank 
characteristics of a Nebraska sandhills prairie.  J. of 
Range Man. 51: 55-62. 
 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett,  and T.N. Shiflet. 1971. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states.  
USDA SCS Agriculture Handbook No. 389, 
Washington, DC. 
 
Martin, A.R., R.S. Moomaw, and K.P. Vogel. 1982.  
Warm-season grass establishment with atrazine. 
Agron. J . 74: 916-920. 
 
Moser, L.E. and L.J. Perry.  1983. Yield, vigor, and 
persistence of sand lovegrass [ Eragrostis trichodes (Nutt.) Wood] following clipping treatments. J. of 
Range Man.
 36:236-238. 
 
Perry, L.J. and L.E. Moser. 1974. Carbohydrate and 
organic nitrogen concentrations within range grass 
parts at maturity.  J. of Range Man. 27: 276-278. 
  
Pohl, R.W. 1978.  How to know the grasses . Dubuque 
(IA): William C. Brown Publishing Co. 
 
Stubbendieck, J., S.L. Hatch, K.J. Kjar. 1982.  North 
American Range Plants.  University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
 Vogel, K.P. and S.D. Kindler. 1980. Effects of the 
subterranean aphid [ Geoica utricularia (Passerini)] 
on forage yield and quality of sand lovegrass.  J. of 
Range Man. 33:272-274.  
 
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occurrence of C3 
and C4 photosynthetic pathways in North American 
grasses. J. of Range Man . 32: 12-28. 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1968.  Prairie plants and their 
environment.  University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 
Nebraska. 
 
Prepared By 
Richard Wynia USDA-NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia USDA-NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited:  080228 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.