Plant Guide
RUBBER RABBITBRUSH 
Ericameria nauseosa (pallas ex 
Pursh) G.L. Nesom & Baird  
Plant Symbol = ERNA10 
 
Contributed by USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington   
 Sally and Andy Wasowski, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 
www.wildflower.org  
 
 Alternate Names  
Grey rabbitbrush, golden rabbitbrush, chamiso blanco, 
Chrysothamnus nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, 
Chrysocoma nauseosa Pallas ex Pursh,  Bigelovia 
nauseosa  Gray  
 
Uses   
Forage:  Rubber rabbitbrush has marginal value for all 
classes of livestock and has occasionally been reported to 
be toxic (Stubbendieck et al. 2003). It is, however, an 
importa nt browse species on depleted range land and can 
be heavily used by wildlife during winter months (Utah 
State University 2009). Halls et al. (1994) report browsing 
animals, especially mule deer, use rubber rabbitbrush as  forage in winter months but not in summer because the 
leaves have fewer secondary volatile chemicals in winter. 
Bhat et al. (1990) found some accessions of rubber 
rabbitbrush ranked high in crude protein, phosphorus and 
digestibility in comparison to other winter browse species, 
and suggest
ed these accessions could be selected for 
superior germplasm releases.  
 
Wildlife habitat:  The leaves, flowers and seeds of rubber 
rabbitbrush are a food source for deer, antelope, elk, small 
mammals and birds. The plant also provides cover for 
small mamma ls and birds such as jackrabbits and sage 
grouse.   
 
Pollinator habitat : Rubber rabbitbrush attracts a wide 
array of native insects, including butterflies and small 
bees (Utah Native Plant Society 2009; Ogle et al. 2007). It 
is one the few native plant spec ies in the Intermountain 
West that provides habitat for pollinators during the late 
summer and fall months (Ogle et al. 2007).   
 
Range revegetation: Rubber rabbitbrush is deep rooted 
and produces heavy litter (Aldon and Pase  1981) and has 
the potential to stabilize soils, moderate soil temperature 
and moisture, as well as add aesthetic value to degraded 
land (Romo and Eddleman 1994).   
 
Erosion control: Rubber rabbitbrush grows rapidly and 
produces abundant seed (Romo and Eddl eman 1994). It 
can be used to stabilize roadsides and other critical areas.  
 
Mine reclamation:  The plant is able to grow on a variety 
of substrates, including sand, shale, slickrock and other 
unusual substrate types (Meyer et al. 1989) and is an ideal 
pla nt for mine reclamation.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  The Hopi stripped the bark from the 
branches of rubber rabbitbrush and used the branches for 
basket weaving (Stubbendieck  et al. 2003). The Navajo 
used the flowers to make yellow dye (Lady Bird Johnson 
Wildflower Center 2009). Native Americans also used 
rubber rabbitbrush for chewing gum, tea, cough syrup, 
and to treat chest pains (Stubbendeick et al 2003). During 
World War  II the plant was studied as a substitute for 
commercial rubber, and currently it is a small commercial 
rubber source (Utah State University 2009).   
 
Ornamental : The attractive, late -blooming flowers, 
silvery -green foliage, and drought tolerance of rubber 
r abbitbrush make it a desirable plant for low maintenance 
and sustainable landscaping. It is recommended by the 
Utah Native Plant Society (2009) as a screen or 
background for summer flowers.