RED LOVEGRASS     
Eragrostis secundiflora 
J. Presl ssp. 
oxylepis  (Torr.) S.D. Koch 
Plant Symbol = ERSEO          
           
Alternative Scientific Name:  Eragrostis oxylepis  (Torr.) Torr.   
Description  
General :  Red lovegrass [ Eragrostis secundiflora  J. Presl ssp. 
oxylepis  (Torr.) S.D. Koch] is a tufted perennial with culms 
ranging from 30-75 cm tall.  Blades are flat with long hairs above 
the ligule.  Blades are usually 10-15 cm long and 2-2.25 mm wide 
with green to blue green coloration (Gould 1975). 
 
Red lovegrass panicles are usually contracted, but sometimes 
open ranging from 5-30 cm long and 1-45 cm wide.  The spikelets 
are in dense clusters on branches and branchlets. Spikelets are 
pedicellate, linear-oblong to ovate, strongly compressed with 10-
26 florets, laterally flattened, pale green or violate to reddish in 
color (Gould 1975; Hatch et al. 2003).  Caryopses are dark red to 
brown with 3,759,533 seeds per pound.  
Distribution :  Red lovegrass is native to North America and grows 
in the southern US and into northern Mexico particularly on sandy soils and along beaches (Barkworth et al. 2007).   For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat :  Red lovegrass is commonly associated with slender grama, purple threeawn, hooded windmillgrass, and common 
sand bur.  These habitat areas are also associated with a number of annual and perennial forbs including  Sida spp. and 
Ipomoea  spp. (Everitt et al 1981 & Judd and Sides 1983).   
Adaptation 
Red lovegrass is adapted to open spaces on sand, loamy sand, and sandy loam soils.  
Uses 
Red lovegrass is recommended for use in range seeding mixtures, upland wildlife plantings, roadside plantings, and 
conservation plantings.  Red lovegrass is an early successional plant well adapted to colonizing openings. Hatch and Pluhar 
(1993) state red lovegrass is poor forage for cattle. 
Status 
Weedy or Invasive : This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Se rvice 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/ ) 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this  plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).
 Planting Guidelines 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of planting. Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by either tillage or 
herbicides. Prior to planting, the site should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.  Red lovegrass can be seeded using 
a drill or broadcast seeder.  If broadcast seeded, some type of additional coverage such as culti-packing or light dragging is 
recommended to ensure good seed to soil contact.
  
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep. It is better to plant too  Red Lovegrass (c) South Texas Natives

shallow than too deep. For calibration purposes, red lovegrass contains approximately 4,000,000 seeds per bulk pound. A 
seeding rate of 0.5-1 pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre is recommended. 
Management 
Areas planted to red lovegrass should be deferred for 90 days to allow plants to become established.  Established plants 
should be allowed to produce seed annually, because red lovegrass readily reseeds itself with minimal soil disturbance.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no potential problems or pests associated with red lovegrass. 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns associated with red lovegrass. 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.   
Seeds and Plant Production 
Red lovegrass is best started using greenhouse grown transplants, planted on bedded rows.  Seedlings grow and mature 
quickly and will produce a marketable crop in the year of planting.  When cleaned to caryopses seed quality and active 
germination are very high (≥ 90%) because of this only small amounts of seed is needed to produce a sufficient number 
transplant to establish production fields. 
 
Seed harvest is possible using a variety of methods and implements.  Seed ripens indeterminately, and a Woodward Flail-Vac 
Seed Stripper (Ag-renewal, Inc., Weatherford, Oklahoma) can collect the ripe seed crop without damaging or eliminating the 
ability to make subsequent harvests of the stand as later flowering florets mature.  However, majority of the seed crop will 
hold well on the plants after complete maturity allowing for combine harvest.  An additional benefit of combining is the 
removal of unfilled florets which increases seed harvest purity.  In well managed, irrigated fields, 2-3 harvests can be 
expected per year.  The first harvest is typically in May, with the last harvest in October.  Potential seed yields per acre have 
been calculated at 10 PLS lbs. per acre on 36” bedded rows with a plant population of 14,000 plants per acre.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Duval Germplasm red lovegrass was collaborate released in 2016 by South Texas Natives and the E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
Material Center in Kingsville, TX. This release is made up of four collections originating from MLRAs 150B, 83E, and 
083C.  Duval Germplasm is recommended for use in range seeding mixes and for critical site revegetation and rights-of-way 
plantings in South Texas.  Generation 0 seed is maintained by South Texas Natives.    
 
Literature Cited 
Insert text here 
Barkworth, M.E., L.K. Anderton, K.M. Capels, S. Long, and M.B. Piep. 2007.  Manual of Grasses for North America.  Utah 
State University Press, Logan, UT. 
Everitt, J.H., C.L. Gonzalez, G. Scott and B. E. Dahl. 1981. Seasonal Food Preferences of Cattle on Native Range in the 
South Texas Plains. Journal of Range Management 34:384-388. 
Gould, F.W. 1975.  The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, TX. 
Hatch, S.L. and J. Pluffer. 1993. Texas Range Plants. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, TX. 
Hatch, S.L., J.L. Schuster, and D.L. Drawe. 1999. Grasses of the Texas Gulf Prairies and Marshes.  Texas A&M University 
Press, College Station, TX. 
Judd W. F., S. L. Sides. 1983. The Effect of Hurricane Allen on the Near-Shore Vegetation of South Padre Island. The 
Southwestern Naturalist 28:365-369. 
 
Citation 
Maher S., and J. Reilley. 2016. Plant guide for red lovegrass (Eragrostis secundiflora). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Services, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center. Kingsville, Texas 78363.      
Published August 2016 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site:

http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER