Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE WILDRYE 
Elymus glaucus Buckl. 
Plant Symbol = ELGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materi als Center, California  
 
 D. Skinner, USDA NRCS Washington PMC, Pullman, WA 
 
Uses 
Blue wildrye is good for streambank restoration, 
meadow and swale seeding.   It is also excellent for 
reseeding burned or disturbed areas in oak woodland 
or forest.  It is very tolerant of fire, burning quickly 
with little downward transfer  of heat.  Blue wildrye 
can also provide excellent wildlife habitat for 
mammals, birds, and waterfowl.  It provides good 
forage early in the season, but later, may be too 
coarse and stemmy.  
 
Ethnobotanic:  Blue wildrye has similar uses as 
creeping wild rye,  primarily as a cereal  grain.  It is 
less desirable for basketry as the nodes are thick, but 
this does not exclude its use in some baskets.  Similar 
to creeping wildrye, ther e may be some ceremonial 
uses of blue wildrye. 
    Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Blue wildrye is a large perennial 
bunchgrass.  It is very tall (up to 5 feet) with an 
upright growth habit and just a few stems per plant.  
It is similar in stature and growth habit to slender 
wheatgrass.  The leaf blades are thin and flat, ranging 
from 4-12mm (.2-.5 inch)  wide.  Leaf color changes 
from green to blue green, with a white waxy coating.  
Frosts induce dormancy.  
 
Distribution 
Blue wildrye is found from California to Alaska and 
also the Great Plains and northern Mexico.  Please 
consult the PLANTS database for current 
distribution. 
 
Habitat 
Open areas, native prairie,  chaparral, woodland and 
forest.   
 
Adaptation 
Blue wildrye grows well in both disturbed and 
undisturbed areas and is a good competitor.  It 
tolerates wide variations in soil and weather 
conditions, though grows best in good soils.  It 
prefers moisture but tolera tes drought and is usually 
more drought-tolerant than meadow barley ( Hordeum 
brachyantherum ) and California brome (Bromus 
carinatus ).  Some ecotypes are adapted to sunny 
grassland habitats.  
 
Establishment 
Seeds mature in late spring to summer; can be 
collected for 2-7 weeks de pending on ecotype and 
growing conditions.  Seed is up to 8mm long (3/8 
in.), germinates easily, and has good seedling vigor.  
There are approximately 134,000 seeds/lb., and if 
planted at a rate of 1 lb./acre, there would be 
approximately 3 seeds/square feet. 
 
Management  
Forage quality can be excellent when cut before the 
boot stage.  It will not survive if grazed too heavily.  
Likewise, it is generally tolerant of mowing if not cut 
too short.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Leaf rust can occur and treating the foliage with an 
approved fungicide might be needed in severe 
infestations. 
  
Seeds and Plant Production 
Flowering occurs in the late spring typically April to 
May in California.  Further north, flowering typically 
occurs in June and July.  Adequate moisture will 
promote good seed set, but even under adverse 
conditions of low moisture, seed will be produced in 
most years.  Seed is ripe 6 to 9 weeks after flowering.  
There are 134,000 seeds per pound.  Seed production 
fields generally require 5-7 pounds pure live seed per 
acre blue wildrye is not recommended to be seeded 
alone in revegetation plantings, and it should not 
make up more than 50% of the seed mix.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Mariposa’ (CA) - Collected from a native stand near 
Mariposa, California at an  elevation of 600 feet 
above sea level.  ‘Maripos a’ has shown a preference 
for loam to clay loam soils.  It can persist on 
moderately deep road cut slopes.  It is best grown for 
seed on well to moderately well drained, moist, 
medium textured soils.  It does not tolerate poor 
drainage or prolonged flooding.  
 
'Arlington' (WA)- Collected  from a native stand two 
miles north of the city of Arlington in Snohomish 
County, Washington at an elevation of 200 ft. (61 m) 
above sea level.  'Arlington' blue wildrye is a native, 
cool season, perennial bunchgrass.  It establishes 
rapidly from seed but is short-lived.  Field 
evaluations in western Oregon and Washington 
indicate that 'Arlington' is suitable for erosion control 
and quick, self-perpetuating cover on logging roads, 
cut-over timberland, burned areas and steep hillsides.  
The species may also be less competitive with 
recently planted forest tree seedlings compared to 
certain introduced grasses.  However, the specific 
forage value of 'Arlington' and its compatibility with 
tree plantations is not fully established. 
 
'Elkton' (OR) - Collected  from a native stand 11.5 
miles northwest of the city of Sutherlin in Douglas 
County, Oregon at  an elevation of 400 ft. (121 m) 
above sea level.  'Elkton' blue wildrye is a native, 
cool season, perennial bunchgrass. It establishes 
rapidly from seed but is relatively short-lived.  
Evaluations in western Oregon and Washington 
indicate that 'Elkton' is suitable for erosion control 
and quick, self-perpetuating cover on logging roads, 
cutover timber and burned areas and steep hillsides.  
The species may also be less competitive with  recently planted forest tree seedlings compared to 
certain 
introduced grasses.  However, the specific 
forage value of 'Elkton' and its compatibility with tree 
plantations not fully established. 
 
‘Union Flat’ germplasm  (WA) – Collected from a 
native stand in Palouse Hills region of Washington at 
an elevation of 1800 feet.   ‘Union Flat’ germplasm is 
a selected class release and primarily intended for 
upland wildlife plantings.  It was selected for rapid 
emergence and growth rate, and it is a more profuse 
seed producer than other cultivars.  ‘Union Flat’ 
germplasm will be maintained until 2025.  After 
which, it may be re-released as a cultivar if seed 
demand remains high.   
       
References 
Hankins, D. Email to the author. 19 July 2005. 
 
 
Hickman, J.C.  The Jepson manual. Higher plants of 
California . University of California Press.  Berkeley 
and Los Angeles.  
 
Hitchcock, A.S. (rev. A. Chase). 1950.  Manual of the 
grasses of the United States . USDA Misc. Publ. No. 
200. Washington, DC.  
 
USDA-NRCS.  Notice of release of ‘Arlington’ blue 
wildrye.  Oregon State University Agricultural 
Experiment Station and Washington State University 
Agriculture Research Center, Corvallis.  
 
USDA-NRCS.  Notice of release of ‘Elkton’ blue 
wildrye . Oregon State University Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Corvallis. 
 
USDA-NRCS.  Notice of release of ‘Mariposa’ blue 
wildrye . Lockeford Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford.  
 
Yolo County Resource Conservation District. 2000. 
Know your natives: a pictorial guide to California 
native grasses . Yolo County Resource Conservation 
District, Woodland. 
   
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, formerly USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, California  
 
Reina O’Beck , USDA NRCS Califor nia State Office, 
Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, formerly USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, California

Edited: 11Jul2005 ro; 29Jul2005 rln; 1Aug2005 rln ; 06jun06 jsp; 1Sept2008 
mes; 081001 jsp 
 For more information about this 
and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.