Plant Guide
PENLAND'S 
EUTREMA  
Eutrema penlandii  Rollins 
Plant Symbol = EU PE10 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS  Colorado Plant 
Materials Program  
 
Figure1:  Penland’s eutrema, Eutrema penlandii .  Photo USFWS , Alicia Langton  July 2010. 
Alternate Names  
Eutrema  edwardsii ssp. Penlandii , Weber 1985) 
Penland Alpine Fen mustard  
Mosquito Range mustard  
Uses  
Penland’s  eutrema was first collected near Hoosier 
Pass, Colorado, by C. William T. Penland of 
Colorado College in 1935.  Reed C. Rollins of the 
Gray Herbarium described the species as  Eutrema 
penlandii  in  1950 (Rollings , 1950).  Many mustard 
family plant species have known  food value  
(cabbage, broccoli, kohlrabi, kale, etc.) , in fact, 
Wasabi , Eutrema  japonica,  is  a commonly  
recognized member of the Eutrema  genus  in Asia .  It  is unknown at this 
time if the plant requires 
pollinator s for reproduction. The plant is browsed by 
alpine wildlife.   It has no known agricultural, 
economic, or other human uses at this time.   
 
Status  
Penland’s eutrema  was designated as endangered  by 
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  (USFWS) in 1993,  
at which time it was known to occur at 14 sites with 
an estimated population of 16,400 individuals 
( USFWS , 1993).   A habitat survey conducted in 2003 
resulted in the discovery of two additional sites but 
this addition did not significantly change the know n 
overall population or habitat extent (USFWS , 
2011). The NatureServe conservation status rank, an 
international effort which rank s species on their 
“global” status,  ranks Penland’s  eutrema as G1/S1 - 
critically imperiled  globally  and in Colorado,  (Figure 
2 ).  Penland’s eutrema is only one of two species of 
Eutrema  in North America and the only  one in the 
lower 48 states ( NatureServe 2011) , (CPC, 2011 ).   
 Figure 2.  Penland's eutrema global "rarity" rank (NatureServe 
2008).  
Description  
General :   
M ustard family (Brassicaceae).  Penland’s eutrema is  
a  diminutive  herbaceous perennial plant that grows 
from  a taproot  (F igure 3) .  Plants grow up to 6 inches 
(15 cm) in height with one to  several spreading erect 
stems (Figure  1 ).  Basal leaves are heart -sh aped with 
rounded tips.  Several white, four -petalled flowers 
top each stem.  The leaves and fruit are  without hairs 
(glabrous)  and  stalked  which distinguishes this 
species  from many other small  types of mustard that 
grow in the area such as Draba  (whitlow-grass). 
Flowering occurs June to August  and even into 
September , depending on the site and snow melt  
(USFWS , 2011) .  Fruits of Penland’s eutrema  are the 
characteristic  mustard family  siliques; they are 
diamond- shaped in cross -section  and  turn purple -
black  when mature which also distinguishes the plant 
from other look- alikes ( USFWS , 2011).

Figure 
3:  Penland’s  eutrema posed with a penny  for size perspective.  US FWS Alicia Langton July 2010.  
 
Distribution:   
Eutrema penlandii  is a narrow endemic known  only 
to occur in the Mosquito mountain r ange of Colorado 
in  Lake,  Park, and Summit counties (US FWS , 1993).  
R ange -wide distribution reaches 18 mi les from north 
to south and approximately 10 mi les east to west, 
encompassing roughly 200 acres of occupied habitat .  
This species is thought to be an ice -age relic  with its 
closest relative,  E. edwardsii, found in the Canadian 
Arctic Archipelago. (Roy et al. 1993) . According to 
the FWS 2011, approximately 40% of the existing 
known populations and habitat for Penland’ s Eutrema  
occurs on private land.  Please consult the USFWS 
website  at www.fws.gov  for more information . For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat :  
Penland’s  eutrema is an alpine tundra  species that 
grows  above treeline  in association with many 
species of moss , forbs, and grami noids in alpine 
meadow  habitat (Spackman, et al. 1997) , (Chapman 
2006) .  It occurs in  wetlands  with perennial water 
flow  from  snowmelt , at  11,800  -13,100 ft.  in 
elevation  ( USFWS , 2011) .  Penland’s e utrema 
generally  grows on  the leeward, south and east -
facing ,  flat to gently sloping benches with steep walls 
that provide some protection from snow -melting 
winds ( USFWS , 2011) .  The annual precipitation is 
30- 40 inches  (US Department of Agriculture , 2006) .  
Penland’s  eutrema is known to  frequently occur  in 
associat ion with a variety of alpine tundra species 
including:  white marsh marigold ( Caltha 
leptosepala), water sedge ( Carex aquatilis), mountain 
sedge ( Carex scopulorum),  Bering chickweed 
( Cerastium beeringianum ), alpine spring beauty 
( Claytonia megarhiza), tufte d hairgrass 
( Deschampsia cespitosa), Ross avens ( Geum rossii), 
elephanthead ( Pedicularis groenlandica ), arctic 
bluegrass ( Poa arctica ), America bistort ( Polygonum 
bistortoides),  alpine bistort ( Polygonum viviparum ), 
King’s crown ( Rhodiola integrifolia ),  Rose crown  (
Rhodiola rhodantha) , diamondleaf saxifrage 
( Saxifraga r homboidea),  and alpine meadow rue 
( T halictrum alpinum ), (F igure 4) , ( USFWS, 2011), (  
RMH, 2010) .   The Mosquito Range  includes thirteen 
oth er rare plant species, of which,  two  are known 
only  from the range  (USFWS 2011) . 
 
Adaptation   
Penland’s  eutrema is adapted to grow in  the 
Mosquito Range in central Colorado (Spackman 
1997) , where a unique set of habitat conditions exist.  
An arctic circumpolar species, Penland’s eutrema  is 
separated from its closest relative  E. edwardsii, 
which occurs  in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago  by 
over 1000 miles  to the north (Roy et al. 1993) .   
 
 
Figure 4:  Penland’s  eutrema habitat .  Photo USFWS, Alicia Langton , July 2010.  
 
Management  
P rimary threats to  Penland’s eutrema appear to be 
from h abitat loss through recreation (off -highway 
vehicle use, camping, and hiking), alterations to 
hydrology, mining impacts,  and climate.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Currently there are no known pests a ffecting the 
growth and vigor of Penland’s  eutrema.  Associated 
threats  may include the introduction of non -native 
invasive plant species  from hikers and campers as 
recreational use numbers continue to increase 
annually of this popular recreation  area  that 
constitute s the only habitat of Penland’s eutrema.

Impacts of herbivory from pikas and rodents have 
been noted by researchers ( USFWS 2011).  However, 
Penland’s mustard has evolved some tolerance to 
grazing and wildlife usage. For instance, a taproot  
growth form enables re -sprouting  after grazing.  
Interestingly, t o date, the main non -native constituent 
in Penland’s mustard habitat is dandelion, T araxacon 
officinales , another tap -rooted species.  
 
Concerns  
Hydrology is the most fragile aspect of the hab itat 
affecting  Penland’s  eutrema.   Any activity that 
directly or indirectly alters the surface or ground 
water supply and alters the wetland habitat required 
by this species could pose a significant threat. On a 
larger scale, climate change  could potentially threaten 
this and other alpine species  since there are no 
upward elevation to which the species may migrate . 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Depending on snow -melt, Penland’s  eutrema 
produces mature fruits from late -July into August and 
into  September (USFWS).  Penland’s eutrema 
produces from seed with no means of vegetative 
reproduction.  Little else is known about the 
reproduction, pollinators , or seed dispersal at this 
time.  
 
References  
Chapman, S.S., G.E.Griffith,   J.M.  Omernik, A.B. 
Price,   J.  Freeouf , and D.L.  Schrupp, 2006.  
Ecoregions of Colorado (color poster with map, 
descriptive text, summary tables, and 
photographs): Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological 
Survey (map scale 1:1,200,000).  
Center for Plant Conservation  (CPC) . 
http://www.cent erforplantconservation.org/Colle
ction/CPC_ProfileImage.asp?FN=1921b.   
  http://www.centerforplantconservation.org/ . 
Accessed 2011.   
NatureServe. 2008. NatureServe Explorer: An online  encyclopedia of life [web application]. 
[Internet].Version 7.0. NatureServe, Arlington, 
Virginia.  http://www.natureserve.org/explorer . 
Accessed: June 17, 2011.  
O'Kane, Steve L. Jr. 1985. Endangered Species  Information System, Species Biology Workbook 
for  ERIOGONUM PELINOPHILUM. U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service.  
Rocky Mo untain Herbarium.  www.rhm.uwyo.edu
/ 
3/25/2010.  Accessed Eutrema penlandii , accession 
records, September 2011.   
Rollings, R.C.  Eutrema penlandii  Rollings, sp.nov.  
Contributions to the Gray Herbarium 171:51.  
Rollins, R.C. 1993. The Cruciferae of continental  North America: Systematics of the mustard 
family from the Arctic to Panama. Stanford 
Univ. Press , Stanford, California. 976 pp.  
Roy, G., S. Kelso, and A. Tonnesen. 1993. Habitat  characteristics of Eutrema penlandii     
 
 
(Brassicaceae) in the Col orado Rockies: A study  
of alpine endemism.  
Spackman, S. et al. 1997. Colorado Rare Plant Field 
Guide. Prepared for the Bureau of Land 
Management, the U.S. Forest Service and the 
U.S. Fish  and Wildlife Service by the Colorado 
Natural Heritage Program.  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1984. Final rule to 
determine  Eutrema penlandii  to be an 
endangered species. Federal Register 49(136):
 
28562- 28565. 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1988.  Eutrema penlandii  Recovery Plan.  U.S. Fish and 
Wild life Service, Denver, Colorado.  
U .S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011.  Eutrema 
penlandii , unpublished summary pages.   
USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service,  PLANTS Database [USDA PLANTS]. 
http://plants.usda. gov/. Accessed 20 11. 
US Department of Agricultur e, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service.  2006.  Land Resource 
Regions and Major Land Resource Areas of the 
United States, the Caribbean, and the Pacific 
Basin .  U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Handbook 296.  
Weber, W.A. 1987. Colorado Flora: Western Slope . 
Colorado Associ ated University Press, Boulder, 
Colorado. 530  pp. 
 
Acknowledgements:  
Thank you for editorial contributions from : 
 
Anderson, David,  and the Botany Team,  Colorado 
Natural Heritage Program, Colorado State 
University, For t Collins,  CO. 
 
Prepared By :   
Christine Taliga, USDA NRCS  Colorado State 
Office,  Denver, CO . and  Gina Glenne, USDI Fish 
and Wildlife Service, Grand Junction, CO.  
 
Citation  
Taliga, Christine E. and Gina  Glen ne, 2011.  Plant 
G uide for Penland’s eutrema  (Eutrema penlandii ). 
USDA- Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Colorado State Office.  Denver, 80225 -0426.  
Published  September, 2011  
Edited:  18Sep2011  cet; 22Sep2011 gg; 
23Sept2011rm,  23Sep2011jab

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at  
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site 
http://plant -materi als.nrcs.usda.gov.  
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL O PPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER