Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PALE PURPLE 
CONEFLOWER  
Echinacea pallida  (Nutt.) Nutt.
Plant Symbol = ECPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 R. Alan Shadow USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names  
pale Echinacea or pale coneflower 
 
Uses 
 The uses are numerous for this classic forb species. 
Medicinal:  Native Americans used this species long 
before the white European settlers arrived on 
America’s shore. A number of Native American 
Nations, including Blackfoot, Choctaw, Comanche, 
Dakota, Lakota, and Sioux, used various  Echinacea 
preparations for a variety of purposes (Flannery, 
1999). European settlers learned of native botanical 
species from their indigenous  teachers, soon bringing 
Echinacea  into the colonial pharmacopoeia (Barrett, 
2003). The first historical recordings of  Echinacea 
were found in the  Flora Virginica (1762) by Clayton   
and  Materia Medica Americana  (1787) by Schopf 
(Flannery, 1999). Currently, extracts and whole plant 
products made from  Echinacea species comprise one 
of the largest sectors of the several billion dollar 
herbal medicine market  in North America and 
Europe. Annual sales of  Echinacea products have 
been estimated at $300 million in the U.S. alone 
(Brevoort, 1998).  Echinacea is used most widely as 
prevention or treatment of the common cold, with the 
proposed mechanism of action relating to its reported 
ability to stimulate the immune system (Barrett,  2003). Birt 
et al (2008) reported that the analysis of 
polar fractions of  Echinacea extracts showed the 
presence of antiviral activity, with evidence 
suggesting that phenolic  compounds other that the 
known HIV inhibitor, cichoric acid, may be involved. 
 
Forage value : Pale coneflower is eaten by all 
livestock classes and it decreases under grazing 
pressure. The plants have high nutritive content, 
especially early in the spring.  
 
Wildlife : Leaves were eaten by harvest mice and deer 
mice in captivity, but cotton rats and prairie voles 
would not consume the leaves (Menhusen, 1963). 
Shirley (1994) indicated that hummingbirds were 
attracted to the flowers and goldfinches and other 
birds ate the seeds.  
 
Landscaping : Schramm (1992) listed the ornamental 
characteristics of this plant as very high and the 
flowering as showy. It is characterized as the 
dominant landscape elemen t when blooming. The 
heads remain in bloom for several weeks from late 
May to early July. Pale coneflower can be used as cut 
flowers and the brown, rounded, spiny heads can also 
provide attractive accents to dried arrangements. 
Kindscher (1992) indicated that the  Echinacea 
species ornamental possibilities have not been fully 
explored.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : A member of the sunflower or composite 
family (Asteraceae).  Pale coneflower is a native, 
perennial forb with a large (2.54 centimeter) (cm) 
chocolate brown to black taproot with few to little 
branching that will penetrate into the soil for 2 to 3 
meters (m) (Weaver, 1958). The stems (1.2 m) are 
erect, one to several, simple to rarely branched with 
most of the leaves being basal in nature. The leaves 
are alternate, simple, rough  on both surfaces, and up 
to 25 cm in length and 2.5 to 4.0 cm in width. Basal 
leaves have entire margins, are three nerved and 
petiolate, upper leaves are reduced in size with sessile 
attachment to the stem. Inflorescence is a head that is 
solitary at the top of the stem. Pale pink, drooping 
petal-like ray florets surround the domed, reddish-
brown center of disk florets that are rough and

prickly to the touch. The pale coneflower blooms in 
late spring to mid summer. The fruits are small (4-5 
millimeter) (mm) elongated, tan achenes that develop 
in the seed head. The achenes may remain in the 
heads for many weeks after they mature.  The name 
“Echinacea” (from Greek) means hedgehog 
comparing the spiny animal to the sharp spiny bracts 
of the inflorescence. “Pale” and pallida generally 
refer to the coloration of the ray flowers. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Pale coneflower is found in the 
eastern ¼ of Kansas, west to Cowley and Butler 
Counties. The species rang e extends from Indiana 
and Wisconsin southwest to Arkansas and northern 
Texas.  
 
Habitat: Pale purple coneflower is found in dry and 
mesic prairies and along ro adsides.  Pale purple 
coneflower performs well on various soil types from 
sandy to clay, it prefers well drained upland soils in 
full sun. It grows best on acid to neutral soils with a 
pH of 4.5 to 7.5 in a sunny location. Weaver and 
Fitzpatrick (1934) found this  species in 66 % of the 
upland prairies they studied, but less than 25 % of the 
low land prairies. Weaver ( 1968) indicated that pale 
coneflower was the ninth most important prairie forb.  
 
Adaptation 
Pale purple coneflower is adapted to dry and mesic 
prairies and a variety of soil types. It can stand some 
acidic soils (pH=4.5) and due to its long tap root can 
with stand prolonged drought.  
 
Establishment 
Seed of pale purple coneflower can be planted 
dormant in the fall (November to December) in an 
unstratified condition. Spring plantings should use 
stratified seed of this species. Kindscher (1992) 
recommended moist stratification of 2 to 4 months 
and Shirley (1994) recommended 90 days. Seeds 
should be barely covered with soil (3 mm) when 
planted and must be carefully weeded and watered as 
seedlings since they have low seedling vigor initially 
(Kinscher, 1992). A firm, weed free seed bed should 
be prepared prior to planting the pale coneflower. 
Pale purple coneflower has approximately 233,688 
seeds per kilogram (kg). Seeding rate for seed 
production should be 20 to 30 seeds per 30 cm of row 
at .9 m between rows. For a prairie restoration pale 
coneflower would be a very small component of the 
mixture with 36 pure live seeds (PLS) per meter 
square. No fertilization should be used during the 
establishment year unless the soil test shows 
deficiency of phosphorus (>15 ppm) or potassium  (>90 ppm). Normally no nitrogen will be used during 
the establishment year because that will encourage 
weed competition.  
 
Management 
Weed competition can be reduced by mowing over 
the height of the pale purple coneflower seedlings 
and by cultivating between rows. Remove dead plant 
materials in the spring by shredding or burning 
residue. Burning needs to be accomplished prior to 
the plants breaking dormancy. Without moist 
stratification pretreatment, few fresh seeds will 
germinate. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This species has been grown at the Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center for several years and during that 
time period there were no apparent pests or other 
potential problems. All 
Echinacea species are known 
to hybridize, so proper isolation should be maintained 
between related species to prevent hybrid seed 
production (McGregor, 1968). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Rock (1972) and Shirley (1994) indicated that pale 
coneflower is an aggressive plant and needs 
competition to limit its spread. The plant does tend to 
lodge without support from surrounding vegetation. 
Native prairie grasses work well, providing support 
and contrast for the plant during flowering.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed is harvested by hand or combine mid August. 
Seed should be dried initially and then processed 
using a three or four screen cleaner. Seed can be 
cleaned to a purity of 80 % without too much trouble. 
The germination, as mentioned previously, is rather 
discouraging without moist stratification. However, 
studies with the application of ethephon improved 
germination of  E. pallida seed lots regardless of seed 
source. The increase in germ ination by ethephon in 
eight seed lots was statis tically significant when 
compared to nontreated control seeds (Sari et al. 
2001). Romer o et al. (2005) found that seeds of 
Echinacea pallida  and two other Echinacea species 
had significantly higher percentage and rate of 
germination under cold moist stratification under 16-
24 h of light for four weeks than those seed 
germinated in the dark. Smith-Jochum and Albrecht 
(1987) found in field planting that fall sown seed had 
higher overall seedling emergence than did spring 
sown seed. They also report ed that germination in the 
greenhouse appears to occur at a higher rate than in 
the field. A preliminary result indicated that better 
establishment and survival of  Echinacea species 
occurred by transplants rather than direct seeding in

the field (Smith-Jochum and Albrecht, 1987). 
Greenhouse propagation requires seed pretreatment 
of wet stratification for 12 weeks at 40degrees F. 
Seed should be sown at 3mm depth in greenhouse 
flats two months before last frost free date. This 
species needs light to germinate, but covering the 
seed to 3mm depth does not inhibit germination. 
Transplants should be hardened off prior to planting 
in soil after all danger of frost has passed (Houseal, 
2008). Pale coneflower can be easily divided in the 
spring (Shirley, 1994 and Rock, 1972). Kindscher 
(1992) indicated that the Echinacea crowns can be 
divided into separate plantlets in the fall and then 
grown in greenhouse flats to produce root systems for 
out planting in the spring. Harbage (2001) found that 
micropropagation of three  Echinacea species resulted 
in abundant shoot production in cultures, but that 
subsequent root production was only successful with 
E. purpurea . 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture”. 
 
Northern and Southern Iowa Germplasms are source 
identified plant releases made in 2002 from the 
Elsberry Plant Materials Center. The sources of 
germplasm for these releases are counties in northern 
and southern Iowa. Central Iowa Germplasm is a 
2006 release of source identified materials from 
central Iowa county collec tions. The Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center and the Tallgrass Prairie Center are 
the releasing entities for this germplasm material.  
 
References 
Barrett, B. 2003. Medicinal properties of  Echinacea: 
A critical review. Phytomedicine 10: 66-86. 
 
Birt, D.F., M.P. Widrlechner, C.A. LaLone, L. Wu, J. 
Bae, A. K.S. Solco, G.A.  Kraus, P.A. Murphy, E.S. 
Wurtele, Q. Leng, S.C. Hebert, W.J. Maury, and J.P. 
Price. 2008.  Echinacea in infection. Am. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 87(2): 488S-492S. 
 
Brevoort, P. 1998. The Booming U.S. Botanical 
Market: A New Overview. HerbalGram 44: 33-46. 
 
Flannery, M.A. 1999. From  Rudbeckia to Echinacea : 
The emergence of purple cone flower in modern 
therapeutics. Pharmacy in History. 41: 52-59. 
  Harbage, J.F. 2001. Micropropagation of 
Echinacea 
angustifolia, E. pallida , and E. purpurea  from stem 
and seed explants. HortScience. 36(2): 360-364.  
 
Houseal, G. 2008. Native Seed Production Manual. 
University of Northern Iowa: Tallgrass Prairie 
Center. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992. Medical Wild Plants of the 
Prairie. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, KS. 
 
McGregor, R.L. 1968. The Taxonomy of the Genus 
Echinacea  (compositae). The University of Kansas 
Science Bulletin. Volume XLVIII, No. 4. 
 
Menhusen, B.R. 1963. An investigation on the food 
habits of four species of rodents in captivity. 
Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science. 
66(1); 107-112. 
 
Rock, H.W. 1972. Prairie Propagation Handbook. 
Boerner Botanical gardens. Milwaukee, WI. 
 
Romero, F.R., K. Delate, and D.J. Hannapel. 2005. 
The effect of seed source,  light during germination, 
and cold-moist stratification on seed germination in 
three species of  Echinacea for organic production. 
HortScience. 40(6): 1751-1754. 
 
Sari, A.O., M.R. Morales, and J.E. Simon. 2001. 
Ethephon can overcome seed dormancy and improve 
seed germination in purple coneflower species 
Echinacea angustifolia  and E. pallida . 
HortTechnology. 11(2): 202-205. 
 
Schramm, P. 1992. Prairie  Restoration: a twenty-five 
year perspective on establishment and management. 
Proceedings of the Twelft h North American Prairie 
Conference. Cedar Rapid, IA.  
 
 Shirley, S. 1994. Restoring the Tallgrass Prairie. 
University of Iowa Press. Iowa City, IA. 
 
Smith-Jochum, C.C. and M.L. Albrecht. 1987. Field 
establishment of three  Echinacea species for 
commercial production. Acta Hort. 208: 115-120. 
 
Weaver, J.E. and T.J. Fitzpa trick. 1934. The Prairie. 
Ecological Monographs 4(2): 109-295.  
 
Weaver, J.E. 1958. Classification of root systems of 
forbs of grassland and a consideration of their 
significance. Ecology 39(3): 393-401.

Weaver, J.E. 1968. Prairie Plants and Their 
Environment. University of Nebraska Press. Lincoln, 
NE. 
 
Prepared By  
Richard Wynia,  USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center. 
 
Species Coordinator 
Jerry Kaiser,  USDA NRCS Elsberry  Plant Materials 
Center. 
 
Edited: 090128 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.