Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA 
BUCKWHEAT  
Eriogonum fasciculatum  
Benth.  
Plant Symbol = ERFA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Common Names 
Eastern Mojave buckwheat, wild buckwheat, 
buckwheat, flat-top buckwheat 
 
Uses 
California buckwheat has shown excellent 
performance as a conservation plant on critical areas 
and problem soils, such as Serpentine, decomposed 
granites, and high pH soils. Its showy white flowers 
also make it ideal for environmental enhancement 
uses. Due to its long flowering period, California 
buckwheat is also an excellent insectory plant that 
provides nectar sources fo r beneficial insects when 
planted next to crops as part of an (IPM) Integrated 
Pest Management program. 
 
Ethnobotanic Uses: The Cahuilla drank leaf tea for 
headache and stomach pain. Hot root tea drunk for 
colds and laryngitis. Root poultice was applied to  wounds. A tea of dried flowers or dried roots was 
taken to prevent heart problems. Studies have 
identified leucoanthocyanidins beneficial to the heart 
in other 
Eriogonum  species.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site.  
© Gary A. Monroe. 2003.  
 
Description 
General: California buckwheat is a native evergreen 
shrub about 12 to 39 inches high and 28 to 51 inches 
wide. Branches are numerous, slender and flexible. 
Leaves are egg-shaped, 1.5 to 3.8 inches long and 
less than half an inch wide, smooth or fuzzy above 
and fuzzy beneath. Flowers are white or pink. 
Flowering period is from May through October. 
Seeds are light brown, angled and very small.  
 
Distribution 
California buckwheat grows naturally on dry slopes 
and canyons near the coas t from San Diego County 
north to Marin County. It is also found in Utah, 
Arizona and northwestern Mexico. 
 
Habitat 
Dry slopes, washes and canyons in scrub. 
 
Adaptation 
California buckwheat can be used as a conservation 
plant on critically eroded areas and for environmental 
enhancement on sandy to clay loam, moderately to 
well-drained soils. This species occurs abundantly in 
southern California but is also adapted to parts of 
California within the Mediterranean climate up to 
2700 feet elevation where the mean annual 
precipitation ranges from 7-20 inches.

Establishment 
California buckwheat is a good seed producer. Seed 
matures in the early fall. Annual production is about 
300 pounds per acre. The seed dries on the plant, 
which allows some leeway in harvesting. Fruits can 
be stripped to dry clusters and then cleaned by 
machine. Without the calyx removed from the seed, 
there are about 334,000 seeds per pound. Seed 
germination is about 25 percent.  
 
Plants can be propagated  by seeding directly into 
containers in the greenhouse. Plants grow rapidly and 
should be moved into larger containers or the field as 
growth progresses. California buckwheat also can be 
seeded directly into the field. Seeding rates are 9 
pounds per acre drilled and 14 pounds per acre 
broadcast.  
 
Management  
On wildfire burned areas, use 1-2 pounds per acre as 
part of a mixture. Seed germination is quite variable, 
so buying good quality seed is important. If 
germination is less than 25 percent, double the 
seeding rate. 
 
Homeowners may need to buy this seed directly from 
specialty seed suppliers. Use  4 to 8 ounces of seed for 
a 10,000 square foot area.  When using container 
plants, set plants three feet apart.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No known pest problems.  California buckwheat 
provides an excellent insectaries habitat which 
primarily supports beneficial insects.  Before placing 
it next to a crop, check with  local IPM Integrated Pest 
Management specialists to ensure that it is 
compatible with targeted insect populations. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
California buckwheat produces about 145kg/ha (300 
lbs/ac) of seed. Achenes  with calyx attached are 
handled as seed. The calyx can be separated by 
rubbing the achenes through a number 6 screen. 
Without the calyx removed there are about 735,000 
seeds per kilogram (334 ,000 seeds/lb.). Seed 
germination is approximately 25 percent.  
 
Plants are propagated by  seeding directly into 
containers in the greenhouse. Seedlings in the early 
stages of growth are somewhat susceptible to “damp-
off” and quite sensitive to cold. Only “hardened” 
material should be used in plantings.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Duro’ (CA) - is a bl end of six accessions of 
California buckwheat. In 1964, seed was collected 
from six native stands in Kern, San Luis Obispo, and 
Modoc counties. Container plants of these accessions 
were planted together in three rows at the Pleasanton 
PMC and all subsequent plantings of ‘Duro’ were 
made with blended seed collected from these rows. 
‘Duro’ California buckwheat was performed better 
than most other native California shrubs in both 
container plantings and direct seedlings on critically 
eroded areas. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Foster, S. and C. Hobbs. 2002.  Western medicinal 
plants and herbs . Houghton Mifflin Company, New 
York.  
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual of higher 
plants of California . University of California Press, 
Los Angeles and Berkeley.  
 
Monroe, G. 2003.  Eriogonum fasciculatum . San Luis 
Obispo County, California. 
 
USDA-NRCS.  Notice of release of ‘Duro’ California 
buckwheat.  California Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Davis.   
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer  
USDA NRCS Plant Materi als Center, Lockeford, 
California  
 
Reina O’Beck  
USDA NRCS California  State Office, Davis, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer  
USDA NRCS Plant Materi als Center, Lockeford, 
California

Edited: 11Jul2005 ro; 29Jul2005 rln; 8Aug2005 rln; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.