Plant Guide
CANADA WILDRYE 
Elymus canadensis L. 
Plant Symbol = ELCA4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 
 Shelly D. Maher, E. “Kika” de la Garza PMC  
Alternate Names  
Elymus  brachystachys  Scribn. & C.R. Ball  
Elymus  crescendus  L.C. Wheeler  
Elymus  philadelphicus  L.  
Elymus  robustus
   
Scribn. & J.G. Sm.  
Uses  
Restoration : Canada wildrye is often an early 
successional component of prairie mixtures.  
 
Livestock: Canada wildrye provides good forage 
quality during the early part of the grazing season but 
is generally considered an inferior forage after it 
matures.  It is fairly palatable to most livestock, and 
is rated good in energy value but poor in protein 
value.  
 
Wildlife : Canada wildrye has fair palatability as food 
for wildlife.  It also provides nesting, brood, winter, 
and escape cover.  
 
Erosion Control : Exceptional seedling vigor and 
rapid establishment make Canada wildrye an 
excellent species for  use in erosion control seedings.  
Stands of Canada wildrye typically establish during 
the 1
st  year, reach peak production the 2nd or 3rd
   
year, 
and then rapidly thin out.  This species is sometimes 
used in seeding mixtures where quick  establishment 
and sta bilization is needed.  
S tatus  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status and wetland indicator values).
 
 
Description  
General : Canada wildrye is a native, cool -season 
perennial bunchgrass that grows 2.5 -
 to 5- feet tall.  
Plants flower from March to Ju ne with seed maturing 
in July.  T he seedhead is  a  thick and bristly spike  
which can be either erect or nodding and can reach 
10 inches in length,  l eaf blades are .5 inches wide or 
less.
  Auricles are claw -like and clasping, arising 
from a broad, yellowish or light green collar.  
Spikelets  are mostly 3 -5 flowered.  Glumes are  about 
equal and not bowed out at the base.  Lemmas  mostly 
0 .5 inch long with a flexuous awn 0 .5 to 2 inches 
long with a slight outward curve at maturity  (Gould, 
1975 ).
  
 
Dis tribution :  For curre nt distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   Canada wildrye is found 
throughout the U.S. except in  the Southeast  
 
Habitat :  Canada wildrye tends to be a short -lived, 
cool -season grass  found growing on shaded stream 
banks, along fence rows and in open woodlands.  It 
also is found on sandy shores and dunes in the 
Northeast.    
 
Adaptation    
Canada wildrye  is adapted to coarse textured sandy , 
gravelly or rocky soils .  It is more tolerant of 
droughty,  poor fertility soils than Virginia wildrye  
( Stubbendieck et. al,  1992
  )
.  It has good shade 
tolerance.  It  also appears to have moderate salinity 
tolerance.
 Lavaca Germplasm Canada wildrye has 
performed well on both coarse and fine textured soils.  
Lavaca Germplasm can  be
 used as a cool -season 
component in native seed mixtures for range 
restoration.  It also c an be used as a cool-season 
pasture.   Because of its shade tolerance, Canada 
wildrye may be best  suited for use in shaded areas or 
riparian zones.  
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting ca n be scheduled for early spring 
or  early fall.   Establish a clean, weed -free seedbed by 
either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site 
should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.    
 
Canada wildrye  is best seeded using a native- grass 
drill with picker wheels  to ensure a good planting of 
the seed.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not