Plant Guide
NAKED BUCKWHEAT 
Eriogonum nudum Dougl.   
Plant Symbol = ERNU3 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon   
 
Naked buckwheat flowering at the NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center. Photo by Amy Bartow. NRCS. 
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:  b arestem buckwheat, naked 
wild buckwheat, naked stemmed eriogonum, nude 
buckwheat  
Alternate Scientific Name: Eriogonum latifolium  Smith 
ssp.  nudum  (Douglas ex Bentham) S. Stokes  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat:  Naked buckwheat is a great pollinator 
plant for various butterflies, including blues, hairstreaks, 
and metalmarks  ( Pavlick, 2007 ). It is  also  an  important  
host plant  for butterfly caterpillars a nd the flowers 
provide polle n to native  and  honey  bees.  
Forage:  Forage use of this plant is limited largely to 
spring and fall . In the spring, the new succulent growth is 
attractive to livestock. In the fall,  the  flowers may get 
nibbled  (Dayton, 1960) . 
Ornamental:  This species can be great for xeriscaping.  Restoration
: Naked buckwheat can be used with other 
native forbs or grasses for revegetation purposes . 
Ethnobotany  
Native American s have used  naked buckwheat as  a part of 
their  diet and t ools.  The University of Michigan-
Dearborn ’s Native American Ethnobotany website lists 
different tribal uses for naked buckwheat  (Moerman, 
2012 ).  The Karok and Miwok tribes ate the young stems 
raw as greens.   The Miwok tribe also used the twigs and 
leaves as a broom and the Karok tribe children used the 
stems for a game.  The  Kawaiisu tribe used hollow stems 
as  pipes for smoking  and for drinking tubes.   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s curr ent 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General:  Naked buckwheat is a common, native 
perennial forb in the buckwheat  family (Polygonaceae) .  
The smooth slender stems grow about t hree feet tall; the 
basal leaves arise from a short, woody crown. The leaves 
are slender stalked and the flowers are usually white,  but 
often tinged with yellow or rose , and are clustered on a 
two - or three -forked inflorescence  (Dayton, 1960). Naked 
buckwheat  flowers July to August.  The fruit is a hard, 
dry three -sided achene (Young and Young, 1992).   There 
are  13 botanical  v arieties  of  Eriogonum nudum , but they 
can be  difficult  to distinguish and tend to intergrade 
across their range  (Jepson Flora Project, 2012); a 
botanical key should be consulted for positive 
identification .   
Distribution :   The native  distribution  of naked buckwheat  
is highly variable and extends from low to sub alpine 
elevations (up to 12,400 ft)  from southern Washington 
south to California and western Nevada , and into 
northwestern Mexico  (Jepson  Flora Project,  2012) . For 
updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Naked buckwheat  grows in abundant stands in 
dry open meadows, on rocky outcrops, and along trails 
and roadsides  ( Dayton, 1960) . 
Adaptation  
Naked buckwheat prefers sandy , well-drained  soils , is 
drought  tolerant, and usually is found in exposed, sunny 
sites  ( Jepson Flora Project, 2012 ).

Establishment  
For restoration purposes, weed control is essential for 
establishment. Seedlings grow slowly in cool spring 
temperatures and weeds can quickly overtake young 
plants in the first growing season.  During warmer 
summer temperatur es, this species grows vigorously, even 
when soil moisture is low.   
Nak ed buckwheat can be established  by direct seeding.  
Seeds of most populations  have a high percentage of 
dormant seed that  will not germinate until 90 da ys of 
cold/moist stratification.   Therefore,  sow seed in  the fall 
at a rate of 5  pounds per acre  (50 seeds per square foot) at 
a depth of 1/8  to1/4 inch for a solid stand.  There are 
approximately 400,000 seeds in a pound. Sowing a pound 
of seed over and acre will result in a rate of about 10 
seeds per foot.  
Naked buckwheat seed increase field  at the NRCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center. Photo by Amy Bartow. NRCS.  
Management 
Naked buckwheat is a low maintenance plant once 
established. Weed control in the first year is of utmost 
important as seedlings grow slowly.  Given the right 
environment , this  species  can live 3  to  5 years.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Plants can quickly  wilt and rot if grown in waterlogged 
soils. Leaf rusts have been noticed on some naked 
buckwheats, but are  rarely severe. 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with  naked buckwheat . 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Field  Establishment:   Seed production for Eriogonum 
nudum  requires a year for establishment.   Sow seed in the 
fall at a rate of 5  lb/acre, drilled at a depth of  1/8  – 1/4  
inch, with  10- to 14- inch row spacing , unless more space 
is needed for between row cultivation.  This seeding rate 
will result in approximately 50  seeds per square foot.  
Seeds will stay dormant until spring and then grow slowly 
throughout the season.   The plants will need one year to 
fully est ablish, with sparse flowering and  little to no seed  production the first year.  
Irrigation should not be required 
for fall sowing.  
 
Harvest:  Seeds are mature when the bracts are dry and 
papery , and usually change color, turning brown or rusty.  
Plants usu ally flower uniformly and seed retention is 
moderate.   The  window for harvesting is usually in mid -
September  in the Willamette Valley of Oregon . Highest 
yields have been achieved using a modified swather that 
both cuts and collects material .  Harvested  material 
should be dried on a tarp before cleaning.  
Seed Cleaning:   A thresher or stationary combine can be 
used to dehull seeds.   Use a small air -screen machine to 
fine tune cleaning.  
Yields/Stand longevity:   The second through fourth years, 
yields  will be high.   At the Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, yields are typically  50- 100  pounds  per acre.   The 
species is short -lived when grown for seed in the 
Willamette Valley  and will not last longer than four  years.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no improved cultivars of naked buckwheat, but 
seed and plants are sometimes available from commercial 
sources in California  (CNPLX, 2012) or by contract grow 
out . 
References  
CNPLX (California Native Plant Link Exchange). 2012 . 
Eriogonum nudum  -  Naked buckwheat. 
http://www.cnplx.info/nplx/ (accessed 21 Mar 2012).  
Calflora, Berkeley.  
Dayton, W. 1960. Notes on western range forbs. USDA 
Forest Service, Washington, DC.  
Freeman, C.C., and J.L. Reveal. 2005. Polygonaceae  Jussieu. In:  Flora of North America north of Mexico, 
vol. 5, Magnoliophyta: Caryophyllidae, part 2, 
eFloras, New York.  http://www.efloras.org/ 
florataxon.aspx? flora_id=1&taxon_id=250060414 
(accessed 21 Mar 2012) . 
Jepson Flora Project. 2012 (v. 1.0).  Jepson eFlora, 
Eriogonum nudum , M. Costea and J. L. Reveal, 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi -bin/get_cpn.pl?ERNU3 
(accessed 21 Mar 2012).   
Moerman, D. 2012. Eriogonum nudum . In: Native 
American Ethnobotany Database [Online]. Univ. of 
Michigan, Dearborn. http://herb.umd.umic h.edu/ 
(accessed  21 Mar 2012 ). 
Young, J.A. , and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of woody 
p lants in North America. Dioscorides Press, Portland, 
OR.  
Prepared By :   
Meghan Hemingway , USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Oregon  
Citation

Hemingway, M. 2012.  Plant guide for naked buckwheat 
( Eriogonum nudum) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR.  
Published  May  2012   
Edited:  21Mar2012 aym ; 6Nov2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site 
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER