Plant Guide
SOUTHEASTERN 
WILDRYE  
Elymus glabriflorus  (Vasey ex 
L.H. Dewey) Scribn & C.R. Ball 
Plant Symbol = ELGL3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Photo by Sara Tangren  
Alternative Scientific  Names 
Elymus australis  
Elymus glabriflorus var.  australis  
Elymus glabriflorus var.  glabriflorus  
Elymus virginicus var . australis 
Elymus virginicus var . glabriflorus 
Elymus virginicus f.  australis  
Uses  
Southeastern wildrye is a native, robust,  upright, cool-
season grass that tolerates a variety of soil s and cultural 
conditions.  It is relatively short- lived and does not 
tolerate frequent mowing.  It is  compatible with  native 
warm -season grasses and wildflowers in seed mixes.  
B eneficial  characteristics  include  rapid and high 
germination  rates; long- term seed viability ; suitability  for 
slope, riparian and critical area stabilization ; and  tolera nce 
of  well -drained sandy  to waterlogged s oils.  Southeastern 
wildrye is a tool for p rivate and public land managers  developing plans that combine the benefits
 of wildlife 
habitat with production agriculture . 
 
R estoration  and Soil Stabilization:  The use of native 
grasses for revege tation has increased  with the increased 
availability of plant material and  the recognition that  
native species are important in the restoration of 
biological diversity (Knapp and Rice, 1996).  
Southeastern wildrye seed germinates  quickly  and in high 
percen tages (70%) making it useful for  roadsides, 
stabilization of slope s and other highly erodible areas . 
 
P ublic awareness of the health of the Chesapeake Bay and 
Mississippi River Basin watersheds  has increased  the 
desire  to  reduce the  environmental impacts  from synthetic 
inputs .  One of s outheastern  wildrye’s strongest attributes 
is that it requires little or no fertilization  for establis hment 
and  maintenance; making  it ideal for restoration plans 
seeking to protect water quality . 
 
T he Great Smoky Mountains  National Park primarily  uses 
grasses  to stabilize steep roadsides.  Effective slope 
stabilization is achieved by  h ydro- seeding southeastern 
wildrye , hard fescue ( Festuca brevipila ), Chewing’s 
fescue  [Festuca rubra  L. ssp. fallax (Thuill.) Nyman] , red 
fesc ue ( Festuca rubra) , and  annual rye grass (
1TLolium 
multiflorum ) with
1T other  native warm season  grasses and 
wildflowers  at the rate of 260 lbs of seed of per  acre in the 
early autumn  or spring .  Southeastern wildrye  provides 
winter soil coverage when many other plants are dormant.  
Seed stored under optimal conditions (less than 50º F and 
30% relative humidity) remains highly viable for up to 10 
years (Observations at the National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, M D). 
 
A 1:1:1 seed mix of the w ildryes Canada, Virginia and 
riverbank  seeded (20 lbs . /acre)  with  fringed bromegrass 
( Bromus ciliatus ) (9  lbs . /acre)  and  fowl bentgrass ( Poa 
palustris ) (0 .5 lbs . /acre)  provides quick dense cover for 
erosion control on up to a 2% grade (Salon 2006) .   
S outheastern wildrye  has the potential to function 
similarly to the other wildryes.  
 
Wildlife:  Various beetles and butterfly  larvae  feed upon 
members of the genus  and spiders  commonly build webs 
among the spikelets.  Phorbia flies eat  patches of fungi 
spreading the beneficial  fungal spores from one grass to 
the next.  Ground -dwelling sparrows consume wildrye 
seed .  As the plant matures and lodges  (fall over), 
excellent habitat  is created for ground -nesting birds such 
as bobwhite quail.  Deer do not graze on wildrye,  as 
grasses are not a primary food. They will eat grass when it 
is young and tender,  but tend to avoid it after it  is older 
unless it is their only choice for food .

to tiller and develop crowns for regeneration and 
carbohydrate storage.    
 
Southeastern wildrye can withstand light grazing.  
Rotational grazing is recommended for preservation of 
mature stands.  Plants should not be defoliated (clipped or 
grazed) lower than 5 to 6 inches, in o rder to prevent weed 
competition and promote vegetative growth  (more 
nutritious and greater palatability) .  Defoliation should 
occur every 20 to 30 days in order to maintain high forage 
quality and quantity.  If haying, harvest prior to jointing 
(seed head  development) to capture highest forage 
quality.  One harvest can be expected, as summer heat 
forces the plants into dormancy.  
 
Plants are nitrogen responsive, therefore traditional 
approaches  for hay management in regards to nutrient 
removal  can be applied to s outheastern wildrye.    
 
Herbicide may be necessary for seed production or 
roadside situations.   Oryzalin is an  effective broad  
spectrum  pre-emergent herbicide for  established  stands.  
Broadleaf  weeds  can be controlled with 2 , 4,- D amine , 
MCPP -p,  dicamba, or clopyralid.  Yellow nut sedge can 
be a stubborn weed in moist soils, halosulfuron  provides 
good  control.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Diseases:   Plants established after a glyphosate treatment 
may develop fusarium head blight  (Figure  3), a condition 
which affects seed quality but not foliage  (Fernandez 
2005) .    
 
Figure 3: Fusarium Head Blight symptoms  on seed.   Photo by Sara 
Tangren.  
Rust (Puccinia  spp.) has been observed on leaves late in 
the season, after seed heads have emerged and  matured .   
 
  Environmental Concerns
 
The entire tribe of grasses , of which southeastern  wildrye 
is a part , is prone to hybridize and form new species, 
some  of which  are fertile and some are not.  The 
ecological consequences of moving Elymus  species 
outside  their natural range are difficult to forecast.   
 
Control  
The authors have not observed any incidence of 
s outheastern wildrye becoming invasive.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the pr oducts and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
References  
Barkworth, M.E., J.J.N. Campbell & B. Salomon (2006).  
Elymus  L.  In: Flora North America Editorial 
Committee (Eds.).  Flora of North America North of 
Mexico  Vol.  24: 288 -343.  Magnoliophyta: 
Commelinidae (in part) Poaceae, part 1. Oxford 
University Press, New York.  Manuscript.   
www.
3Therbarium.usu.edu/webmanual3T  (accessed on 
5/01/09).  
Bultman, T., J. White,  T. Bowdish, A. Welch and J. 
Johnston, 1995. Mutualistic Transfer of Epichloë 
Spermatia by Phorbia Flies . Mycologia, 87:2 182-
189.  
Fernandez, M.R., F.  Selles,  F. Gehld , M.  DePauw  and 
R.P.  Zentner.  2005.  Crop Produc tion Factors 
Associated with Fusarium Head Blight in Spring 
Wheat in Saskatchewan.  Crop Sci. 45:  1908– 1916 
Knapp, E.E. and  K.J. Rice. 1996.  Genetic Structure and 
Gene Flow in Elymus  glaucus (blue wildrye):  
Implications for Native Grassland Restoration.  
Restor. Ecol. 4 (1 ):  1 -10.  
Rushing, J.B. 2012. Evaluation of wildrye ( Elymus spp.) 
as a potential forage and conservation planting for the 
southeastern United States. Mississippi State  
University Library, Mississippi State, MS 39762.  
Sanderson, M.A., R.H.  Skinner, J. Kujawski,  M/ van der 
Grinten.   2004.  Virginia Wildrye Evaluated as a 
Potential Native Cool- Season Forage in the Northeast 
USA.  Crop Sci ence 44: 1379- 1384. 
Salon, P.R  and  M.  van der Grinten.   2007.  Compatibility 
of a mixture of Canada, Virginia and riverbank 
wildrye seeded with seven individual species of 
native and introduced cool season grasses. . The Fifth 
Eastern Native Grass Conference, Harrisburg, PA. 
October 10- 13 2006. 1p.  
 
Prepared By :  Shawn Belt, USDA, NRCS Norman A. 
Berg National Plant Materials Center, Brett Rushing 
Mississippi  State University , and Sara Tangren .

Citation  
Belt, S., B.  Rushing, S. Tangren.   2013.   Plant  Guide for 
Southeastern wildrye  (Elymus g labriflorus ).  USDA -
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center . Beltsville, MD 20705 . 
Published  March 2013 . 
Edited:  [29jan2013sb, 28jan2013br , 2feb2013st]     For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District 
at 
3TUhttp://www.nrcs.usda.gov/U3T and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 3T Uhttp://plants.usda.gov/U3T or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  3TUhttp://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.govU3T. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER