Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLE 
CONEFLOWER  
Echinacea angustifolia DC. 
Plant Symbol = ECAN2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Kansas snakeroot, echinacea, snakeroot, narrow-
leaved purple coneflower,  scurvy root, comb flower, 
black susans, and hedge hog   
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The purple coneflower,  Echinacea 
angustifolia , was and still is the most widely used 
medicinal plant of the Plains Indians (Kindscher 
1992).  It was used as a painkiller and for a variety of 
ailments, including toothache, coughs, colds, sore 
throats, and snake bite.   Echinacea angustifolia was 
used as an analgesic by the Cheyenne, the Dakota, 
the Fox, and the Winnebago (Moerman 1986).  
Purple coneflower is used as an antidote for 
poisonous conditions, snake bite, and other poisonous 
bites by the Winnebago, Ponca, Pawnee, Omaha, 
Dakota, and by most Montana tribes (Gilmore 1977).  
The root was used to relieve toothache by the Dakota, 
Omaha, Pawnee, Ponca, Teton Sioux, and 
Winnebago (Moerman 1986).  The Cheyenne chewed 
the root to stimulate the flow of saliva, which was 
especially useful for Sun  Dance participants as a 
thirst preventative (Hart 19 81).  A wash was used as  a dressing for burns to relieve pain by the Dakota, 
Winnebago, Omaha, 
Pawnee, and Ponca. 
 
 
The Fox used purple coneflower as an anti-
convulsive and gastro-intestinal aid. The Kiowa 
chewed coneflower root for coughs and sore throats.  
The Omaha and Pawnee used a smoke treatment as a 
remedy for headache.  A poultice of smashed roots 
were applied as an anesthetic to arms and hands by 
the Omaha, and a poultice was applied to enlarged 
glands as a treatment for diseases such as mumps by 
the Pawnee, Ponca, Dakota, and Winnebago.  Purple 
coneflower was used to increase endurance in the 
sweat lodge ceremony by the Dakota, Pawnee, 
Ponca, and Winnebago.  The Lakota ate the root and 
green fruit when they were thirsty or perspiring 
(Rogers 1980, Munson 1981).  The Teton Sioux used 
coneflower to cure tonsillitis.  The Omaha and Ponca 
used the plant as eyewash.  When the roots were 
mixed with blazing star (Mentzelia laevicaulis ) and 
boiled, the resulting tea was drunk for smallpox 
(Kindscher 1992).  Purple coneflower roots mixed 
with puffball ( Lycoperdon species) spores and skunk 
oil were used in the treatment of boils.  The smoke 
from burning purple coneflower was used as a 
treatment for distemper in horses by the Ponca, 
Dakota, Pawnee, and Winnebago. 
 © Kurt Adolfson USDI, GS, BRD, NPWRC 
 
The Omaha, the Lakota, and the Ponca sometimes 
used the seed heads to comb their hair (Kindscher 
1992).  Purple coneflower stalks were used in play by 
Pawnee children.  They would whirl two flower 
stalks one around the other, the two stalk touching by 
the flower heads.  
 
The purple coneflower was the only native prairie 
plant popularized as a medicine by folk practitioners 
and doctors, and was used extensively as a folk 
remedy (Kindscher 1992).  The use of the purple 
coneflower root was used by early settlers in 
Oklahoma as an aid in nearly every kind of sickness.  
If a cow or a horse did not eat well, people 
administered  Echinacea in its feed. 
 
Echinacea  is widely used as an herbal remedy today, 
primarily as an immuno-stimulant.   Echinacea 
angustifolia  root was found to possess mild antibiotic 
activity against  Streptococcus and Staphyloccus 
aureus  (Stoll et al. 1950).  A pentane-oil extracted 
from the root was found to be inhibitory to Walker 
carcinosarcoma 256 and P-388 lymphocytic leukemia

(Voaden and Jacobson 1972).  Italian investigators 
found the wound-healing effects of Echinacea to be 
attributable to echinacin  B (Bonadea et al. 1971).  
Perhaps the most important finding so far is the 
discovery of large, highly active polysaccharide 
molecules in  E. angustifolia  that possess 
immunostimulatory properties (Wagner and Proksch 
1985, Wagner et al. 1985).  Stimulation of the 
immune system appears to be  strongly influenced by 
dose level.  Recent pharm acological studies indicate 
that a 10-mg/kg daily dose of the polysaccharide over 
a ten-day period is effective as an immuno-stimulant.  
Increases in the daily dosage beyond this level, 
however, resulted in “markedly decreased 
pharmacological activity” (Wagner and Proksch 
1985, Wagner et al. 1985).  Other research has shown 
that the purple coneflower produces an anti-
inflammatory effect and has therapeutic value in 
urology, gynecology, internal medicine, and 
dermatology (Wagner and Proksch 1985).   
 
Echinacea angustifolia  also contains chemical 
compounds that are insecticidal.  One such 
compound is toxic to mosquitoes and houseflies; 
another substance, echinolone, disrupts insect 
development (Hartzell 1947, Jacobson 1954, Voaden 
and Jacobson 1972).  Researchers in the Horticulture 
Department of South Dakota State University are 
currently attempting to identify the  Echinacea 
angustifolia  germplasm containing the highest level 
of echinolone.  It will be used in manufacturing and 
insecticide for sunflower crops (Foster 1991). 
 
Ornamental : The purple coneflower is often grown 
simply for its ornamental value, especially for its 
showy flowers.  The best possibility for obtaining a 
new cultivar is in the hybrids between  Echinacea 
purpurea  and Echinacea angustifolia  var. 
angustifolia , whose progeny are compact, rounded, 
and bushy plants about two feet in diameter 
(M
cGregor 1968).   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Purple 
coneflower is a perennial herb 1.5-6 dm (0.5-2 ft) 
tall, with a woody taproot.  The plant has one to 
several rough-hairy stems,  mostly unbranched.  
Leaves are alternate, simple, and narrowly lance-
shaped 5-30 cm (2-12 in) long, 1.5-4 cm (0.5-1.5 in) 
wide, with entire margins.  Flowers look like  lavender sunflowers with the heads 4-7.5 cm wide 
(1.5-3 in) wide, at the ends of long stalks.  Flowers 
bloom from June to July.  Ray flowers are 2-4 cm 
(0.75-1.5 in) long, spreading or drooping, light pink 
to pale purple.  The disk flowers are 5-lobed, 
brownish-purple, and situated among stiff bracts.  
Pollen grains are yellow.  Fruits are small, dark, 4-
angled achenes. 
 
Distribution 
The purple coneflower grows in open rocky prairies 
and plains.  It is found pr
imarily in the Great Plains, 
east of the Rocky Mountains from Texas to Montana 
and Saskatchewan, to eastern Oklahoma, western 
Iowa, and western Minnesota. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Native  Echinacea  species are dwindling in the wild 
from loss of habitat and over-harvesting.   Echinacea 
angustifolia  is threatened on one hand by conversion 
of native habitat, and on the other hand by heavy 
harvesting to serve the  herbal pharmaceutical 
industry.  It takes three to four years for roots to 
reach harvestable size (Foster 1991).  Yields for 
cultivated, dried roots of three-year-old  Echinacea 
purpurea  grown at Trout Lake, Washington, were 
131 kg/ha (1,200 lbs/acre) (Foster 1991).  According 
to Richo Cech (1995), a mature two-year old  E. 
purpurea  plant yields 2.25 pounds of fresh flowering 
aerial portions and 0.5 pounds of fresh root per plant.  
Yield for the purple coneflower is not available, but 
probably would be less because the plant is smaller.  
 
Propagation from Cuttings 
Purple coneflower can be propagated by division of 
the crowns.  This technique results in stronger plants 
initially and eliminates the tedious nurturing and 
tending of the slow-growing seedlings (Kindscher 
1992).  Harvest roots when plants are dormant, when 
leaves begin to turn brown.  Wash roots and remove 
most for use.  Then carefully divide the crown by 
hand to make one to five “plantlets.”  Replant the 
divisions as soon as possible.  It is important that they 
don’t dry out, so if replan ting is delayed a couple of 
hours, dip the plants briefly in water and keep them 
in a sealed plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you 
are ready to replant them.  When replanting, ensure 
that the remaining fine roots are well spread out in 
the planting hole and the soil is pressed firmly around 
the plant.  These plantlets can be grown in flats in the 
greenhouse during the winter to re-establish their root 
systems, then replanted in the field the following 
spring for another round of production.

Seed Propagation 
•  Echinacea  angustifolia  has a reputation for poor 
germination.  Actually, when the proper steps are 
take, it has extremely dependable germination.  
The following information is provided by Richo 
Cech (1995). 
•   Seeds require a 12-week period of cold 
conditioning, or cold stratification, to germinate. 
•  Outdoors, scatter seed thinly on well-limed, 
weed-free, open beds in the fall or early winter, 
covering the seed with a light sifting of potting 
soil.  The seed is thereb y subjected to the optimal 
conditions of oscillating temperatures, an 
extremely important pre-germination 
environment for  Echinacea seed. 
•  An acceptable alternative to outdoor cold 
conditioning is to mix the seeds with damp sand 
and switch between the refrigerator and freezer 
several times over a period of 12 weeks.  This 
seed may then be sown di rectly in the garden or 
field.  The conditioned seed may also be sown in 
flats and placed in the greenhouse or outside. 
•   Another method of cold stratification is to wrap 
the seeds in wet peat moss and place them in a 
plastic bag in the refrigerator for two to four 
months.  Plant seeds in deep plug trays; this 
allows the taproot to develop straight down to a 
depth of six or eight inches prior to 
transplanting.   Seeds should be barely covered 
with soil when planted. 
•  E. angustifolia  seedlings have a tendency toward 
transplant shock and slow  growth, especially if 
the development of the taproot is compromised 
by keeping seedlings in the flats or plots too 
long.  Seedlings have little vigor and must be 
carefully weeded and watered. 
•   For field cultivation, close spacing of the plants 
allows for optimal root yield per area planted.  
Plants may be thinned to 6-12 inch spacing in the 
row or bed.  Keep relatively free of weeds and 
water occasionally during dry spells.  Over-
watering should be avoided, for the root crowns 
are subject to rotting.  A sparing side dressing of 
organic compost, usually in the mid-spring, will 
assist this sometimes slow-growing herbaceous 
perennial in outranking competitive weeds. 
 
An ounce of well-cleaned  E. angustifolia seed 
contains approximately 8,000 seeds.  A pound 
contains around 128,000 seeds.  Given a very tight 
spacing of six inches between the plants and one foot 
between the rows, an acre would contain 87,200 
plants.  Given a 68% germination rate, a pound of 
good seed could produce an acre of plants.  This 
same acre, dormant harvested for the roots at the end  of the second year of growth, would produce (at ¼ lb. 
per root) 21,800 lbs of fresh root. 
 
Harvesting and Processing the Seed 
•
  Seed can be harvested during the fall of the 
second year.  Harvest the seed in autumn when 
seeds are ripe, before the fall rains set in.  Seed 
should be from the largest and most vital plants.  
•  Stop watering when the seeds begin to mature – 
excessive watering at this stage is not needed and 
it may damage the seed crop.  
•  Snip the coneheads off and put them in buckets.  
If the seed is still a little green, dry the coneheads 
in the sun.  
•  Separate the seed from the chaffy debris.  It is 
important to break up the coneheads without 
damaging the seed.  Run the seed through a 
hammermill or compost chopper at low RPM 
through a one-inch screen.  Then pass the seed 
and chaff through a ¼ inch stationary screen. 
Shake the remaining seed and chaff through a 
screen that is too small for the seed to pass.  
What you have left is the seed with only the 
chaff that is the same size as the seed. 
•  Lay out a flannel sheet and pour a cupful of your 
seed/chaff along the edge.  Lift the top edge of 
the sheet and roll the seed to the other end where 
your partner is waiting to carefully funnel the 
seed into a bowl. 
•  Make sure the seed is thoroughly dry.  Store in 
plastic bags in a cool, dry, and dark place.  
Plastic bags allow the seed to respire, while glass 
does not.  Seed thus stored remains viable for 
about three years. 
 
Management 
Herbivores such as insects  and deer are not a problem 
with  Echinacea .  Gophers and moles can be a 
problem, eating the roots.  Goldfinches love the 
Echinacea  seed crop and can clear out all the seed in 
a few days.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ECAN2 is readily available from native plant 
nurseries and seed companies throughout its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Bonadeo, I., G. Bottazzi, & M. Lavazza 1971  . 
Echinacin B, an active polysaccharide from 
Echinacea.   Revista Italiana Essenze Profumi, Piante 
Officinali, Aromi, Saponi, Csmetici, Aerosol 53:281-
295. 
 
Cech, R.A. 1995.   Echinacea Native American tonic 
roots .  A Horizon Herbs Publication, Williams, 
Oregon. 
 
Foster, S. 1991.   Echinacea – nature’s immune 
enhancer .  Healing Arts Press,  Rochester, Vermont. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1977.  Uses of the plants by the Indians 
of the Missouri River region.  University of Nebraska 
Press. 
 
Hart, J.A. 1976.  Montana: Native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, & F. T. Davies, Jr. 
1990 .  Plant propagation principles and practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hartzell, A. 1947 .  Plant products for insecticidal 
properties and summary  of results to date.  
Contributions of the Boyce Thompson Institute 
15:21-34. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston and London.  pp. 113-
117. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural 
library's source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson 
Horticultural Library, University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Jacobson, M. 1954 .  Occurrence of a pungent 
insecticidal principle in American coneflower roots.   
Science 120:125-129. 
 
Kinscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  Pp 84-94. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951  . 
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L. T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L. 1968.   The taxonomy of the genus 
Echinacea (Compositae) .  University of Kansas 
Science Bulletin 48(4):113-142. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2. University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology. Technical Reports, Number 19.  Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.  Pp. 156-158. 
 
Munson, P.J. 1981.  Contributions to Osage and 
Lakota ethnobotany .  Plains Anthropology 26:229-
240. 
 
Rogers, D.J. 1980.   Lakota names and traditional 
uses of native plants by Sicangu (Brule) people in the 
Rosebud Area, South Dakota .  Rosebud Educational 
Society, St. Francis, South Dakota. 
 
Stoll, A., J. Renz, & A. Brack 1950.   Antibacterial 
substances II. Isolation and constitution of 
echinacoside, glycoside from the roots of Echinacea 
angustifolia .  Helvetical Chim.  Acta 33:1877-93. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000322.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
USDI, GS 2000.   Native wildflowers of the North 
Dakota grasslands .  Version: 000322.  
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.go v/resource/literatr/wildfl
wr/species/echiangu.htm>.   Northern Prairie Wildlife 
Research Center, Jamestown, North Dakota. 
 
Voaden, D.J. & M. Jacobson 1972.   Tumor inhibitors 
3.  Identification and synthesis of an oncolytic 
hydrocarbon from American coneflower roots .  
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 15(6):619-623. 
 
Wagner, H. & A. Proksch 1985.  Immunostimulatory 
drugs of fungi and higher plants . IN: (H. Wagner et 
al. Eds.) Economic and Medicinal Plant Research.  
Vol. 1.  Academic Press, New York, New York. 
Pp.113-153 
 
Wagner, H., A. Proksche, I. Riess-Mauere, A. 
Vollmar, S. Odenthal, H. Stuppner, K. Jurcie, M. Le 
Turdu, & J.N. Fang 1985 .  Immunstimulierend 
wirkende polysaccharide (heteroglykane) aus 
hoheren pflanzen.   Arzneimittel-Forschung 
35(8):1069-1075.

Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised 05dec00 jsp; 01may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.