Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN PURPLE CONEFLOWER  
Echinacea purpurea  (L.) 
Moench.  
Plant Symbol = ECPU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
echinacea, snakeroot, Kansas snakeroot, narrow-
leaved purple coneflower, scurvy root, Indian head, 
comb flower, black susans, and hedge hog   
  
Uses  
Ethnobotanic: Purple coneflower ( Echinacea 
purpurea ) was and still is a widely used medicinal 
plant of the Plains Indians.  It was used as a painkiller 
and for a variety of ailmen ts, including toothache, 
coughs, colds, sore throats,  and snake bite (Kindscher 
1992).  The Choctaw use purple coneflower as a 
cough medicine and gastro-intestinal aid (Moerman  1986).  The Delaware used an infusion of coneflower 
root for gonorrhea and found it to be highly effective. 
 
The purple coneflower was the only native prairie 
plant popularized as a medicine by folk practitioners 
and doctors.  It was used extensively as a folk remedy 
(Kindscher 1992).  Purple coneflower root was used 
by early settlers as an aid in nearly every kind of 
sickness.  If a cow or a horse did not eat well, people 
administered 
Echinacea in its feed. 
 
Echinacea  is widely used as an herbal remedy today.  
A purple coneflower product containing the juice of 
the fresh aerial parts of  Echinacea purpurea was 
found to make mouse cells 50-80 percent resistant to 
influenza, herpes, and vesicular somatitis viruses.  
This product was available in Germany in 1978 
(Wacker and Hilbig 1978).  Perhaps the most 
important finding so far is the discovery of immuno-
stimulatory properties in  Echinacea purpurea and E. 
angustifolia  (Wagner and Proksch 1985, Wagner et 
al. 1985).  Stimulation of the immune system appears 
to be strongly influenced by dose level.  Recent 
pharmacological studies indicate that a 10-mg/kg 
daily dose of the polysaccharide over a ten-day 
period is effective as an immuno-stimulant.  
Increases in the daily dosage beyond this level, 
however, resulted in “markedly decreased 
pharmacological activity” (Wagner and Proksch 
1985, Wagner et al. 1985).  Other research has shown 
that the purple coneflower produces an anti-
inflammatory effect and has therapeutic value in 
urology, gynecology, internal medicine, and 
dermatology (Wagner and Proksch 1985). 
 From TAMU-BWG Digital Librar y - Vascular Plant Images 
 
Ornamental: The purple coneflower is often grown 
simply for its ornamental value, especially for its 
showy flowers.  The best possibility for obtaining a 
new cultivar is in the hybrids between  Echinacea 
purpurea  and E. angustifolia  var. angustifolia , whose 
progeny are compact, rounded, and bushy plants 
about two feet in diameter (M
cGregor 1968).     
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).   Echinacea 
purpurea  is a perennial herb 1.5-6 dm (0.5-2 ft) tall,

with a woody rhizome or tough caudex.  The plant 
has one to several rough-hairy stems, mostly 
unbranched.  Basal and lower cauline leaf blades are 
ovate to ovate-lanceolate with serrate edges, up to 2 
dm long and 1.5 dm wide, and slightly heart-shaped 
at the base.  Cauline leaves are similar but become 
smaller as they extend up the stem.  The flowers are 
in heads like sunflowers with the disk up to 3.5 cm 
across.  The drooping ray florets have ligules 3-8 cm 
long, and are reddish-purple, lavender, or rarely pink.  
The disk florets are 4.5-5.5 mm long, and are situated 
among stiff bracts.  Flowers bloom from June to 
August.  Pollen grains are yellow.  Fruits are small, 
dark, 4-angled achenes. 
 
Distribution 
The purple coneflower grows in rocky prairie sites in 
open, wooded regions . Echinacea purpurea extends 
eastward through the Great Plains bioregion from 
northeast Texas, Missouri, and Michigan.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Native  Echinacea  species are dwindling in the wild 
from loss of habitat and over-harvesting.   E. 
purpurea is not as threatened as  E. angustifolia.  In 
the wild,  E. purpurea  grows sporadically along 
waterways, with a few scattered individuals.  Plant 
densities are too low for efficient harvest for 
commercial purposes.   E. purpurea is the most 
widely adaptable species for cultivation.  It is cold 
and heat hardy, easy to grow, and boasts high yields.  
Bioactive constituents  of E. purpurea compare 
favorably with  E. angustifolia, although there are 
proportional differences.   E. angustifolia has more of 
the alkylamides, while  E. purpurea has more of the 
equally immune enhancing caffeic acid derivatives.  
They are both effective medicines.  A combination of 
both probably affords the most broad-spectrum 
immune-enhancing effect.  Historically , E. purpurea 
was rarely utilized by pharmaceutical companies.  
 
It takes three to four years for roots to reach 
harvestable size (Foster 1991).  Yields for cultivated, 
dried roots of three-year-old  Echinacea purpurea 
grown at Trout Lake, Washington, were 131 kg/ha 
(1,200 lbs/acre) (Foster 1991).  According to Richo 
Cech (1995), a mature two-year old  E. purpurea 
plant yields 2.25 pounds of fresh flowering aerial 
portions and 0.5 pounds of fresh root per plant.  
 
Propagation from Cuttings 
Purple coneflower can be propagated by division of 
the crowns.  This technique results in stronger plants 
initially and eliminates the tedious nurturing and  tending of the slow-growing seedlings (Kindscher 
1992).  Harvest roots when plants are dormant, when 
leaves begin to turn brown.  Wash roots and remove 
most for use.  Then carefully divide the crown by 
hand to make one to five “plantlets.”  Replant the 
divisions as soon as possible.  It is important that they 
don’t dry out, so if replan
ting is delayed a couple of 
hours, dip the plants briefly in water and keep them 
in a sealed plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you 
are ready to replant them.  When replanting, ensure 
that the remaining fine roots are well spread out in 
the planting hole and the soil is pressed firmly around 
the plant.  These plantlets can be grown in flats in the 
greenhouse during the winter to re-establish their root 
systems, then replanted in the field the following 
spring for another round of production. 
 
Seed Propagation 
•   Echinacea purpurea  seed is easy to germinate.  
The following information is provided by Richo 
Cech (1995). 
•   The seed can be spring-planted without cold, or 
cold stratification, to germinate. 
•   Propagation is easily done in flats, which are 
sown with approximately ¼ ounce of seed per 
flat, evenly sprinkled on the surface and covered 
with about ¼ inch of potting soil.  
•  The flats are left outdoors through the winter and 
watered if necessary. 
•  A light screen over the flats will diminish the 
severity of heavy rain and snow, and will also 
keep out cats. 
•  Spring germination can be greatly enhanced by 
bringing the flat of cold-conditioned seed into 
the greenhouse, whereupon rapid germination 
may be expected. 
•  Once the second set of true leaves appears, the 
seedlings are put into  pots or are spaced at 
approximately two inch cen ters in another deep 
flat.  Seedlings must be carefully weeded and 
watered. 
•   In late spring or early summer, the hardy 
seedlings, now with a four-to-six inch root 
system, may be transplanted into the field or 
garden one or two feet apart. 
•  Regular spacing with one foot between the plants 
and two feet between the rows will result in 
approximately 21, 800 plants per acre.  A 
generous two-foot spacing with three feet 
between the rows will result in approximately 
7,500 plants per acre.  
•  Timely watering during dry periods greatly 
increases the size of this  plant.  A sparing side 
dressing of organic compost, usually in the mid-
spring, will assist this sometimes slow-growing

herbaceous perennial in outranking competitive 
weeds. 
 
An ounce of well-cleaned E. purpurea seed contains 
approximately 6,000 seeds.  A pound contains around 
96,000 seeds.  Given a normal spacing of one foot 
between the plants and two feet between the rows, an 
acre would contain 21,800 plants.  Given a 68% 
germination rate, a pound of good seed could produce 
three acres of plants.  This same acre, dormant 
harvested for the roots at th e end of the second year 
of growth, would produce (at 1/2 lb. per root) 10,900 
lbs of fresh root. 
 
Harvesting and Processing the Seed 
•   Seed can be harvested during the fall of the 
second year.  Harvest the seed in autumn when 
seeds are ripe, before the fall rains set in.  Seed 
should be from the largest and most vital plants.  
•  Stop watering when the seeds begin to mature – 
excessive watering at this stage is not needed and 
it may damage the seed crop.  
•  Snip the cone-heads off and put them in buckets. 
If the seed is still a little green, dry the cone-
heads in the sun.  
•  Separate the seed from the chaffy debris.  It is 
important to break up the cone-heads without 
damaging the seed. Run the seed through a 
hammer mill or compost chopper at low RPM 
through a one-inch screen.  Then pass the seed 
and chaff through a ¼ inch stationary screen.  
Shake the remaining seed and chaff through a 
screen that is too small for the seed to pass.  
What you have left is the seed with only the 
chaff that is the same size as the seed. 
•  Lay out a flannel sheet and pour a cupful of the 
seed/chaff along the edge.  Lift the top edge of 
the sheet and roll the seed to the other end where 
your partner is waiting to carefully funnel the 
seed into a bowl. 
•  Make sure the seed is thoroughly dry.  Store in 
plastic bags in a cool, dry, and dark place.  
Plastic bags allow the seed to respire, while glass 
does not.  Seed thus stored remains viable for 
about three years.  
 
Management 
Herbivores, such as insects and deer, are not a 
problem with  Echinacea.  Gophers and moles can be 
a problem as they eat the roots.  Goldfinches love the 
Echinacea  seed crop and can clear out all the seed in 
a few days.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
ECPU is widely available through most nurseries and 
seed companies.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Cultivars : King, Sombrero, Alba, Bright Star 
Leuchste, Crimson Star, Magnus, Ovation, 
Springbrook’s Crimson Star, Talent, Thompson and 
Morgan Hybrids, White Flower Farm Strain, White 
Lustre, and White Swan. 
 
References 
Cech, R.A. 1995.   Echinacea Native American tonic 
roots .  A Horizon Herbs Publication, Williams, 
Oregon.  
 
Foster, S. 1991.   Echinacea – nature’s immune 
enhancer .  Healing Arts Press,  Rochester, Vermont. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1977.  Uses of the plants by the Indians 
of the Missouri River region.  University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Hart, J.A. 1976.  Montana: Native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, & F. T. Davies, Jr. 
1990 .  Plant propagation principles and practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston and London.  pp. 113-
117. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural 
library's source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson 
Horticultural Library, University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Kinscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  Pp. 84-94. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp.

McGregor, R.L. T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L. 1968.   The taxonomy of the genus 
Echinacea (Compositae) .  University of Kansas 
Science Bulletin 48(4):113-142. 
 
Michigan State University Extension 1996.   Home 
horticulture: Echinacea purpurea.  Version: 000327.  
<http://www.msue.msu.edu/msue/imp/mod03/01700
365.html>.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2. Technical Reports, Number 19, 
University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.  Pp. 156-158. 
 
Texas A&M University 1999.  TAMU-BWG digital 
library - vascular plant images .  Version: 000327.  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/cgi/gallery_quer
y?q=Echinacea+purpurea>.   Bioinformatics Working 
Group, College Station, Texas. 
 
Voaden, D.J. & M. Jacobson 1972.   Tumor inhibitors 
3.  Identification and synthesis of an oncolytic 
hydrocarbon from American coneflower roots .  
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 15(6):619-623. 
 
Wagner, H. & A. Proksch 1985.  Immunostimulatory 
drugs of fungi and higher plants .  IN: (H. Wagner et 
al. Eds.)  Economic and medicinal plant research .  
Vol. 1.  Academic Press, New York, New York.  
Pp.113-153 
 
Wagner, H., A. Proksche, I. Riess-Mauere, A. 
Vollmar, S. Odenthal, H. Stuppner, K. Jurcie, M. Le 
Turdu, & J.N. Fang 1985.   Immunstimulierend 
wirkende polysaccharide (heteroglykane) aus 
hoheren pflanzen.   Arzneimittel-Forschung 
35(8):1069-1075. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 13may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.