Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PHILADELPHIA FLEABANE  
Erigeron philadelphicus L.  
Plant Symbol = ERPH 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate names 
Daisy fleabane, common fleabane, marsh, fleabane, 
frost-root, skervish, poor robin’s plantain 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Cherokee and other Native 
American tribes used Philadelphia fleabane for a 
variety of medicinal purposes including epilepsy.  A 
poultice was made from the plant to treat headaches.  
The roots were either made into tea or chewed to 
treat colds and coughs.  The smoke from incense 
made from the plant was inhaled to treat head colds.  
A snuff was made and sniffed also for head colds.  It  was mixed with other herbs to also treat headaches 
and inflammation of the nose and throat.  The tea was 
used to break fevers. The plant was boiled and mixed 
with tallow to make a balm that could be spread upon 
sores on the skin.  It was used for as an eye medicine 
to treat “dimness of sight.”  It was used as an 
astringent, a diuretic, and as an aid for kidneys or the 
gout.  The Cherokee and Houma tribes boiled the 
roots to make a drink for “menstruation troubles” and 
to induce miscarriages (to treat “suppressed 
menstruation”).  It was also used to treat hemorrhages 
and for spitting of blood.  The Catawba used a drink 
from the plant to treat heart trouble. 
© William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Livestock
: Cows graze this plant for forage. 
 
Wildlife: Deer use this plant for food.  Butterflies, 
bees and moths pollinate the flowers.  
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
   
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower or composite family (Asteraceae; 
Compositae).  Philadelphia fleabane is a native, 
biennial or short-lived, somewhat weedy, perennial 
herb.  The hemispherical,  aster-like flowers (1.5 –
2.5cm diameter), which bloom in the spring, have 
yellow centers of tubular disk flowers (2.5-3cm 
long), surrounded by from 100-150 narrow, white to 
pinkish-purple rays (5-10mm long).  The flowers 
grow on branches atop a 30 to 90cm-tall leafless, 
usually single, stem that grows out of a sparse rosette 
of basal leaves (4-16cm long). Each branch can bear 
from a few to several flowers or drooping closed 
buds.  The opened flowers close at night. The basal 
leaves are ovate (widest near the base) with toothed 
margins.  Another group of smaller, lanceolate leaves 
surround and clasp the stem near the base. The leaves

and stems can be sparsely pubescent to quite hairy. 
The genus name, Erigeron stems from the Greek  eri, 
"early" and  geron "old man," probably because of the 
plant’s hairy appearance.  The common name 
“fleabane” is from Old English and it refers to the 
plant’s odor, which supposedly can repel fleas. 
Similar species: Erigeron pulchellus  has fewer ray 
flowers (40-60).   E. quercifolius is shorter with violet 
or blue flowers.  E. strigosus  is an annual from 30-
90cm tall, which lacks the clasping leaves 
surrounding the stem.  Low Erigeron ( E. pumilis 
Nutt.) is from 5-30cm tall and can have white, pink, 
or bluish rays. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: Philadelphia fleabane grows in moist to very 
wet conditions.  Plants grow in wet meadows and 
grassy openings, flood plains, lowland woodlands, 
thickets, fields, stream banks, low pastures, wet 
roadsides and seepage areas.   The size of the plant 
varies with habitat. 
 
Establishment 
The plant will grow in a variety of soils.  However, it 
requires soils that are moist and moderately well 
drained.  It grows best in full sun but will tolerate 
dappled shade. 
 
Seeds: Wildflower seeds should be sown directly into 
beds or scattered in the garden during early spring.  
The seeds should germinate in about four weeks.   
 
Management 
Philadelphia fleabane is a native wildflower that 
occurs over much of the United States and will often 
self sow if growing under favorable conditions.  
However, this plant is listed as an invasive weed, so 
be sure to determine if it can be a problem in your 
area before planting.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.   
 
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Chapman, A.W.  1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 698 
pp. 
 
Cronquist, A.  1980.   Vascular flora of the 
Southeastern United States . University of North 
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  261 pp. 
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote. 1975.   Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
  
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten. 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of southeastern United States .  Vol 2.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  712 
pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. &  .L. Blomquist. 1953.   Flowers of the 
south: native and exotic . University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 208pp. 
 
Haddock, M. 2000.   Philadelphia fleabane .  Kansas 
wildflowers and grasses 
http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wild flower/philadelphia.html. 
(May 4, 2001). 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey.  1975.  Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history . Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998.   Native American 
ethnobotany . Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 927 
pp. 
 
Shemluck, M. 1982.   Medicinal and other uses of the 
Compositae by Indians in the United States and 
Canada . Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5: 303-358. 
 
Small, J.K.  1933.   Manual of southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp.

Smith, A.I.  1979.  A guide to wildflowers of the mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana . Primitive Man 
Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic Anthropological 
Conference 14(4): 49-75. 
 
Northern Prairie Wildlife  Research Center. 2001. 
Native Wildflowers of the North Dakota Grasslands . 
United States Geological Service 
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/ resource/literatr/wildflwr
/species/erigphil.htm. (May 4, 2001). 
 
Erigeron philadelphicus. 2000. Plants for a future-
species database. 
www.pfaf.org. (May 4, 2001). 
 
Wunderlin, R. P. & B. F. Hansen. 2000.  Atlas of 
Florida Vascular Plants . 
http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu/. 
[S. M. Landry and K.N. Campbell (application 
development), Florida Center for Community Design 
and Research.] Institute for Systematic Botany, 
University of South Florida, Tampa. (May 4, 2001). 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 29May2001 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.