Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
SILVERBERRY  
Elaeagnus commutata  Bernh. 
ex Rydb.  
Plant Symbol = ELCO  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Silverberry, wolf-willow 
 
Uses 
Wildlife/Livestock: American silverberry is an 
important wildlife food for moose, elk, mule deer and 
white-tailed deer, pronghorn, upland game birds, 
small nongame birds, small mammals, and 
waterfowl.  Its palatability is rated poor for cattle and 
horses and fair for sheep.   American silverberry also 
provides protection and nesting cover for these same 
animals, particularly in grasslands and other mostly  open habitats.  In mature White Spruce forests of the 
Yukon Territory, it provides important habitat for 
snowshoe hares. 
 
Ethnobotany
: The fleshy fruit of American 
silverberry is cooked in moose fat and eaten by some 
Alaskan natives.  The pits of the fruits are used as 
necklace beads in the Fort Yukon region of Alaska.   
 
Conservation : The vigorous rhizomatous habit of 
American silverberry helps it spread quickly in 
disturbed sites, and it has been used for soil 
stabilization of mine spoils in British Columbia and 
Alberta.  Pre-inoculation with mycorrhizal and 
nitrogen-fixing symbionts may result in more rapid 
revegetation.   
 Jeanne Russell Janish Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams (1951) 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Oleaster family (Elaeagnaceae).  Long-lived 
shrubs, growing 1-4 m tall, rarely small trees, 
strongly rhizomatous, and stoloniferous, sometimes 
forming thickets or loose colonies, the branches 
thornless, reddish brown, sparsely to densely covered 
with silvery scales.  Leaves are deciduous, simple, 
alternate, 2-10 cm long, ovate to oblong or ovate-
lanceolate, wedge-shaped at base, short petioled, both 
surfaces covered by minute, silver scales, sometimes 
with scattered brown scales beneath.  Flowers are 
bisexual or unisexual, sweet-scented, short-stalked in 
lateral clusters of 1-3 on twigs of the current year; 
petals absent, the sepals forming a 4-lobed tube from 
the top of the developing fruit (the ovary inferior), 
yellowish inside, silvery outside, 12-15 mm long.  
Fruits are ovate to ellipsoid, 8-10 mm long, silvery-
covered with a dry mealy flesh covering a single, 
ellipsoid stone.  North American native with fruits 
covered by silver scales.   
 
Distribution 
American silverberry is distributed across northern 
North America, from Alaska, Yukon Territory, and 
the Northwest Territories through Canada, except for 
the easternmost provinces  (New Brunswick, Nova 
Scotia, Newfoundland), and in the United States from 
Washington to Minnesota and southward to 
northeastern Utah and Colorado.  “Escapes”

(presumably from cultivation) occur in Texas and 
Kentucky.  Although the species is wide-ranging, the 
plants usually are uncommon to rare and local where 
they occur.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
American silverberry commonly occurs in riparian 
communities along watercourses and is ranked as a 
facultative wetland species in Alaska.  It also grows 
in open grasslands and a variety of open forests and 
thickets.  Because of its relative shade intolerance, it 
usually is found in open vegetation, particularly 
where soil disturbance has occurred.  It is a dominant 
species and indicator of relatively young (6-19 years 
old) quaking aspen parkland communities in the 
Canadian Prairie Provinces.  The tough leaves, with 
their dense and close cover of scales, probably are at 
least partially responsible for the drought resistance 
of silverberry.  Plants al so are wind resistant and 
tolerate temperatures down to about -40°C.   
 
Although it grows best in loamy soils, American 
silverberry is commonly found in dry, sandy or 
gravelly soils, including those highly susceptible to 
erosion.  The species occurs over a wide range of 
elevation (300-8000 feet).  Flowering in June-
August; fruiting mostly August-October.     
 
Establishment 
Seeds are produced in good crops every 1-2 years.  
They remain viable 1- 2 years or more and 
germination may require a natural stratification 
period of nearly two years.  Birds are the primary 
seed dispersers.  American silverberry also 
reproduces and spreads by rhizomes.   
 
Plants cut back severely to old wood can still 
regenerate.  Cuttings are slow and difficult to root, 
usually requiring at least 12 months for good 
establishment.   
 
Management  
American silverberry fixes nitrogen, some of which 
is available to plants of other species growing nearby.  
In rough fescue grasslands, silverberry at 1,000 stems 
per acre increases forage produ ction.  It can be grown 
in orchards to increase yields from fruit trees by up to 
10%.   
  
American silverberry is an “increaser” species on 
overgrazed cattle rangelands, and where silverberry 
was a minor component 20 years ago in rough fescue 
grasslands of Alberta and Saskatchewan, it is now 
widely distributed.  Frequent sheep browsing or  mowing, however, reduce silverberry cover.  Many 
passerine bird species are attracted to mixed-grass 
prairie with interspersed silverberry cover and 
reduction of silverberry results in reduced or altered 
composition of bird communities.    
 
In native grasslands, American silverberry is often 
controlled with herbicides or fire.  It is top-killed by 
most fires and is probably completely killed by 
severe fires.  In the Cana
da Great Plains, American 
silverberry is described as a species "seriously 
harmed by spring and fall burns."  Plants sprout from 
rhizomes after fire, and although numbers of plants 
may increase after fire, cover usually decreases and 
recovers slowly.  Presettlement fires probably 
occurred every 5-10 years in grasslands where 
American silverberry is a common shrub.  More 
frequent burning reduces silverberry cover, but 
patches of shrubs can be maintained by employing 
partial burns.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
American silverberry is heavily rusted in Canada and 
is also a host for pycnia and aecia of  Puccinia 
coronata  (crown rust) and  Puccinia caricis-
sherpherdiae.  An unidentified species of 
Calamagrostis  was found to be a uredinial and telial 
host for Puccinia coronata  found on E. commutata .   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local NRCS office 
for more information. 
 
References 
Abrams, L. 1951.   Illustrated flora of the Pacific 
Northwest.   Vol. III.  Stanford University Press, Palo 
Alto, California. 
 
Bailey, A.W. 1970.   Barrier effect of the shrub 
Elaeagnus commutata on grazing cattle and forage 
production in central Alberta .  J. Range Managemt. 
23:248-251.  
 
Esser, L.L. 1994.   Elaeagnus commutata .  In: W.C. 
Fischer, compiler.  The Fire Effects Information 
System [Data base].  U.S.  Dept. of Agric., Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station, 
Intermountain Fire Sciences Lab., Missoula, 
Montana.  <http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Graham, S.A. 1964.   The Elaeagnaceae in the 
southeastern United States.   J. Arnold Arb. 45:274-
278.

Scianna, J.D. (Sept.) 1999. Description, propagation 
and use of silverberry (Elaeagnus commutata). 
Montana Technical Note 33 .  USDA, NRCS Bridger 
Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana.  5p.  
Soper, J.H. & M.L. Heimburger 1982.   Shrubs of 
Ontario .  Life Sciences Misc. Publ.  Royal Ontario 
Museum, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.  
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the North 
Central Plains .  The University Press of Kansas,  
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Vories, K.C. 1981.   Growing Colorado plants from 
seed: a state of the art .  Vol. I.  Shrubs.  Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT-103. U.S.  Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Ogden, Utah.    
 
Watson, L.E., R.W. Parker, & D.F. Polster 1980.  
Manual of plant species suitablity for reclamation in 
Alberta . Vol. 2.  Forbs, shrubs and trees .  Land 
Conservation and Reclamation Council.  Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada.  
  
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Larry Holzworth 
USDA, NRCS, Montana St ate Office, Bozeman, 
Montana 
 Edited 19sep00 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 10aug03jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.