Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
 
WYETH 
BUCKWHEAT  
Eriogonum heracleoides  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = ERHE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
 Parsnipflower buckwheat.  
Derek J. Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Whorled buckwheat, Parsnipflower buckwheat 
 
Uses 
Restoration/low water use landscaping:  Wyeth 
buckwheat produces large splays of small, cream to 
yellow colored flowers and has tremendous potential 
for use in native landscaping and drought tolerant 
plantings in the semi-arid regions of western North 
America (Young 1989). Wyeth buckwheat can be 
used in seeding mixtures to increase the forb- sub-
shrub component in native species diversification and 
site restoration planting projects in the sagebrush 
steppe and mountain footh ills of the Intermountain 
West.  Flowers of buckwh eat species are known to 
attract insects which are an important part of the diets 
of insect loving species such as sage grouse 
( Centrocercus urophasianus ). Wyeth  buckwheat has 
little or no forage value for livestock (USDA, 1937). 
 
Ethnobotanical : A decoction of roots and stems are 
said to have been used to treat colds and tuberculosis 
and to treat cuts and sores (Turner and others 1980). 
Root decoctions have also been reported to have been  used for diarrhea, stomach
aches and other ailments 
(Steedman 1930). 
  
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Buckwheat family (Polygonaceae). Wyeth 
buckwheat is a perennial forb to sub-shrub with a 
branching woody stem. Leaves are covered with 
dense white hairs making the herbage appear a light 
green to blue-grayish color. The flowers are a 
creamy-yellow color and have six petals which are 
borne in simple or compound umbels. Plants of 
Wyeth buckwheat can be distinguished from other 
closely related members of the genus by having a 
whorl of 5 to 10 leaves at midpoint of flowering 
stem; however in some subspecies this is not 
apparent (Freeman and Reve al 2005). The seeds, or 
achenes, are light to dark brown from 3 to 5 mm 
long. There are approximately 374,000 seeds/kg 
(170,000 seeds/lb). 
 
Distribution : The species range includes the Rocky 
Mountain and Intermountain western states from 
British Columbia and Alberta south to Utah and 
Nevada. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat: Plants of Wyeth buckwheat can be found 
growing in rocky soils, often on slopes and dry 
canyons. This species is fre quently found growing in 
association with mountain big sagebrush ( Artemisia 
tridentata  ssp. vaseyana ) and antelope bitterbrush 
( Purshia tridentata). 
 
Adaptation 
Plants are found growing na turally in areas receiving 
12 inches to about 25 inches annual precipitation. 
Wyeth buckwheat grows in mountain foothills at the 
upper end of the Wyoming big sagebrush zone and 
into the mountainous coniferous and deciduous forest 
regions. Wyeth buckwheat typically occupies sites at 
lower elevation and precipitation than sulphurflower 
buckwheat ( E. umbellatum), but the ranges of the two 
species do overlap. Plants grow in course, rocky, 
well-drained soils.

Establishment 
Recently harvested seed is typically dormant and 
responds best to a 16 to 24 week chilling period at 2º 
C (36 º F) (Meyer and Paulsen 2000). Seed should be 
planted at or just below the soil surface, to no more 
than 3mm (0.25 in) depth.   The full seeding rate is 
3.4 kg/ha PLS (4.0 lb/ac PLS), but this species should 
not be seeded in a pure stand.  This species would 
normally be included in native seed mixtures at a rate 
of 0.3 to 0.6 kg/ha PLS (1/4 to 1/2 lb/ac PLS).  
 
Management 
When planted in a native reclamation seed mix, 
Wyeth buckwheat will be a minor component of the 
establishing plant community; therefore management 
should be based on other key species in the mixture.  
Any new planting should be deferred from livestock 
grazing until it is well established which may require 
1 to 3 years.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Seed collections often contain insect larvae in the 
seeds. Placing seeds in a freez er (0 to 10º F) for 7 to 
10 days prior to long term storage effectively kills 
insect pathogens. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Wyeth buckwheat is a species native to the 
Intermountain and Rocky Mountain West. The 
species is not considered weedy or invasive, but 
plants can spread to adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal environmental conditions. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
 Parsnipflower buckwheat seed.  
Derek J. Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Seed should be planted in late fall as a dormant 
planting to allow proper stratification of the seed over 
winter. For best results the seedbed should be weed  free, moist and firmly packed. The use of weed 
barrier fabric is very effective at controlling weeds. 
Additionally, preliminary herbicide tolerance trials 
conducted at the Univers
ity of Oregon, Malheur 
Experiment Station on sulphurflower buckwheat 
indicated Prowl® (pendimethalin) Treflan® 
(trifluralin) and Balan® (benefin) look promising for 
use in seed production fields (Shock and others 
2006). J.  Herbert Stone Nursery in Oregon 
recommends soil fumigation prior to planting forb 
seed production fields to eliminate soil borne 
pathogens and to reduce weed competition 
(Archibald 2006). Buckwheat seed should be planted 
to a depth of no more than 3 to 6 mm (0.125 to 0.25 
in). When planting in weed barrier fabric, plant at 9 
to 18 in spacing. When drill seeding, use a seeding 
rate of 20 to 30 pure live seeds (PLS) per linear foot 
(Ogle and others 2006).  
 
Seed can be harvested by hand or direct combined in 
mid to late July.  Due to the wide window of seed 
ripening it may be beneficial to harvest multiple 
times by hand to obtain the greatest amount of viable 
seed.  
 
For seed cleaning, run harvested material through a 
hammermill followed by an air screen cleaner. Check 
cleaned seed for holes or other insect damage which 
may indicate the absence or damage of the seed 
within the achene. It may be necessary to reclean 
using the air screen cleaner with the blower on a 
higher setting to remove empty achenes. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no commercial releases of Wyeth 
buckwheat; however wildland collected seed is 
available. The Aberdeen, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center is currently conducting a common garden 
study to evaluate accessions for potential release. 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Archibald, C. 2006. Seed production protocols for 
Anaphalis margaritaceae, Eriophyllum lanatum  and 
Eriogonum umbellatum . Native Plants Journal 
7(1):47-51. 
 
Freeman, C.C. and J.L. Re veal. 2005. Polygonaceae. 
In:  Flora of North America . Volume 5: 
Magnoliophyta: Caryophyllidae , part 2. Oxford

University Press. New York, New York. Pp. 216-
601.  
 
Meyer, S.E. and A. Paulsen. 2000. Chilling 
requirements for seed germination of 10 Utah species 
of perennial wild buckwheat. Native Plants Journal 
1:18-24. 
 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard & L. 
Holzworth. 2003. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legume, and woody species for the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 
24, Jan. 2003. 41p. 
 
Shock, C.C., Ishida, J. and C. Ransom. 2006. 
Identification of herbicides for use in native forb seed 
production. In: Great Basin Native Plant Selection 
and Increase Project, FY05 Progress Report. pp. 32-
35. 
 
Steedman, E.V. 1930. Ethnobotany of the Thompson 
Indians of British Columbia, based on field notes by 
James A. Teit. Bulletin du Bureau d'Ethnologie 45: 
441-522. 
 
Turner, N.J., Bouchard, R., and D.I.D. Kennedy. 
1980. Ethnobotany of the Okanagan-Coleville 
Indians of British Columbia and Washington. 
Victoria. 
 
USDA. 1937. Range Plant Handbook. United States 
Government Printing Office, Washington DC. 
 
Young, J.A. 1989. Germination of seeds of sulphur 
flower. Journal of Seed Technology 13:31-38. 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley, Range Conser vationist (Plants), USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John, Manager, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited: 012207 djt; 011907 dgo; 011907 lsj; 011907 jb; 081008 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program
s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.