Plant Guide
CALIFORNIA POPPY  
Eschscholzia  californica  Cham.  
Plant Symbol = ESCA2  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California 
 
 
Figure  1. California poppy in bloom. Photo C. Smith, Lockeford Plant 
Materials Center  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:   
California goldenpoppy   
golden poppy   
flame flower   
copa de oro  (cup of gold)   
dedal de oro  (thimble of gold)  
 
Scientific Alternate Names:   
Subspecies  
Eschscholzia  californica  s sp . californica  (ES CSC)  
Eschscholzia  californica  ssp . mexicana  (ESCAM)  
Uses  
Horticulture : 
California poppy has been an important gardening plant in 
California and on multiple continents for almost 200 
years .  In 1826, ten years after Chamisso described 
Eschscholzia  californica , English collector David 
Douglas collected seeds from a southern Oregon 
population for the Royal Botanical Society of England 
( Beidleman, 2006; McClintock, 1976).   The collection 
would be amongst the first of a number of horticultural 
introductions of C alifornia poppy to regions far beyond 
the western United States. The popularity of gardens in 
the Victorian era, the global extent of European influence,  and the development of international travel contributed to 
the plant’s early distribution worldwide.
 
 
Wildlife  
The California poppy has limited direct wildlife value, 
comprising less than 5% of small mammal diets and 
providing minor cover for small birds (Martin et al., 
1951). The importance of the species to mammals is 
likely increased in certain resource- limited environments.  
Indirect benefit to other animal species may be substantial 
as insect  visitation and overall insect abundance may 
increase relative to the pollen -rich flowers .  This floral 
resource, as a member of a diverse plant community, may 
ser ve as an important link in the food web.   
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insec ts : 
From late February to late September, numerous and 
varied insects are attracted to the vibrant flowers and 
abundant pollen of the California poppy.  The species is 
an obligate o ut-crosser, relying upon the pollination 
services of insects for reproductive success (Beatty, 1936; 
Cook, 1962) though reports of sterile plants have been 
recorded (Wright 1979). Common pollinators include 
b umble bees (Apidae), sweat bees (Halictidae), mi ning 
bees (Andrenidae) and European honey bees (Apidae: 
Apis mellifera ).  There is also evidence that up to five 
specialist pollinators (oligoleges) of the genus Perdita  
(Apidae) may gather pollen from  California poppy and 
perhaps one other plant species, the  mariposa lily 
( Calochortus splendens ) (Timberlake, 1956).  Other floral 
visitors in pursuit of food or refuge  include thrips, hover 
flies, butterflies, minute pirate bugs and beetles (Cook, 
1962).  While incidental transfer of pollen can occur, 
these l atter insects are generally not considered significant 
pollinators.   
 
Erosion Control and Revegetation:  
Seeds are used in erosion control mixtures, roadside 
plantings, and in restoration projects in California : 
 
Medicinal:  
Over 30 chemicals and secondary m etabolites, many 
unique to the species, have been isolated from the 
California  poppy (Duke, 1992; Kalvana  et al. , 2006).  At 
least two of these, the alkaloids sanguinarine and 
chelerythrine, have generated interest for their anti -
bacterial and cancer treat ing potential.   
  As with most plant chemicals, especially those derived 
from the poppy family (Papaveraceae), there is an implied 
dose -dependent toxicity.  
 
Caution: California poppy may be toxic when taken 
internally without sufficient preparation.

1993).  California poppy establishes well on marginal 
disturbed sites, but populations can be expected to decline 
in areas where competition for light and water becomes 
intense (Ratcliff et al., 1972), yet, what the species lacks 
in competitive ability, it regains in adaptive ability (Leger 
and Rice, 2003, 2007) .  In general, the species is capable 
of recovering from freeze events, as well as tolerating 
high temperatures, drought, variable precipitation 
regimes, and a wide range of soil textures, chemistries, 
and levels of fertility (Hickman, 1993; Munz and Keck,  
1968; Ratcliff et al., 1972; McCully  et al. , 2004). The 
ability of this species to colonize varied environs of 
moderate to low competition contributes to success of the 
species as a horticultural plant as well as to its weediness 
in regions well beyond its natural range (Randall, 2007; 
Kirkpatrick, 1998; Leger and Rice, 2003, 2007).   
Establishment  
Seed Source Considerations : 
Selection of varieties for urban and garden plantings 
should be made with consideration to the local climate, 
soil or potting media, and whether the planting will 
receive supplemental irrigation.
  For urban areas, planting 
objective , floral qualities, and  the price of seed are often 
the main fac tors in selecting a seed source.  
Successful natural area plantings depend on proper site 
pre paration and the selection of adapted plant materials, 
i.e. seed from local populations  or from populations with 
similar climate, soil texture and chemistry.  In general, 
annual growth forms of California poppy may be better 
suited to short- term or interim  groundcover applications, 
especially on arid sites with shallow or sandy soils, 
provided that a minimum level of precipitation is received 
during the critical winter growing season.  Perennial 
forms  are recommended for sites with moderate to deep 
soils (> 18”) and good drainage which allows for healthy 
tap root development.  Evergreen perennial forms may 
persist best in coast environments and in areas  where 
moisture stress is minimized.  
 
The production history and identification of the origins of 
seed sourc e are important considerations for restoration of 
natural areas, augmentation plantings, or if seeding areas 
are adjacent to native stands of poppy.  Because of the 
physiological uniformity achieved in the horticultural 
breeding process, varietal releases  may be ill-adapted to 
less managed settings.   Non -varietal seed may be 
available as various types or classes of pre- variety 
germplasm such as “sourced identified”, “selected”, 
“tested” class germplasm.  For current information on the 
seed certification pr ograms and agencies please consult 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department.  Wildland collected seed is also an option, 
though non- varietal agronomically cultivated seed can 
often be produced more economically than wild collected 
seed, and therefore greater quantities are made available 
for revegetation efforts .  
  Additional consideration may be warranted for plantings 
near historical populations since a
nnual and perennial 
f orms of California poppy readily hybridize as  they are 
both considered obligate outcrossing plants and share 
common pollinators  (Cook, 1962).   In order to conserve 
genetic integrity within and among populations, the 
introduction of distant populations into  historical 
populations or to areas where subspecies overlap is 
discouraged until more information is known.  
 
Seed Dormancy : 
Through the domestication process and the selection of 
horticultural traits, most complex seed dormancy 
requirements for garden var iety California poppy have 
been reduced or eliminated.  Domesticated  California 
poppy seed germinated  consistently, with little regard to 
treatment, except for high -heat treatments which have 
been shown to harm the seeds from most populations 
tested (Monta lvo et al., 2002b ).  Any remaining seed 
dormancy can generally be overcome by sowing seeds in 
the fall as day -length decreases in locations with mild 
winters, or seeds may be sown in early spring in areas 
with harsh winters.  
 
In contrast to horticultural  varieties, seeds from wild 
California poppy populations often retain the seed 
dormancy characteristics correlated to the environmental 
conditions to which they have adapted.  This is true for 
many wild populations, both annual and perennial, 
whether increas ed under agronomic conditions or 
wildland collected. In germination trials on southern 
California populations of E. californica  ssp.  californica , 
y ear of harvest affected dormancy in wild annual 
populations more than wild perennial forms, but seed 
dormancy  was not significantly different after two years 
of storage (Montalvo et al, 2002b ).  For all wild 
populations  included in the study, dormant seed treated 
with smoke increased mean germination rates above 
untreated dormant controls, though populations diff ered 
substantially in response to treatment and in baseline 
dormancy.  The smoke treatments did not appear to be as 
significant for some populations aged more than 8 months 
before treatment.  For some populations, mean 
germination of dormant seed was improved in 10 out of 
13 trials with the addition of a cold moist stratification 
period following a dry smoke treatment (Montalvo et al, 
2002 b).   
 
Wildland or natural area plantings should occur in the fall 
for most Pacific regions, including deserts, to allow for 
exposure to natural precipitation, light, and temperature 
conditions which favor dormancy release mechanisms.  
Pre -treatment of seed prior to planting is generally not 
recommended for wildland reestablishment , as seed 
dormancy will be naturally broken if adapted seed is sown 
at the appropriate time.   
 
Agronomic seed increase plots are best established in the 
fall, though seed pre -treatment may need to start well in

advance of planting.  The more similar the seed increase 
fields are to the original wildland collection site, the less 
effort may be involved in pre -treating seed to break 
dormancy.  In an agronomic seed increase planting, 
addressing seed dormancy requirements for a given 
population at time of establishment should limit the 
unintentional selec tion against genes conferring dormancy 
and maximize seed germination rates (Montalvo, 2002b).    
 
S eed may be relatively short -lived  under room 
temperature storage, perhaps maintaining viability for 
about five years (Montalvo  et al., 2002b).   Seeds stored i n 
paper envelopes in a tin box at the California State Seed 
Laboratory dropped to about 50% of initial germination 
rates in years 8 to 10 (Goss, 1937).  More research is 
needed into the optimum seed storage conditions for 
Eschscholzia  californica .   
 
Site  Preparation and Seeding Rates : 
In general, California poppy grows well in  full sun in soil 
with  textures r anging from sand to clay loam, but not  in 
sites with  pooled  water, or where soils are saturated  or 
excessively moist for extended periods of time, eit her 
from irrigation or precipitation .  Both subspecies are 
capable of colonizing marginal sites low in fertility, but 
do not compete well with established stands of grasses 
such as annual oat ( Avena fatua) and perennial ryegrass 
( Lolium perenne ) (Cook, 1962; Kirkpatrick, 1998).  Best 
establishment, either in mixes or solitary stands, is 
achieved on low stubble or clean seedbed sites (Cook, 
1965; Ratcliff et al., 1972).  Further, California poppy 
may establish and respond to supplemental applications of 
nitr ate fertilizer and to increased rooting depth provided 
by ripping site prior to seeding; poppy may establish 
poorly on sites with high soil organic matter (Montalvo, 
2002a)  
 
California poppy is successfully and most easily 
established from direct seed appl ication.  Non-dormant 
s eed may be surface sown (broadcast) and harrowed to 
cover  the seed to approximately 1/8”; the species has also 
been successfully established in hydroseeding mixes 
(Montalvo, 2002b).  If seeding plants from dormant seed 
populations, deeper planting to between ¼ and ½” is more 
successful because light inhibits germination of the small 
dormant seeds (Montalvo, pers .comm.).   If using 
California poppy in a seed mix, seeding rates will depend 
on desired objectives for site .  Recommended bro adcast 
rates for solitary stands are 3 -4  lbs per acre (Brenzel, 
2007 ), or 18- 24 seeds per square foot.  Rates for other 
seeding methods will vary based on desired objective.    
 
The species is not tolerant of transplantation, unless the 
plug or container pl ant is very young.   
 
Management  
Once established, many adapted populations become self -
perpetuating, both in terms of reseeding and plant density.   Persistence within a site is dictated by the level of 
competition for soil and light resources.  In a Mader
a 
California field mowed or grazed to unspecified stubble 
height, Ratcliff et al.  (1972) attributed an increase in the 
density of poppy to a reduction in competition for light 
from an accumulated mulch layer and a reduction in the 
naturalized annual specie s ripgut brome (Bromus 
diandrus ) and broadleaf filaree ( Erodium botrys).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Though California poppy has a number of floral insect 
visitors, there are only a few recorded pests that inflict 
damage to the plant.  Insects that feed  on the sap of plants, 
such as thrips, aphids and leafhoppers, and Lepidopteran 
larvae which feed on leaves and flowers, are the most 
commonly encountered pests.  Significant visual 
symptoms of damage, such as leaf stippling in the case of 
leaf hoppers and  thrips, or malformed leaves with aphids, 
can be encountered in most plantings, although they are 
often more evident on stressed plants.  Alfalfa looper 
infestation  in California poppy has been observed to 
substantially reduce floral counts (Leger, 200 7).  In 
addition to causing leaf damage, plant pests are capable of 
vectoring disease.  Of most concern for neighboring crops 
are the phytoplasm aster yellows spread by leafhoppers, 
as well as various complexes of the Tospoviruses tomato 
spotted wilt and impatiens necrotic spot, most notably 
vectored by western flower thrips ( Frankliniella 
occidentalis ) (Dreistadt, 2001).  Concerned growers 
should rogue suspicious plants as active infections of 
these diseases can produce various symptoms.  
Laboratory analysis o f symptomatic plants may be 
considered in situations where the health or productivity 
of economic crops may be jeopardized.   
 
The Papaveraceae family is susceptible to a variety of 
diseases of the roots ( Verticillium , Rhizoctonia solani, 
Sclerotinia sclero tiorum), leaves and flowers (leaf spots 
Cercospora  and  Septoria) (Dreistadt, 2001).  Powdery 
mildew ( Erysiphe) and gray mold ( Botrytis) are the most 
commonly encountered in California poppy; both are 
generally transient, non- lethal infections of aerial pla nt 
parts, and plants recover as the environmental conditions 
become less favorable for disease development.  Stand 
reduction from disease may be exacerbated due  to abiotic 
conditions, such as prolonged periods of saturated soil, 
over -fertilization, overcro wding and other conditions that 
induce plant stress.   
 
Avoidance of disease is the best strategy: plants require 
good drainage, adequate sunlight (preferably full sun) and 
low to moderate ambient humidity.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
California poppy may be toxic  to livestock  (USDA, 
2010) .  Monitor animal response and behavior for 
potential toxicity in grazing situations where poppy

densities are high or where other forage resources are 
limited.  Livestock palatability of Eschscholzia  sp.  as well 
as potency of the plant itself may depend on the growth 
stage of the plant as well as the age and class of animal.  
Control  
California poppy is  susceptible to the herbicide active 
ingredients pendimethalin and DCPA, and the active 
ingredients oxyfluorfen, dicamba, and pr onamide in post-
emergent applications  (Roseberg,  1996).   Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for ea ch control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed size for the species will vary; for large seeded types, 
t here are approximately 270,000 seeds per pound. One 
pound of large -sized  seed spread over one acre will result 
in approxi mately 6 seeds per square foot.  For seed 
production , Califo rnia poppy is typically grown as an 
annual, regardless of actual (variant -dependent) life 
history, though there are exceptions where production 
fields may be held over for additional years.  The species 
is planted at 3 -5 pounds per acre in the fall.  For f ields in 
Central California, a single harvest is completed in early 
to mid -spring, depending on the production year and the 
development of the plant.  Plants are swathed when a 
majority of the seed capsules show pronounced 
longitudinal veins, and just begi n to change color from 
green to tan.  The plants are field -dried on tarps, then 
either direct combined or the seed is collected from the 
tarps after pods have dried and shattered.  Some growers 
report success using chemicals  specifically developed as 
anti -transpir ants to slow the moisture loss in seed pods, 
aiding in their retention on the plant.  This production 
method requires the seed be harvested with a combine 
after being swathed.  Seed  yield varies between 200 -500 
pounds per acre.  Seed is cleaned usi ng standard seed 
cleaning technology.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
California poppy has been actively propagated in the 
horticultural trade for at least 150 years.  In that time, a 
number of traits have been purposely s elected such as 
unique flower color, petal shape or petal number (Gould, 
1976).  Such poppies are often available as named 
varieties and are readily available from commercial 
sources.  Germplasm collections and pre- varietal 
germplasm may be available.  Con tact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  Look 
in the phone book under United States Government.  The  Natural Resources Conservation Service will be listed 
under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture. ” 
 
References  
Beatty, A. V.  1936.  Genetic studies on the California poppy.  
J.  Hered. 27:330- 338 
Beidleman, R. G.  2006.  California Frontier Naturalists.  Univ. 
of California Press, Ltd.. London.  
Brenzel, K .N. editor.  2007.  S unset western garden book. 
Sunset Publishing Inc.  Menlo Park, California.  
Calflora.   2010.  The Calflora Database.  ( www.calflora.org. 1 
January 2010). Calflora Database.  Berkeley, CA 94709.  
Clark, C.  1978.  Systematic studies of Eschscholzia  (Papaveraceae). I. The origins and affinities of E. 
mexicana .  Syst. Bot .  3(4): 374 -385  
Cook, S.A.   1962.  Genetic system, variation and adaptation in 
Eschscholzia californica. Evolution.  16(3):278- 299. 
Dreistadt, S.H.   2001.  Integrated pest management for 
floric ulture and nurseries. Regents of the Univ.  of 
California, Division of Agric . and Nat . Resources.  
Oakland, CA.  
Duke, J. A.  1992.   Handbook of phytochemical constituents of 
herbs and other economic plants. Boca Raton, FL. CRC 
Press.  [Online database:  http://www.ars -
grin.gov/duke/plants.html .  1 January 2010]. 
Foster, S, and C.  Hobbs.  2002. A field guide to w estern 
medicinal plants and herbs.  Houghton Mifflin Company, 
New York.  
Gould, R.  1976. The California poppy -garden hybrids.  
Pacific Hortic .  37(1):6- 8. 
Goss, W. L.  1937, Germination of flower seeds stored for ten  years in the California State Seed Laboratory. Bulletin of 
the Department of Agriculture, State of California. 
26(3):326- 333.  
Hickman, J. C., editor.  1993.  The Jepson manual: h igher 
p lants  of California.  Univ.  of Cal ifornia Press, Ltd. Los 
Angeles . 
Kirkpatrick, E. H.  1998.  Factors affecting the success of 
California poppy ( Eschscholzia californica) intro duced 
into western Washington state.  Northwest Sci.  
72(3):180- 189. 
K alvana, M ., J. Chen, F. Lepine, R. Legros and M . Jolicoeur.  
2006.  Analysis of secondary metabolites from 
Eschscholzia californica  by high-performance liquid 
chromongraphy.  Phytochemical Analysis.  17:236- 242.  
Leger, E.A. and K.J. Rice.  2003.  Invasive California poppy 
(Eschscholzia californica  Cham.) grow larger than native 
individuals under reduced competition.  Ecol. Lett.  
6:257- 264. 
Leger, E.A. and K.J. Rice.  2007.  Assessing the speed and  predictability of local adaptation in invasive California 
poppies ( Eschscholzia californica ).  J. of Evolutionary 
Biology. 20(3):1090- 1103. 
Lyons, R .E. and J .N . Booze -Daniels.  1986.  Characteristics of 
photoperiod response of California poppy.  J. Amer. Soc. 
Hort. Sci. 111(4):593- 596.

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson.  1951.  American 
wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food habits . Dover 
Publ ., New York.  
McClintock, E.  1976.   The California poppy: A natural 
history.  Pacific Hortic. 37:3 -5  
M cC ully , M.E.; M.J. Canny , and C.X. Huang.  2004.  The 
management of extrac ellular ice by petioles of frost -
resistant herbaceous plants.  Ann.  Bot.  94:665- 674.   
Moerman, D. E.  1998.  Native American ethnobotany. Timber 
Press, Portland, Oregon.  
Montalvo, AM, PA McMillan, and EB Allen.  2002a. The  relative importance of seeding m ethod, soil ripping, and 
soil variables on seeding success. Restoration Ecology. 
Vol 10 1:52- 67. 
Montalvo,  A.M., L.J. Feist -Alvey and C.E.  Koehler.  2002b .  
The effect of fire and cold treatments on seed germnation 
of annual and perennial populations of Es chscholzia 
californica  (Papaveraceae) in southern California.  
Madroño.  49(4):207- 227.   
Munz, P.A. and D.D.  Keck.  1968.  A California flora with 
supplement.  Univ.  of California Press, Berkeley.  
Randall, R.  2007.   Summary listing from the global 
compen dium of weeds for  Eschscholzia californica 
(Papaveraceae).  [Online  database: 
http://www.hear.org/gcw/eschscholzia_californica/ . 
Updated January 2009}  
Ratcliff, R.D. ; S.E.  Westfall  and R.W . Robarts.  1972.   More 
California poppy in stubble field than in ol d field.  USDA, 
USFS Res. Note PSW -271.  Pacific Southwest Forest and 
Range Ext. Stn., Berkeley, CA.  
Roseberg, R. J.  1996.  Herbicide tolerance and weed control 
strategies in  Lesquerella production.  Ind . Crops and 
Products.  5:133- 139.  
Timberlake, P .H.  1956.  A revisional study of the genus 
Perdita  F. Smith, with special reference to the fauna of 
the Pacific Coast.  Univ . of California publ . in Entomol .. 
11:247- 350.  USDA, ARS, 
 National Genetic Resources Program.  
Germplasm Resources Information Network -  (GRIN)  
[Online Database:  http://www.ars -grin.gov/cgi -
bin/npgs/html/paper.pl?language=en&chapter=scient  23 
November 2010)].  Natl.  Germplasm Resources 
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland.  
USDA, NRCS.   2010.  The PLANTS Database ( Online 
d atabase: http://plants .usda.gov.  1 January 2010).  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874 -
4490 USA.  
Wright, GM. 1979.  Self incompatibility in Eschscholzia  californica .  Heredity.  4(3):429- 31. 
 
Prepared By :  Christina Smith  
USDA -NRCS  Plant Materials Center   
Lockeford, C alifornia 
Citation  
Smith, C. 2010. Plant  guide for California poppy 
( Eschscholzia californica) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Lockeford, 
CA 95237.  
Published: April, 2012  
Edited:  28Sep2010 kdl ; 29Sep2010 aym ; 29m ar2012msk ; 
16Apr2012 jab,   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER