Plant Guide     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CREEPING 
SPIKERUSH  
Eleocharis palustris  (L.) 
Roemer & J.A. Schultes  
Plant symbol = ELPA3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho 
 
 Alternate Names 
Eleocharis macrostachya, common spikerush 
 
Uses 
Wildlife and Livestock: Creeping spikerush has a 
moderately high protein content in the spring and 
good digestibility.  The tops are heavily grazed by 
both livestock and big game animals, especially after 
the seeds have ripened.  It produces nesting cover for 
waterfowl and ducks eat the seeds and geese graze 
the shoots. 
 
Conservation Uses : This species has utility for 
erosion control, constructed wetland system 
applications, wildlife food and cover, wetland 
creation and restoration,  and for increasing plant 
diversity in wetland and riparian communities.  Its 
dense root mass makes this species an excellent 
choice for soil stabilization in riparian and wetland 
sites.  The rhizomes also form a matrix for many 
beneficial bacteria making  this plant an excellent 
choice for wastewater treatment. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Creeping 
spikerush is a perennial, heavily rhizomatous wetland 
plant that is found from low to mid elevations.  It has 
a dense root mass that extends deeper that 40 cm in 
the soil profile.  The stems are singular or in small 
clusters and it will continue to grow to keep the heads 
out of the water if the water rises slowly.  The stems 
are upright, round, and ma y reach 1.2 m in height 
(height is dependent on the depth of water in the 
growing environment).  The leaves are reduced to 
sheaths clustered at the base of the stems.  The 
flowers are borne in a termin al spikelet, 1 flower per 
scale with 2 stigmas.  Plan ts typically flower from 
June through September.  The seeds are yellow to 
brown lenticular achenes, 1.5-2.5 mm long including 
tubercle, and subtended by up to 8 bristles.  The seed 
ripens in late August to October.  Seeds are held 
tightly in the seed head for a long period of time.  
 
Distribution: It is found from the West Coast of the 
US, east to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, and  
south to Louisiana.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
It grows in wet meadows, irrigation ditches, springs, 
seepage areas, freshwater marshes, rivers, and along 
lakeshores.  It is a pioneering species that populates 
mud flats very quickly as the water draws down.  It 
can grow in areas that ar e flooded in the spring and 
saturated in the fall.  It can grow in flooded 
conditions where the water is up to one meter deep 
for most of the growing season.  It is a wetland 
obligate plant.  It grows on fine texture soils in 
neutral to alkaline or saline conditions.  It spreads

rapidly by rhizomes and occasionally seed.  It will 
spread into areas that are too deep for seedling 
establishment.  It will develop a thick root mass that 
is resistant to compaction and erosion.  However, its 
roots grow less deeply than Nebraska sedge (Carex 
nebrascensis).  It can fix atmospheric nitrogen and 
make it available to other plants in the wetland 
community.  
 
Creeping spikerush grows on  sites that are either 
permanently flooded or seasonally flooded.  The 
plants can grow and thrive in permanent water up to 
1 m deep or they can survive in areas where the water 
table drops to 30 cm below the surface late in the 
season.  Creeping Spikerush grows in areas that can 
be totally inundated for up to 3-4 months. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Collection and cleaning : Seeds may be collected by 
hand striping the seed from the plant or clipping it 
using a pair of hand shears.  A power seed harvester 
may also be used. 
 
The hammer mill is used to break up the large debris 
and knock the seed loose  from the stem.  Cleaning 
can be accomplished using a seed cleaner with a No. 
12 top screen and a solid  bottom screen.  Screens 
should be sized so desired seed will fall through and 
debris and weed seed are removed.  Air velocity 
should be adjusted so chaff is blown away.  Air flow 
and screen size may requir e adjustment to optimize 
cleaning process for given situation. 
 
Special procedures : The germination rate may be 
enhanced by lightly scarifying the seed and then 
stratifying the seed in a mixture of water and 
sphagnum moss at 2°C for 30-45 days. 
 
Greenhouse: Seeds need light, moisture, and heat for 
germination.  Place the seeds on the surface of the 
soil and press in lightly to assure good soil contact.  
Do not cover the seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  
The greenhouse should be kept hot (32°C to 38°C).  
Germination should begin within about one to two 
weeks.  Maintain the moisture until the plants are 
transplanted. 
 
Wild transplants : Wild plants can be collected and 
transplanted directly into the desired site. As long as 
no more than 4 dm2, 13-15 cm deep, is removed 
from any 1 meter square area, the hole will fill in 
within one growing season.  Care should be taken not 
to collect plants from weed y areas as these weeds can 
be relocated to the transplant site, and the hole left at 
the collection site may fill with undesirable species. 
 
Establishment 
Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild 
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand 
of this species.  Plug spacing of 30-45 cm will fill in 
within one growing season.  The soil should be kept 
saturated.  Allow no more than 8 cm of standing 
water at any time during the first growing season.  
Fluctuating the water level during the establishment 
year will speed the spread of the plants.  Water levels 
should be managed to enhance rhizome spread. 
 
Management  
Standing water should be no deeper than 1 m and 
should fluctuate throughout the growing season.  If 
deeper water levels are desirable, increase the depth 
slowly over the course of the growing season.  This 
species can tolerate periods of drought and total 
inundation.  Water levels can be managed to enhance 
or reduce spread as well as control terrestrial weeds. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few insect or disease problems have been 
encountered in the greenhouse.  Aphids will feed on 
the stems, but little or no damage has been noted and 
the vigor of the plant has not been affected. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
USDA NRCS. Wetlant plant fact sheet – creeping 
spikerush (Eleocharis palustris) . Interagency 
Riparian/Wetland Project, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho. 
 Edited: 28sep05 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.