Plant Guide
SNAKE RIVER 
WHEATGRASS  
Elymus wawawaiensis    
J. Carlson & M. Barkworth   
Plant Symbol = ELWA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office   
 
Snake River  Wheatgrass. Dr. Tom Jones, USDA, ARS, Logan, UT   
 
Alternate Names  
Formerly referred to as bluebunch wheatgrass before the 
description of Snake River wheatgrass as a new species.  
   
Uses   
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife : Snake River wheatgrass is 
palatable to al l classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is a 
preferred feed for cattle, horses, sheep, elk, deer and 
antelope in spring when protein levels can be as high as 
20 percent. Protein levels decrease to about 4 percent as 
the grass matures and cures by early to  mid summer.  
Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 percent 
throughout the active growth period.    
   
Erosion control/reclamation: Snake River wheatgrass is 
very drought tolerant, stands are persistent once 
established, and it is adapted to stabilization  of disturbed 
soils.  It is very compatible with slower developing 
natives such as streambank wheatgrass, thickspike 
wheatgrass, basin wildrye, western wheatgrass, bluegrass  species, and needlegrass species.  It does not compete 
well with aggressive introd
uced grasses.  Its drought 
tolerance, combined with an extensive root system and 
fair to good seedling vigor, make this species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receiving 10 to 20 inches annual 
precipitation.  The cultivars ‘Discovery’ and  'Secar' 
compete w ell in areas as low as 8 inches annual rainfall.  
This grass can be used in urban areas where irrigation 
water is limited to stabilize ditch banks, dikes, and 
roadsides as a component of a native mix.  
Description   
General : The natural distribution of Snake River 
wheatgrass is limited to eastern Oregon, eastern 
Washington, and west central to northern Idaho, but it is 
widely used as a surrogate for bluebunch wheatgrass for 
restoration, reclamation, and rehabilitation of ran gelands 
in the Columbia Plateau, Northern Basin and Range, 
Central Basin and Range, and Snake River Plain, which 
encompass large portions of eastern Washington, eastern 
Oregon, southern Idaho, Nevada, and western Utah.    
   
Snake River wheatgrass is a long -lived, perennial, cool -
season native bunchgrass with an extensive root system 
with strong tillers. Snake River wheatgrass spreads by 
seed.   
  
Snake River wheatgrass can be morphologically 
distinguished from bluebunch wheatgrass by characters 
such as the r atio of spikelet length to internode length, 
glume shape, seedling pubescence, and seedling leaf 
marginal barbs (Jones et al., 1991).    
 
 
Snake River (left) vs. awned (center) and awnless( right)  bluebunch 
wheatgrasses 
 
Snake River wheatgrass has a seed of considerably 
smaller mass than bluebunch wheatgrass.  Snake River

wheatgrass is always awned, while bluebunch wheatgrass 
may be awned or awnless.  Snake River wheatgrass is 
always allotetraploid (2n=28) while bluebunch 
wheatgrass may be diploid (2n =14) or autotetraploid 
(2 n=28) (Carlson and Barkworth, 1997)
.  
  
Adaptation and Distribution  
Snake River wheatgrass does best on medium to coarse-
textured soils, but can be found on heavy to medium to 
coarse- textured soils over 10 inches deep, including fairly  
sandy sites.  It can be seeded on clayey sites.  It may be 
found on thin, rocky sites and on very steep slopes.  It 
tolerates weakly saline conditions.  It does not grow on 
acidic sites.  It is cold tolerant, moderately shade tolerant, 
and very tolerant o f fire.  It is intolerant of high water 
tables, poor drainage, and periods of extended inundation.   
   
On native sites Snake River wheatgrass is most abundant 
in the 8 to 20 inch annual precipitation zones.  When 
seeded, it does best with 10 to 20 inches of  precipitation 
(‘Discovery’ and 'Secar' have established with as little as 
7 inches) and it will tolerate up to 35 inches on very well-
drained soils.  The elevation range is from 500 feet above 
sea level to 10,000 feet.  It is a major component of native 
p lant communities where it is found and generally 
occupies 20 to 60 percent of the overall composition by 
weight of the plant community.  
   
For a current distribution map, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website.  
   
Status   
Con sult the PLANTS Website and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Establishment   
This species should be seeded with a drill  at a depth of 1/2 
inch or less on medium -textured soils, 1/4 inch on fine -
textured soils and 3/4 inch or less on coarse -textured soils.  
The single species seeding rate recommended for this 
grass is 8 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) or about 24 PLS 
per square  foot.  If used as a component of a mix, adjust 
to percent of mix desired.  For broadcast plantings, mined 
lands, and other harsh critical areas, the seeding rate 
should be increased to 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  
Seedlings are significantly weaker than  crested 
wheatgrass and a clean firm weed free seedbed is required 
for establishment (cheatgrass and other weed competition 
can cause stand failure).  
   
Seed in very early spring on heavy to medium - textured 
soils and in late fall on medium to light - textu red soils.  
Late summer (August to mid - September) seeding is not 
recommended unless irrigation is available.  Dormant fall 
seedings will pre -chill seed and improve germination.   
   
Snake River wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly for a  native grass and s
tands should be given up to 3 years to 
ensure establishment.  It is compatible with other native 
species and should be used in seeding mixtures.  It should 
not be seeded with strongly competitive introduced 
species.   
   
Stands may require weed -control measu res during 
establishment. Application of 2,4 -D should not be made 
until plants have reached the four to six -leaf stage. Mow 
weeds at or prior to their bloom stage. New stands may be 
damaged by grasshoppers and other insects and pesticides 
may be needed.  
   
Management   
Stands of Snake River wheatgrass should not be grazed 
until they have firmly established (usually two to three 
growing seasons) and started to flower.    
   
Six inches of new growth should be attained in spring 
before grazing is allowed in esta blished stands.  The 
growing point of Snake River wheatgrass is fairly high 
and stands can be easily overgrazed.  Spring grazing 
should occur no more than one out of three years and no 
more than 40 percent utilization should occur during rapid 
growth.  Hea vy early-spring grazing is especially 
damaging, and grazing should be delayed until flowers 
are halfway emerging from the protecting leaf.  No more 
than 60 percent utilization should occur after seed ripens.    
   
Snake River wheatgrass is not suited to hay production 
and is best suited to rangeland, critical area stabilization, 
and cropland retirement type uses.   
  
Environmental Concerns   
Snake River wheatgrass is long lived and spreads 
primarily via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or inv asive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  Most seedings do not spread 
from original plantings.  
 
It is a cross- pollinating species and is known to cross with 
bluebunch wheatgrass,  thickspike wheatgrass, quackgrass, 
and bottlebrush squirreltail.  These interspecific hybrids 
generally exhibit low fertility and do not dominate a site 
or crowd out non -hybrid plants.  
   
Seed Production   
Seed production of Snake River wheatgrass has been  very 
successful under cultivated conditions.  Row spacing of 
24 to 36 inches are recommended under irrigation and 36 
inches under dryland conditions.  Seeding rates of 3 to 4 
PLS per acre are recommended.  Cultivation and/or 
judicious use of appropriate h erbicides will be needed to 
maintain rows and weed -free conditions.    
 
Seed fields are productive for three to four years.  
Average production of 75 to 100 pounds per acre can be 
expected under dryland conditions.  Average production

of 250-500 pounds per acre can be expected under 
irrigated conditions.    
 
 
 A  Snake River wheatgrass seed production field   
  Dr. Tom Jones, USDA, ARS, Logan, UT  
  
Harvesting is best co mpleted by swathing, followed by 
combining of the cured rows.  The seed heads readily 
shatter and require close scrutiny of maturing stands.  If 
direct combined, harvest at 30 percent moisture and dry 
seed down to 12 percent moisture (if stored in bins) or  15 
percent moisture (if stored in sacks).    
Debearding will be required during processing.  Seed is 
generally harvested from mid -July to mid -August.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
   
‘Discovery’ , the second Snake River  wheatgrass ( Elymus 
wawawaiensis ) plant material, was released in 2008 
(Jones, 2008). It was developed from four accessions that 
were found to have improved vigor in comparison to 
Secar.  These accessions were crossed and seed was 
harvested in bulk to gene rate Discovery.    
   
Discovery was compared to Secar in seeded trials at two 
sites in the Intermountain Region and four sites in the 
Great Plains (Jones, 2008). Stand frequency of Discovery 
in the Intermountain locations for year 2 was 49.3% 
compared to 27.4% for Secar.  Forage yield of Discovery 
for years 2 to 4 was 108.0% greater than Secar.  No 
significant differences were observed at the Great Plains 
locations.  Discovery was also compared to Secar in a 
transplanted trial at Millville, Utah where it pro duced 
18% greater straw weight across two densities the 
summer after establishment.     
The populations used to generate Discovery trace to 
materials collected in Whitman and Asotin counties in 
southeastern Washington and Idaho County in central 
Idaho.    
   
Breeder seed is maintained by the USDA -ARS Forage 
and Range Research Laboratory, Logan, UT, and will be 
made available to commercial growers through the Utah 
Crop Improvement Association for production of 
Foundation, Registered, and Certified generations.    
   
'Secar'  is the original cultivar release of Snake River 
wheatgrass ( Elymus wawawaiensis). It was originally 
released as a bluebunch  wheatgrass, but cytological 
examination later determined it to be Snake River 
wheatgrass.  The original collection site for Secar is along 
the Snake River Gorge near Lewiston, Idaho. The Idaho - 
Oregon - Montana -Wyoming AES, Washington 
Agriculture Research Center, and Pullman Plant Materials 
Center released Secar in 1980.    
   
It is one of the most drought -tolerant native perennial 
grasses available and can survive down to 8 inches 
rainfall. It is a bunchgrass with fair to good seedling vigor 
and establishes  well under droughty conditions. While 
Secar is considered to be highly drought tolerant as a 
mature plant, drought often reduces the stand during the 
establishment year. 'Secar' is intended for use on 
rangeland for re -establishment of native -plant 
communi ties and for cropland retirement type plantings.  
Certified seed is available and Breeder seed is maintained 
by Pullman PMC. Foundation seed is available through 
the Washington State Crop Improvement Association.    
References   
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 199 4.  Grass varieties in the 
  United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
  USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C.  
Carlson, J.R. & M.E. Barkworth 1997.  Elymus 
  wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with 
  Pseudoroegneria spicata (Triticeae, Poaceae) .  
  Phytologi a 83:312-330.   
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
  Reveal, & P. K. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
  Flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
  Columbia University Press, New York, New York.   
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.  Manual of the grasse s of the 
  United States .  USDA, Washington, DC.   
Jones, T.A.  2008.  Notice of release of ‘Discovery’ Snake 
  River wheatgrass.   Native Plants J. 9:99 -102.   
Jones, T.A., D.C. Nielson, and J.R. Carlson.  1991.  
  Developing a grazing- tolerant native grass for  
  bluebunch wheatgrass sites.   Rangelands 13:147-150.  
Miller, R.P., J.M. Seufert, and M.R. Haferkamp.  1987.  
  The ecology and management of bluebunch 
  wheatgrass ( Agropyron spicatum ): A review.  Oregon 
  Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 669.

Morrison, K.J., and C.A. Kelley. 1981.  Secar bluebunch 
  wheatgrass.   EB 0991.  Cooperative Extension, 
  Washington State University, Pullman.  
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
  system .  Version: 000413. Rocky Mountain Research 
  Station, Fire Sciences L aboratory, Missoula, MT. 
  http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/      
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database .  
  http://plants.usda.gov    National Plant Data Center, 
  Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
   
Prepared By   
Daniel G. Ogle   
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho   
   
Mark Stannard   
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington   
   
Dr. Thomas A. Jones   
USDA, ARS, Forage and Range Laboratory, Logan, Utah   
   
Species Coordinator  
Daniel G. Ogle   
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho  
Published  September  2008 
Edited: 091608dgo; 091508ms; 071108taj   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://ww w.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER