DAHURIAN WILDRYE 
Elymus dahuricus Turcz. ex 
Grieseb.  
Plant Symbol = ELDA3  
 Dahurian wildrye. Photo  courtesy of Bismarck Plant Materials 
Center, USDA- NRCS, Bismarck, North Dakota. 
 
Alternate Names  
Common Names:  None  
Scientific Names:  None  
Description  
General :  Dahurian wildrye is a n introduced, self -
pollinating,  short -lived  (1-3 yrs)  perennial  bunchgrass 
with culms reaching 40 to 60 inches. The stems are leafy 
with leaves 11 to 1 8 mm wide and lax. The seed head 
forms a tight spike with 2 to 4 spikelets per node (Dobb 
and Burton 2013). There are approximately 80,000 
seeds/lb. The root system is s hallow and fibrous. 
Dahurian wildrye is similar in appearance to blue wildrye 
( E. glaucus ) but differs in palea shape (Barkworth and 
others 1993).  
Distribution :  Dahurian wildrye is native to Siberia, 
Mongolia  and China. In North America it  has been used 
in pasture and hay production in western Canada from 
Saskatchewan to British Columbia. Its use is limited in 
the northern Great Plains region of the United States  
(Alderson and Sharp 1994) . For current distribution,  please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.
 
Habitat :  This species has been used in North America on 
rangeland and for pasture and hay forage.  
Adaptation  
Dahurian wildrye is adapted to sites receiving 12 to 24 
inches  annual  precipitation  ( Dobb an d Burton 2013), but 
persists longer with higher precipitation. It is said to have 
h igh saline tolerance and is adapted to all soil textures 
( Dobb and Burton 2013).  It was grown in test plots in 
Saskatchewan with electrical conductivity levels up to 6.7 
dS/ m (Glover and others 2004).  It is n ot as winter hardy 
as crested o r intermediate wheatgrass in semi -arid 
climates with little snow cover. It is very competitive 
during establishment but loses competitive ability as the 
stand ages.  
Uses  
Hay and pasture : Dah urian wildrye is a tall plant with 
leaves growing high up on the stem providing excellent 
forage for pasture. It also has better regrowth after harvest 
than intermediate and crested wheatgrass  and can be 
grazed 2 to 3 times per season . It p roduces signific antly 
greater amounts of forage than crested and intermediate 
wheatgrass in the first growing season  but decreases as 
stands lose vigor in subsequent years (Lawrence and 
Ratzlaff  1988) . Forage quality and palatability of 
Dahurian wildrye is high, comparable to intermediate and 
crested wheatgrass.  
 
Dahurian wildrye is a short -lived perennial with quick 
establishment and is used as an early forage component 
with other slower growing species.  It should be limited in 
mixes to less than 25% to prevent i t from outcompeting 
less vigorous species. Montana State University 
Extension (Dixon 2014) recommends  the following mixes 
based on grazing seasons  in south central Montana : 
 
Spring Pasture:  
  5 lb crested wheatgrass  
  0.5-1 lb alfalfa  
  1 lb Dahurian wildrye  
 
Summer Pasture:  
  6 lb western wheatgrass  
  1-2 lb white prairie clover or small burnet  
  1 lb Dahurian wildrye  
 
Fall pasture:   
  6 lb Russian wildrye  
  0.5-1 lb alfalfa  
  1 lb Dahurian wildrye  
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Because it regrows quickly after harvesting it has a better 
yield distribution than other forage grasses.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Planting Guidelines 
The f ull stand seeding rate  for Dahurian wildrye is 14 
lbs/ac for a target of 25 seeds/ft². This species shows 
e xcellent emergence and seedling vigor , better than 
crested or intermediate wheatgrass  and has established 
from deep seeding trials as deep as 1.5 in . Drill seeding to 
a depth  of 0 .5 to 0.75 in ches is recommended  (Lawrence 
and others 1991) .  
 
Due to high seedling vigor and competition , Dahuria n 
wildrye should be seeded in alternate rows or cross 
seeded  perpendicular to  slower establishing species  such 
as Russian wildrye (Holt and Lawrence 1994) . This will 
provide good forage while other species develop.  
Management  
Dahurian wildrye has  exceptional grazing recovery ( Dobb 
and Burton 2013) . It c an be grazed in early spring without 
negative effects. However Dahurian wildrye has a shallow 
root system and plants can be pulled easily from the 
ground in wet spring soils during the establishment  year. 
New seedings should be protected from grazing until they 
are well established (Ogle  and others 2011). 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with Dahurian wildrye.  
Environmental Concerns  
This species is  not native to North America and may 
spread via seed under ideal conditions. Its use however , 
has been  limited to managed pastures. It is not noted for 
weedy tendencies. Dahurian wildrye is self -pollinating 
and will not form hybrids with native species  (La wrence 
and Ratzlaff 1988) . 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed production for Dahurian wildrye is similar to that of 
other wildryes and wheatgrasses. Wide row spacing of 24 
to 36 inches is recommended for mechanical  weed 
contro l, however tighter row spacing of  12 inches 
provides higher yields. Seeders should be calibrated to 
deliver approximately 8 seeds per foot of row. For 12 inch 
spacing this equates to 4 lbs/ac. Fertilizer is not 
recommended during establishment  but fall or early 
spring  applications of  nitr ogen  after establishment  can 
increase yields.  
 
Seed can be harvested either with swathing or with direct 
combining. Seed heads can shatter seed even when the  heads are still green. Seed yields on irrigated fields 
average 600 to 1050 lbs/ac, while dryland 
yields average 
260 to 600 lbs/ac.  Dahurian wildrye is self -pollinated, so 
minimal isolation distance is required for certified seed 
production.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
‘Arthur’ and ‘James’ Dahurian wildrye were selected  at 
Ag riculture Canada Research Station in Saskatchewan in 
1989  from collections made  in China. Both were  released 
for high establishment year yields compared to other 
wildryes.  There are no distinguishing features which 
separate Arther from James Dahurian wildrye. Arthur 
heads slightly earlier than James (Sharp and Alderson 
1994).  
Literature Cited  
Barkworth, M.E., Campbell, J.N., and Salomon, B. 1993. 
Elymus . In: Flora of North America Editorial 
Committee, eds. 1993+. Flora of North America 
North o f Mexico. 16+ vols. New York and Oxford. 
Vol. 3, pp. 356- 357.  
Dixon, P. 2014. Yellowstone County suggested dryland  pasture seeding . Montana State University Extension. 
Billings, MT. 
http://www.co.yellowstone.mt.gov/extension/ag/pubs
/dryseedpasture.pdf . 
Do bb, A., S. Burton. 2013. Rangeland Seeding Manual 
for British Columbia, B.C. Min. Agri., Sust. Agri. 
Mgmt. Br., Abbotsford, B.C.  
Glover, D.E., Kielly, G.A., Jefferson, P.G and R.D.H.  Cohen. 2004. Agronomic characteristics and nutritive 
value of 11 grasses  grown with irrigation on a saline 
soil in southwestern Saskatchewan. 2004. Canadian 
Journal of Plant Science. 84: 1037- 1050. 
Holt, N.W. and T. Lawrence. 1994. Pasture production of  Russian wild ryegrass alone or in mixtures with 
Dahurian wild ryegrass or s lender wheatgrass. 
Canadian Journal of Plant Science. 74: 103 -107.  
Lawrence, T.; Ratzlaff, C. D., 1988: An evaluation of  dahurian wild ryegrass Elymus dahuricus  Turcx ex 
Griseb as a forage crop. Forage Notes 33: 28 -40  
Lawrence, T, Ratzlaff, C.D and P.G. Peterson. 1991. 
Emergence of several Triticeae range grasses 
influenced by depth of seed placement. Journal of 
Range Management. 44(2): 186 -187.  
Ogle, D., St. John, l. Stannard, M., Cornwell, J,  Holzworth, L. 2011. Technical Note 10: Pasture and 
Range Seedin gs – Planning, Installation, Evaluation, 
Management.  USDA -NRCS Boise, ID -Salt Lake 
City, UT -Spokane, WA. 35 p.  
Sharp, W.C. and J. Alderson. 1994. Grass Varieties in the  United States. USDA -Soil Conservation Service, Ag. 
Handbook No. 170. 296p.  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D. and L. St. John . 2014. Plant Guide for Dahurian 
wildrye  ( Elymus dahuricus ). USDA -Natural Resources

Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210 . 
March 2014  
 
Edited:
 25February2014 ls  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation  District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at h ttp://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.
 
 
 
   
 
 
Helping People Help the Land
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER