CALIFORNIA FUCHSIA 
Epilobium canum (Greene) P.H. Raven 
Plant Symbol = EPCA3 
Common Names: h ummingbird trumpet,  hummingbird- flower, 
w ild fuchsia, z auschneria, firechalice,  kolibritrumpet.   
  
Scientific Names: Zauschneria californica   
Subspecies Names: E. canum ssp. canum (Greene) P.H. Raven , E. 
canum ssp. angustifolium  (D.D. Keck) P.H. Raven , E. canum ssp. 
latifolium  (Hook) P.H. Raven,  E. canum ssp. garrettii (A. Nelson) 
P.H. Raven.   
Description  
General :  California fuchsia ( Epilobium canum) is a slender 
stemmed, highly branched  herbaceous perennial  subshrub  native to the southwestern states in the US. It has  toothed, green  to 
white , lanceolate to ovate leaves that have a densely spreading -hairy and glandular pubescence. The lowe r leaves are 
generally opposite while  the upper leaves are mostly alternate. The species ranges considerably in size and f orm in its native 
populations. It grows from 1 -3  f eet tall and spreads from the base due to a rhizomatous root system. The flowers are scarlet  to 
red -orange  on short axillary stems, tubular -funnel form  in shape with a basal bulge  which gives the flower its resemblance to 
a trumpet, with four two -cleft petals (Calflora, 2013 ;Hoch, 2016). There are eight stamens and one pistil  per flower , exerted . 
The blooming period generally runs from August to October in its native setting. Once pollinated the plants prod uce pods that 
contain the seeds. The pods range in size from 0.75  to 1  in ch  depending on the number of pollen tetrads that that are 
deposited in the flower during pollination (Snow , 1986). They are green during development and  when the seeds are mature 
the pods begin to brown and dry. These pods are a dehiscent fruit, and split laterally along the sides, releasing the seeds 
which have a feathery appendage for wind dispersal. Since the flowering period is very long there will often b e flowers, 
developing pods, and mature seeds being released throughout the blooming season.  T he subspecies share these traits  with the 
major morphological differences manifested in the foliage of the plants.  The subspecies tend to intergrade , especially in 
Southern California (Hoch , 2016). 
 
E. canum ssp. canum has linear to lanceolate leaves that are less than  0.23 in.  wide, often only 0.08  in.  wide that are usually 
clustered  densely on the stem and appear grey -green to grey from tomentos e hairs. The flowe rs also are often longer than 
other subspecies . This subspecies is endemic to California and is found on dry slopes mostly below 2000  ft. (Baldwin et al., 
2012, Munz, 1959)  
 
E. canum ssp. garrettii  has widely ovate leaves that are prominently  toot hed, more so then the other subspecies, and are 
greater  than 0.23  in.  wide with conspicuous lateral veins. It grows on dry rocky slopes up to 5500  ft. in elevation (Baldwin et 
al. , 2012, Munz, 1959).  
 
E. canum ssp. latifolium has  leaves that are lanceolate  to ovate and are entire to toothed, but the lateral veins are obscured. 
The leaves range from green to grey -green. This subspecies is found primarily at  the highest elevations, 7000 -10000  ft., but 
some are found as low as 3500  ft. (Baldwin  et al., 2012,  Munz, 1959).  
 
E. canum ssp. angustifolium   is noted for having linear densely  tomentose -canescent leaves, but can be difficult to distinguish 
from other subspecies. It is the most geographically limited being endemic to California, and only having been fo und on dry 
slopes near the coast at elevations no higher than  2000 ft. (Baldwin  et al., 2012, Munz, 1959).  
 
Distribution :  Epilobium canum is found in most of the western and southwestern states including California, Oregon, 
Nevada, Idaho, Utah, New Mexico , Arizona, and Wyoming, mainly in the arid and mountainous areas of these states. There 
are four subspecies including  E. canum ssp. angustifolium and  E. canum ssp. canum which are endemic to California . E. 
canum ssp. latifolium is almost exclusively found in California with a few populations found beyond the states borders . E. 
canum ssp. garrettii has the most extensive range being found across the Western states . All of these are native to similar 
habitats but with different  geographical distributions and adaptations to microclimate conditions. These various subspecies 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide 
Figure 1. California  fuchsia producing its characteristic red trumpet shaped blooms and showing its grey green foliage. Photo by Jesse Lundgren (2013) Lockeford Plant Materials Center.

have the same red trumpet shaped flowers, but are characterized by their varying growth forms and different chromosome 
numbers (Ford and Gottlieb, 2007). For c urrent distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  California fuchsia grow s at elevations of up to 10,000  ft., in dry areas, rocky slopes and cliffs, and montane 
coniferous forest , and coastal scrub (Baldwin  et al. 2012).  
Adaptation  
California fuchsia is found throughout the western and southwestern states, primarily on  well-drained  and rocky slopes at 
elevations up to 10,000  ft. It can tolerate low moisture and nutrient poor  soils, and prefers a near neutral soil pH ( Baldwin et 
al., 2012; Hoch, 2016; Ladybird Johnson Native Plant Database, 2013).  
Uses  
Wildlife:  California f uchsia is an important nectar source for hummingbirds in the western US due to its late season blooms 
that persist through the hot dry summers while most other nectar sources are scarce. The plant often has over 250 blooms per 
flower blooming at one time, with varying amounts of nectar production to reinforce pollinator activity (Boose, 1997)  
 
Landscaping: California fuchsia can be used for environmental enhancement and erosion control. The  plants are extremely 
drought tolerant and withstand sun, heat, and wind, making them ideal plants for dry sunny slopes. They are also unpalatable  
for deer, which is a requirement for successful establishment in  many areas.  
Ethnobotany  
Epilobium canum  was used as a decoction of the plant by the Costanoan’s  as a treatment  for infected sores, to lower infant’s  
fevers, to treat urinary tract problems, and as a general wellness remed y (Bocek, 1984) . The Miwok used a decoction of the 
leaves as a cathartic, as a treatment for kidney and bladder problems and for syphilis and as a treatment for tuberculosis. 
Miwok women used this plant as a treatment for hemorrhages  following childbirth (Barret and Gifford, 1952).  The Karuk 
would also use it as a nectar source, sucking the sweet nectar from the flowers ( Schenck and Gifford, 1952).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/
) and your  state ’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Seed of California  fuchsia is collected by hand or purchased from a reputable seed company or nursery. Seed  should be 
refrigerated for storage at a temperature between 40 and 60 
oF in sealed containers. S ow  seed  in to  flats with drainage holes , 
filled with  a medium of 1.5 parts vermiculite, 1 part coa rse perlite , 1 part sterile sand, and 2 parts peat moss. Thoroughly 
water  trays after sowing and kee p moist during the stratification and germination phases (Decker, 2013). The seeds can be 
naturally stratified outdoors over fall and winter. Seedlings can be grown in a  shade house from March to October depending 
on the region.  After emerging , but still in the cotyledon stage plants are transplanted to D 40   (2 in. diameter by 10 in. depth) 
pots filled with the  media used to germinate the seeds. It is important to transplant at this stage to prevent root deformation. 
At  transplanting a ti me release fertilizer can also be incorporated. Seedlings should be hand watered throughout the growing 
season until well established. During active growth,  irrigation  is delayed until containers are almost  dry to help harden plants 
while  growing. Once the seedlings are  mature, they  are transferred to larger containers, or planted. (Decker, 2003)   
Management  
A single mowin g of  established   plants  in the winter minimizes  woody build up and promotes  new growth in spring and 
summer. Although  California fuchsia is a  drought tolerant  plant,  irrigation  during dry periods prolong s the  bloom  period.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
All of the subspecies of E. canum  are  susceptible  to slug and snail damage,   common rusts and fungal spots, and powdery 
mildew.  Maintaining healthy growing  conditions, helps prevent d iseases. Make sure soil is well drained and do not over 
water. In cases where damage is escalating  use common pest control methods to manage any signs of damage or disease.  
Environmental Concerns  
Two of the subspecies of Epilobium canum, ss p angustifolium and ssp canum,  are endemic to California and have very 
limited populations and distributions. These two subspecies are at risk from  environmental changes such   climate change and  
habitat loss due to human encroachment.

Seeds and Plant Production 
Mature seeds are produced 8 -10 weeks after pollination occurs. The 
capsules holding the seeds dry and dehisce releasing the seeds that 
are then wind  transported to new locations. Seeds of Epilobium 
canum  retain  100% viability when dried to 15% moisture content 
and stored at a relative humidity of 15% at  - 4 
oF  for 30 days. The 
seeds are very small, the average 1000 seed weight is 0.017 ounce  
but  have a high germination rate, reaching 100% germination under 
laboratory conditions  (Decker, 2003) . California  fuchsia is easily 
propagated from cuttings  taken near the tip with several leaves 
included. Plant division is a good method for large growing 
specimens;  the y can be divided in fall and winter into stems with 
roots and rhizomes that  c an be planted in a new location  (Rideout,  
2011).   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of 
origin)   
T he wide distribution ,  ease of vegetative propagation and  successful 
production f rom seed results in  locally adapted plant materials being  
available  fr om local nurseries . There are also several named cultivars  including:  Epilobium canum  ‘ Armstrong’  An upright 
herbaceous perennial subshrub to 2 feet tall by equal width with narrow olive -green foliage and bright red -orange flared 
tubular flowers from  early summer until f irst frost (Theodore Payne, 2014).  Epilobium canum  ‘ Berts Bluff’  An upright 
herbaceous perennial subshrub to 3  feet tall by equal width with narrow grey green foliage  and bright red -orange  tubular 
flowers. From Santa Margarita in Sout hern California and does well in coastal scrub, tolerates a variety of soil types and 
drought conditions  (Wilson, 2013) . Epilobium  canum  ‘ Bowman's  hybrid’. An upright herbaceous perennial/subshrub to 2 feet 
tall by equal width with narrow olive -green  foliage and bright red -orange flared tubular flowers from early summer until first 
frost. Best in full sun in a well -drained soil and, while drought tolerant, looks best with occasional to infrequent irrigation in 
summer but only if soil drains well. Developed in a garden in San Jose , from a UC Program with California fuchsia 
( California Flora Nursery, 2016; San Marcos Growers, 1996 ). Epilobium canum  ‘Catalina,’  Soft long silver  gray-green 
foliage on red -tinted branches that reach 3 to 4 feet tall and beco mes woody at the base. Bright orange-red tubular flowers 
have four deeply bi -lobed petals. This plant was selected by Mike Evans of Tree of Life Nursery from the Middle Ranch area 
of Catalina Island in 1987.  ( California Flora Nursery, 2016; San Marcos Grow ers, 1996). Epilobium canum  ‘ Cloverdale ’ 
Robust growth habit,  2-4  ft.  high by 4 feet wide, upright at first then cascading . Olive -green fuzzy leaves with orange -scarlet 
blooms Selected from Squ aw Rock along the Russian River  North of Cloverdale by the UC Arboretum, Santa Cruz . 
( California Flora Nursery, 2016; Theodore Payne, 2014).  Epilobium canum  ‘Eel River White’ Green  foliage, grows about 8 
inches tall and to 3 feet diameter, with a soft draping form . Leaves  are  bright  green and tubular flowers are pink . R equires 
partial shade, will grow along the coast, and should  be protected from frost . Selected from a plant growing along the Eel 
River in Northern California ( Wilson, 2013). Epilobium canum  ‘ Marin  Pink’ Green  foliage,  upright herbaceous 
perennial/subshrub  2 feet tall and to 3 feet diameter, leaves are bright green and tubular flowers are white. Not drought 
tolerant and requires partial shade, will grow along the coast, should  be protected from frost . (California Flor a Nursery, 2016;  
Wilson, 2013).  Epilobium canum  s sp latifolium   ‘E verett’s choice’  A low- growing vigorous ground -hugging sub -shrub that 
remains under 6 inches tall by up to 4 to 5 feet wide with fuzzy gray -green lance -shaped small leaves that are covered  with 
long whitish hairs. Vivid red -orange tubular flowers with flared lips. Believed to be derived from the plants i n Berkeley , or 
possibly in Lincol n northeast  of Sacramento  (San Marcos Growers , 1996). Cultivars should be selected based on the local 
climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Baldwin, B.G., D.H. Goldma n, and L.A. Vorobik. 2012  The Jepson Manual: Vascular Plants of California. Second ed. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California,. Print.  
Barrett, S.A. and E. W. Gifford, 1933, Miwok Material Culture, Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee 
2:11, page 174   
Bocek, B.R., 1984, Ethnobotany of Costanoan Indians, California, Based on Collections by John P. Harrington, Economic 
Botany 38:240- 255, page 22  
Boose, D. L., 1997. Sources of variation in floral nectar production rate in Epilobium canum  (Onagr aceae): implications for 
natural selection.  Oecologia, 110, 4, 493- 500.  
Cal Flora, 2016. California Flora Nursery, Fulton, CA   http://www.calfloranursery.com/plants/epilobium -cloverdale 
(accessed 25 July. 2016).  
Figure 2. California Fuchsia in  bloom and showing the pods splitting open and feathery appendages on the wind disbursed seeds. Photo Lockeford Plant Materials Center  (2016 ).

Calflora, 1997: Consortium of California Her baria, Berkeley  CA ... http://www.calflora.org/cgi -bin/species_ query.cgi?where -
calrecnum=2984  (accessed 28 Aug 2013;  verified 26 July, 2016 ). 
Decker, C. 2003. Propagation protocol for production of Container (plug) Epilobium canum  (Greene) plants ; USDI NPS - 
Zion National Park Springdale, Utah. In: Native Plant Network. URL: http://NativePlantNetwork.org (accessed 
2016/07/12). US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Center for Reforestation, Nurseries, and Genetic 
Resources.   
Ford,  V.S., a nd Gottlieb, L. D., 2007. Tribal Relationships Within Onagraceae Inferred from PgiC  Sequences.  Systematic 
Botany, 32: 348-356.   
Hoch , P.C. , 2016.  Epilobium canum , in Jepson Flora Project (eds.) Jepson eFlora, http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi -
bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=24343,  (accessed on July 25, 2016).  
Ladybird Johnson Native Plant Database, 1982.  The Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Cen ter : The University of Texas, Austin, 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_p lant=EPCAA (Accessed 12 July 2013; verified 25 July . 2016). 
Munz, P.A. A. 1959.  California Flora . Berkeley: Published for the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden by the University of 
California , Print.  
O’Brian, B. 2007.  Enjoying Zauschnerias. Pacific Horticulture 68 (4). http://www.pacifichorticulture.org/articles/enjoying -
zauschnerias/  (accessed  7/12/2016).    
Rideout, S. 2011. California Fuchsia . Master  Gardener  Newspaper  article. University  of Califor nia Cooperative Extension.  
http://ucanr.edu/datastoreFiles/268 -507.pdf  (accessed 2016/07/12).  
San Marcos Growers , 1996. http://www.smgrowers.com/search/basesearch.asp?strSearchText=Epilobium&x=0&y=0 /    
Santa Barbara, CA  (accessed 25 July. 2016).  
Schenck,  S.M. and E.W. Gifford, 1952, Karok Ethnobotany, Anthropological Records 13:377 -392, page 386  
Snow, A.A. "Pollination Dynamics in Epilobium canum  (Onagraceae): Consequences for Gametophytic Selection." Am. J. 
Bot  73.1 (1986)  
Snow, A. A., 1991. Effects of Pol len-load Size on Sporophyte Competitive Ability in Two  Epilobium Species.  American 
Midland Naturalist, 125, 2, 348- 355. 
Theodore Payne Foundation for Wild Flowers and Native Plants.  2014. Sun Valley, CA  http://theodorepayne.org / ( accessed 
25 July. 2016).  
U SDA, ARS , National Genetic Resources Program  "GRIN for Taxonomy of Plants  - Epilobium canum ." Germplasm 
Resources Information Network for Plants . USDA - Agricultural Research Service, n.d. Web. 28 Aug. 2013. 
<http://www.ars -grin.gov/cgi -bin/npgs/html/tax_s earch.pl>. 
USDA -NRCS. 2011. The PLANTS Database Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 16 Sept. 2013). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA.  
Wilson, B. 2013. Las Pilitas Nursery , Santa  Margarita, CA . http://www.laspilitas.com/nature -of -california/plants/3365--
zauschneria -californica -berts -bluff ( accessed 25 July. 2016).  
 
Citation  
Lundgren, J. and M. Smither -Kopperl. 2016. Plant Guide for California Fuchsia ( Epilobium canum). USDA -Natural 
Resources  Conservation Service, Lockeford Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, CA, 95237.  
Published ;   August 2016 
 
Edited: 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.  
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where  applicable , 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual&#39;s income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity condu cted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)   
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency&#39;s EEO Counselor
  (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at  
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.

If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632 -
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint  
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877 -8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape , etc.) 
please contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact  
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221 -5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers
.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of  the  USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER