Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREEN EPHEDRA 
Ephedra viridis Cov. 
Plant Symbol = EPVI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Tucson Plant Materials Center 
 
Warning: Ephedra is cons idered toxic and should 
be used with caution. 
Alternative Names 
Mormon tea, jointfir  
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic: Green ephedra was traditionally used 
as a beverage and medicine.  Native Americans made 
flour and a coffee-like beverage from the seeds.  The 
Sierra Miwok and Owens Valley Paiute made an 
aromatic tea from the slender twigs by boiling them.   This plant is still highly valued as a beverage today 
by many tribes and it is utilized as a tonic and blood 
purifier.  The twigs were mixed with the inner bark  
 
of 
Purshia tridentata  to make a tea for drinking by 
the Shoshone to treat gonorrh ea.  The Hopi used the 
plant in the treatment of syphilis.  The Paiute and 
Shoshone also used a steeped tea made from the 
twigs as a regulator for kidney or sometimes bladder 
disorders.  Washoe women imbibed a tea for delayed 
or difficult menstruation.  The Kawaiisu of California 
steeped a tea for backache.  The Navaho of Arizona 
gathered the twigs and leaves and boiled them with 
alum to produce a light-tan color. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
The vivid green foliage presents a striking contrast to 
an often-dull gray desert environment.  It has been 
widely planted as an ornamental.  This species is 
used in seed mixtures for re-vegetating depleted 
game ranges in the mountain shrub and juniper-
pinyon types and optionally in the sagebrush type in 
Utah.  Characteristics and qualities also are suited for 
soil stabilization and highway and park 
beautification. 
 
Wildlife : The mountain quail eats The seeds of 
Ephedra species and the plant is browsed by deer, 
bison, and antelope. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Ephedra Family (Ephedraceae).  Green 
ephedra is a dioecious, scraggly shrub rarely more 
than 60 cm to 150 cm high.  The naked seeds are the 
features, which places Ephedra with the classical 
group, the gymnosperms.  The microsporophylls are 
similar to the stamens of the flowering plant; they 
also correspond with the spore-bearing scales in the 
male cone of a pine tree (Benson and Darrow 1981).  
 
The intricate network of br ittle, practically leafless, 
bright green branches is the salient feature of the 
plant.  The leaves are scale-like, 2 to 3 mm long, the 
bases and middle portions conspicuously dark brown, 
the rest light green and tending to be membranous, all 
but the bases falling away with age.  In the 
springtime, the male plant becomes a conspicuous

mass of yellow clusters of pollen sacs, and the green 
ovules (later brown seeds) are an obvious but less 
conspicuous feature of the female plant.  At the 
Tucson PMC, green ephedra begins flowering in 
mid-to late-April.  The pollen cones are spheroidal 
and 3 to 4 mm in diameter.  The pollen sacs are 
relatively large, 0.5 mm long and 0.5 to 0.6 mm 
broad, and are practically lacking stalks.  The ovulate 
cones have stalks 2 to 10 mm long, ovoid, and 5 to 7 
mm long.  The cone scales are in about 3 to 5 pairs, 
not membranous, and ovately shaped.  They are 
green at the middles, lighter colored and thinner 
toward the margins, 2 to 5 mm long, and not stalked.  
The seeds are more or less boat-shaped, the flat 
"deck" of each facing the other member of the pair.  
They are dark greenish lead color, 5 to 7 mm long, 
about 2 to 2.5 mm broad, and not beaked (Benson 
and Darrow 1981). 
 
At the onset of the flowering period, plants bearing 
ovules exert a structure called a micropylar tube at 
the apex of the ovule.  Th e micropylar tube allows 
the ovule to produce and display a small droplet from 
the exerted end of the tube.  This droplet is called a 
pollination droplet and it serves as a receptacle for 
airborne pollen (Pater 1991). 
 
Distribution 
Green ephedra occurs on rocky or sandy slopes and 
plains in such plant communities as the lower 
California oak woodland, Joshua tree woodland, the 
northern juniper-pinyon woodland, the sagebrush 
desert and higher creosotebush deserts, and the desert 
grassland from 3,000 to 7,000 feet (915-2135 m) 
elevation.  Common associates include creosote bush 
( Larrea tridentata),  shadscale saltbush ( Atriplex 
confertifolia ), four wing saltbrush ( A. canescens), big 
sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata ), galleta (Hilaria 
jamesii), sand dropseed ( Sporobolus cryptandrus), 
Utah serviceberry ( Amelanchier utahensis ), junipers 
( Juniperus spp .), and pinyons (Pinus spp .).   
 
The plant occurs naturally in Arizona deserts from 
the northern Mohave to Apache and northern 
Yavapai Counties at elevations of 3,000 to 7,000 feet 
(915-2135 m) (Benson and Darrow 1981).  In 
California, the plant is found east of the Sierra 
Nevada from Lassen County southward to the 
mountains of Inyo County, and westward through the 
mountains of Kern County to eastern Ventura 
County, and thence southeastward to the mountains 
of southern San Bernardino county and the Western 
edge of the Colorado desert.  Green ephedra extends 
into southwestern Wyoming, northern and central 
Nevada, southward to the Charleston Mountains,  Clark County, Utah, except the northernmost part, 
and western Colorado (Benson and Darrow 1981). 
 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Green ephedra is tolerant of calcareous, 
weakly saline, and slightly saline-alkaline (sodic) 
sites and it is sometimes found growing in clayey 
soils.  It thrives in dry, well-drained sites and it is 
intolerant of wet sites and poor drainage.  The plant is 
drought-resistant, markedly so after initial seedling 
establishment.  Local pl ant materials are winter-
hardy.  Distant southern or lower altitude seed 
sources may be frost-sensitive, especially in the 
seedling stage.  Ephedra sites are not commonly 
burned due to sparse, discontinuous fuels but some 
plants survive wildfire and  spread by roots.  Green 
ephedra is more vigorous in full sunlight but it also 
grows in partial shade of open woodlands.  Plants are 
weakly competitive due to slow growth rate 
compatible with other shrubs and herbs, but more so 
after seedlings are firmly established (Pater 1991). 
 
General : Harvest the seeds by knocking them from 
the shrubs into containers  or onto a dry, clean canvas 
using an office clipper seed separator.  A Shop-Vac 
vacuum cleaner also has potential as a harvesting 
tool.  Seed quality is not standardized.  There is 90% 
purity, about 60% germination, 54% Pure Live Seed 
(PLS), and an estimated 25,000 seeds per pound 
(Pater 1991). 
 
Propogration by seed : Plant seed 1 to 2 cm deep; 
preferably by drilling in a well prepared, firm 
seedbed.  Always mix the seeds with other species 
when re-vegetating game ranges to help control 
weeds and counterbalance sl ow rates of growth and 
establishment.  One-half to one pound per acre of 
seed is used in 17 to 19 and 28 to 30 pounds per acre 
total seed mixes when drilling and broadcasting, 
respectively.  Seeding can  be sown by airplane on 
disked or plowed lands or such seeded areas can be 
anchor-chained when no  site preparation proceeds 
seeding.  Plant before the growing season with soil 
moisture most dependably adequate for good 
germination and seedling establishment.  Seedings 
are made in late fall, early winter, or spring in 
intermountain areas (Pater 1991). 
 
About half of the seed will germinate in 5 to 12 days, 
and most germination is completed in 14 days in lab 
tests.  Alternating 59 degree F to 87 degrees F (15.0-
30.5 degrees C) day and 36 degrees F to 41 degrees F

(2.2-5.0 degrees C) night temperatures are optimal 
for germinating seed.  Constant 55 degrees F (12.7 
degrees C) also gave good germination.  Germination 
may be improved by an after ripening period.  
Results from Utah game range revegetation 
evaluations suggest seedling vigor and growth rate 
are rather weak; plants take five to ten years to attain 
two foot heights.  Germination was reduced in -4 to -
16 bars osmotic potential solutions; optimum was 0 
to -4 bars (Pater 1991). 
 
Management 
Reduce plant competition and animal populations, if 
not already at low levels or excluded, during stand 
establishment, and balance animal populations with 
long term conservative usable herbage supply (Pater 
1991). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
EPVI is somewhat available through native plant 
seed companies.  Seeds and plants of selected 
Ephedra cultivars are available from many nurseries.  
It is best to plant species from your local area, 
adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Benson & Darrow 1981.  Trees and shrubs of the 
southwestern deserts.  The University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona.   
 
Curtin, L.S.M. 1984.   By the prophet of the earth 
ethnobotany of the Pima .  University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Kearney, T.H. & R. H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Pater, M. 1991.   Documentation of a plant accession 
selected for advanced testing .  USDA, NRCS, 
Tucson Plant Materials Center, Arizona 
 
Reagan, A.B 1929.   Plants used by the White 
Mountain Apache Indians of Arizona.   Wisconsin 
Archeologist 8(4):143-160. 
 
Strike, S.S. & E.D. Roeder 1994.   Ethnobotany of the 
California Indians.  Volume 2 .  Aboriginal uses of 
California’s indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific 
Books, Champaign. 
 
Train, P., J.R. Henrichs, & W.A. Archer 1941.  
Contributions toward a flora of Nevada, No. 33 .  
Medicinal uses of plants by Indian Tribes of Nevada.  
USDA, The Division of Plant Exploration and 
Introduction, Bureau of Plant Industry.  Washington, 
D.C.  
 
USDA, Natural Resources  Conservation Service 
1999.   Range site descriptions, D30-1-D41-3 .  
Arizona State Office, Phoenix, Arizona. 
 
Whiting, A.F. 1966.   Ethnobotany of the Hopi .  
Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff, Arizona.. 
 
Wyman, L.C. & S.K. Harris 1951.   The ethnobotany 
of the Kayenta Navaho.  University of New Mexico 
Publications in Biology 5.  University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Mark Pater  
USDA, NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center, 
Tucson, Arizona  
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Environmental Horticulture, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.