Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAY EPHEDRA 
Ephedra nevadensis  S. Watson
Plant Symbol = EPNE  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Tucson Plant Materials Center 
 
Warning: Ephedra is considered toxic and should 
be used with caution.  
 
Alternative Names 
Mormon tea, jointfir 
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic: Some tribes 
steeped the twigs and drank the 
tea as a general beverage 
including the Kawaiisu in 
California, the Zuni in New 
Mexico, and the White 
Mountain Apache of Arizona.  
The plant is still prepared as a 
beverage and drank today.  The 
Panamint and Owens Valley 
Paiute of California ate the 
seeds.  The Moapa Paiute and 
Shoshone in the Great Basin 
brewed a tea from the twigs to 
treat venereal diseases.  The Shoshone also imbibed a 
tea to stimulate urination and made the powdered 
twigs into poultices for sores.  The Kawaiisu steeped 
a tea of the twigs for backache.  The Cahuilla in 
southern California made a tea to cure stomach and 
kidney ailments and to cl eanse their system.  The 
Zuni prepared and drunk a tea from the plant, minus 
the root, to treat the first stage of syphilis. 
 
Ephedra's unique and attr active evergreen or gray 
foliage makes it a desirable species for environmental 
plantings.  It is also used in  preparation of herbal teas 
(Keeler 1989). 
 
Wildlife and livestock : Mountain quail eat Ephedra 
seeds.  Deer, bison, and antelope browse the plant.  
Gray ephedra is usually grazed heavily and seems to 
be perfectly safe for grazing livestock since it induces 
neither toxicity in ewes or cows, nor congenital 
deformities in lambs (Keeler 1989).  New seedlings 
should be protected from grazing based on the key 
species in the mix.  Proper  use is based on one-half 
the current year's growth (USDA 1983). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Ephedra Family (Ephedraceae).  Gray 
ephedra is a dioecious, xerophytic shrub with jointed 
or fluted stems and scale-like  leaves.  Leaf scales are 
in twos, 2-6mm long, sheathing to about the middle, 
and obtuse to acute at the  apex.  The inflorescence is 
conelike and the staminate flowers have united 
filaments.  The ovulate spikes are distinctly stalked 
and the seeds are usually paired. 
Alfred Brousseau @ Brother Eric 
Vogel, St. Mary’s  College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
Gray ephedra occurs naturally on flats and slopes in 
all the creosote bush deserts at mostly 1,000 to 4,000 
ft (305-1,220 m) elevation and sometimes it is found 
in the desert grassland up to 5,000 ft. (1,524 m).  It 
inhabits California in the eastern Mojave and 
Colorado deserts, southern Nevada in Clark and 
Lincoln counties, southwestern Utah, Arizona in the 
Grand Canyon area and in the Mojave.  It also occurs 
in Arizona and Colorado deserts, New Mexico along 
the Gila and Pecos river drainage, TransPecos Texas, 
the Edwards Plateau, and at scattered locations on the 
Rio Grande Plain, Baja California to Coahuila and 
Central Mexico (Benson and Darrow 1981).  
Characteristic species ar e creosotebush, white 
bursage, Joshua tree, blac kbrush, catclaw, burrobush, 
big galleta, Indian ricegrass, black grama, bush 
muhly, and desert needlegrass.   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
On good seed years abundant collections of ephedra 
seeds can be obtained by flailing the fruiting 
branches over an open tray (Young 1986).  Seed is 
harvested by hand from native stands.  No seed fields 
have been established and no work has been done to 
determine the best method of mechanically 
harvesting the seed.  The plants' response to clipping 
for harvest is also undetermined (USDA 1983).  
Collected seed was cleaned with ease to a high purity 
with a fanning mill equipped with a No. 12 top screen 
and a No. 1/12 bottom screen (Kay 1975a).

The seeds germinate best at alternating temperature 
requirements with quite cold nighttime temperatures.  
Seedlings grow rapidly and  can be easily transplanted 
(Young 1986).  Germination of gray ephedra seed 
was optimal when the temperature alternated between 
20 C (16 hours) and 25 C (2 hours).  It germinates 
well in the range of 10 and 20 C, but is highest at 20 
C (Kay 1977). 
 
Gray ephedra should perform best on limy sites, most 
textures, excluding clay and silty clay textures.  
According to Young, Evans, and Kay (1977), 
Ephedra nevadensis appears to have an adaptation for 
seed germination under osmotic potentials as low as -
12 bars and thus could be seeded in salt-desert 
conditions.  Depth-of-planting studies resulted in the 
emergence of 30% (42% on a viable-seed basis, with 
insect damaged seed removed) from a depth of 1 cm 
over a 10-day period with temperatures averaging 
about 10 C.  Total emergence was similar at 2 cm, 
though slightly delayed.  Roughly 13% (18% viable 
seed) emergence, delayed further, was recorded for 4 
cm (Kay 1975).  Seed storage at room temperature 
for 12 months after maturity reduced germinability 
(Young 1977). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
EPNE is available through native plant nurseries and 
seed companies within its range.  Seeds and plants of 
selected  Ephedra cultivars are available from many 
nurseries.  It is best to plant species from your local 
area, adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Benson & Darrow 1981.  Trees and shrubs of the 
southwestern deserts .  The University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona.   
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986   Subsistence.  pp. 64-97, IN  
Handbook of North American Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin.   Warren L. D'azevedo [Ed.]. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington D.C. 
 
Jordan, G.L.   Range seeding and brush management 
of Arizona rangelands .  Cooperative Extension 
Service, Agricultural Experiment Station, University 
of Arizona, College of Agriculture. 
 
Kay, B.L. 1975.   Test of seeds of Mojave Desert 
shrubs .  Progress report.  BLM Contract No. 53500-
CT4-2 (N).  24pp. 
 
Kay, B.L. C.M. Ross, W. L. Graves, & C.R. Brown 
1977.   Mojave revegetation notes .  Agronomy and 
Range Science No. 19. 
 
Kearney, T.H. & R. H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Keeler, R.F. 1989.   Investigation of material and 
embryo/fetal toxicity of Ephedra viridis and Ephedra 
nevadensis in sheep and cattle .  Journal of Range 
Management 42(1). 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Pater, M. 1991.   Documentation of a plant accession 
selected for advanced testing .  USDA, NRCS, 
Tucson Plant Materials Center, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Reagan, A.B. 1929.   Plants used by the White 
Mountain Apache Indians of Arizona .  Wisconsin 
Archeologist 8(4):143-160. 
 
Stevenson, M.C. 1915.   Ethnobotany of the Zuni 
Indians .  Pages 35-102 IN:  Bureau of American 
ethnology thirtieth annual report 1908-1909 .  
Smithsonian Institution.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Strike, S.S. & E.D. Roeder 1994.   Ethnobotany of the 
California Indians.  Volume 2.   Aboriginal uses of 
California’s indigenous plants.   Koeltz Scientific 
Books, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
Train, P., J.R. Henrichs, & W.A. Archer 1941.  
Contributions toward a flora of Nevada,  No. 33 .  
Medicinal uses of plants by Indian tribes of Nevada.   
USDA, The Division of Plant Exploration and 
Introduction, Bureau of Plant Industry, Washington, 
D.C.  
 
USDA, Soil Conservation Service 1983.  
Management and uses of mormon-tea .  Arizona State 
Office, Phoenix, Arizona. 
 
Wyman, L.C. & S.K. Harris 1951.   The ethnobotany 
of the Kayenta Navaho.  University of New Mexico 
Publications in Biology 5.  University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Young, J.A. & C.G. 1986.  Collecting, processing 
and germinating seeds of wildland pl ants.  Timber 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Young, J.A., R.A. Evans, & B.L. Kay 1977.   Ephedra 
seed germination.  Agronomy Journal 69. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat & Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Mark Pater 
USDA, NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center 
Tucson, Arizona  
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.