Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STREAMBANK 
WHEATGRASS 
Elymus lanceolatus  (Scribn. & 
J.G. Sm.) Gould  
Plant Symbol = ELLA3  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office & 
the National Plant Data Center 
 USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Two subspecies are recognized for this species: Both 
are known by the common name, streambank 
wheatgrass Elymus lanceolatus  ssp. psammophilus  
Gillett & Senn (formerly  Agropyron riparium) 
though  Elymus lanceolatus ssp.  lanceolatus (Scribn 
& J.G. Sm.) Gould (formerly  Agropyron 
dasystachyum ) sometimes goes by thickspike 
wheatgrass.  This is a perennial, sod-forming grass.  
It is a long-lived, cool season native with an 
extensive rhizomatous root  system combined with a 
few deep roots. 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Streambank wheatgrass 
is not recommended for forage production.  
Streambank wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It  is a preferred feed for 
cattle, sheep, horses, and elk in spring and is 
considered a desirable feed for deer and antelope in 
spring.  It is considered a desirable feed for cattle, 
sheep, horses, and elk in summer, fall, and winter.  In 
the spring, the protein levels can be as high as 20 
percent and decreases to about 4 percent, as it 
matures and cures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain 
about 45 percent throughout the active growth period.  
This species is generally a relatively low forage 
producer (exceptions - 'Bannock' and 'Secar'), but can 
be utilized as native hay when planted in association 
with other species.  It has been noted as one of the 
highest forage producers in the Red Desert and Big 
Horn Basin of Wyoming.  Streambank wheatgrass 
can be used for hay production and will make 
nutritious feed, but is more suited to pasture use.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Streambank wheatgrass 
( E. lanceolatus  ssp. lanceolatus ) and (E. lanceolatus  
ssp.  psammophilus ) are well adapted to the 
stabilization of disturbed so ils.  They do not compete 
well with aggressive introduced grasses during the 
establishment period, but are very compatible with 
slower developing natives, such as Snake River 
wheatgrass ( Elymus wawawaiensis ), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ),  
Western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii), and 
needlegrass ( Stipa spp.) species.  Their drought 
tolerance combined with rhizomes, fibrous root 
systems, and good seedling vigor make these species 
ideal for reclamation in areas receiving 8 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  Th ey are commonly used for 
reclamation in the Red Desert of Wyoming, where 
annual rainfall is 5 to 9 inches (50 - 70 percent 
growing season precipitation).  Streambank 
wheatgrass’ low growth form, vigorous sod, and low 
maintenance requirements make it ideal for 
stabilization and ground cover purposes.  These 
grasses can be used in urban areas where irrigation 
water is limited to provide ground cover and to 
stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and roadsides. 
 
Status 
This is a native species.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s cu rrent status, such as, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Streambank 
wheatgrass has moderately short stems and 
seedheads.  E. lanceolatus ssp.  lanceolatus grows 
from 1 to 3 feet tall and under ideal conditions seed 
spikes may be 10 inches long.  The auricles of both 
are pointed and semi-clasping.  Leaves are 4-8 mm 
wide and green to blue-green in color. The lemmas, 
paleas, and glumes are generally pubescent. 
Streambank wheatgrass has no pubescence in the 
inflorescence. 
 
Distribution 
This species is common to the northern Great Plains 
and Intermountain regions of the western United 
States.  For current distribu tion of this species and its 
relatives, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Streambank wheatgrasses are similar to 
western wheatgrass in app earance, except they are 
not as coarse, their rhizomatous trait is not as 
aggressive, and their coloration is somewhat greener.  
They are more drought tolerant than western 
wheatgrass.  In comparison  to western wheatgrass, 
they “green up” and “head out” earlier and total 
biomass production is generally lower.  Both 
wheatgrasses do better on medium to coarse textured 
soils.  Subspecies  psammophilus can be found on 
slightly heavy to medium to coarse textured soils.  
Western wheatgrass may be a better choice on heavy 
textured soils if rainfall is high enough.  They will 
tolerate slightly acidic to moderately saline 
conditions.  They are cold tolerant, can withstand 
moderate periodic flooding in the spring, are 
moderately shade tolerant, and very tolerant of fire.  
They will not tolerate long periods of inundation, 
poorly drained soils, or excessive irrigation.  Snake 
River wheatgrass prefers deep to shallow medium to 
coarse textured soils. 
 
On native sites, streambank and Snake River 
wheatgrasses are most abundant in the 8 to 20 inch 
annual precipitation zones.  Seeded varieties do best 
with 10 to 20 inches of precipitation.  They have been 
seeded as low as 5 to 9 in ches of precipitation with 
some success.  The natural geographic range of  E. 
lanceolatus  ssp. lanceolatus  is from near sea level in 
the Great Lakes region to  10,000 feet in the Rocky 
Mountains.  The natural range of streambank 
wheatgrass is primarily the intermountain west.  
Subspecies  lanceolatus is a very polymorphic species 
and is a component of the vegetation on such diverse 
sites as stabilized sand dunes in eastern Washington,  glacial outwash fans in Montana and loess (wind 
blown silt loam) soils in southern Idaho.  They are 
components of many native plant communities and 
generally occupy less than 10 percent of the overall 
composition.  An exception to this may be short 
periods following fire in Juniper stands, when they 
may nearly dominate the site.  
 
Species often associated 
with these wheatgrasses 
include the following: the big sagebrush ( Artemisia 
tridentata ) complex, juniper ( Juniperus spp.), 
needlegrasses, sand dropseed ( Sporobolis airoides), 
prairie sandreed ( Calamovilfa longifolia ), bluebunch 
wheatgrass, Snake River wheatgrass, and Idaho 
fescue ( Festuca idahoensis ). 
 
Planting: These species should be seeded with a drill 
at a depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine 
textured soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured 
soils.  Single species seeding rates recommended for 
both grasses are 6 to 8 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) 
or 20 to 25 PLS per square foot.  If used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  
For mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the 
seeding rate should be increased to 40 to 50 PLS per 
square foot.  Mulching and light irrigation are 
beneficial for stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Late summer (August - mid September) seedings are 
not recommended unless irrigation is available.  Pre-
chilling seed aids germination.  Seedling vigor is 
good to excellent, exceeding that of western 
wheatgrass, but less than crested wheatgrass 
( Agropyron cristatum ). 
 
Both wheatgrasses establish fairly quickly, more 
quickly than western wheatgrass.  They are the most 
rapidly establishing native species next to slender 
wheatgrass (Elymus trachycaulus ).  They are 
compatible with other species and can be used in 
seeding mixtures.  They should not be seeded with 
strongly competitive introduced species.  Under 
favorable conditions, they can become a good weed 
barrier. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce seed development.  Grasshoppers and other 
insects may also damage new stands and the use of 
pesticides may be required.

Management 
This grass begins growth in the spring about 2 weeks 
after bluegrass (Poa spp.) species and about 3 weeks 
earlier than western wheatgrass.  They make good 
spring growth, fair summer growth, and good fall 
growth if moisture is available.  
 
Streambank wheatgrass is not recommended for 
forage production.  Streambank and Snake River 
wheatgrass have good palatability for livestock and 
wildlife.  Livestock  and wildlife will graze 
streambank and Snake River wheatgrass throughout 
the growing season, until they becomes too coarse 
toward fall.  Established stands can withstand heavy 
grazing.  
 
Stands of these wheatgra sses should not be grazed 
until they have firmly established and have headed 
out.  Six inches of new growth should be attained in 
spring before grazing is allowed in established 
stands. 
 
These wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants, 
requiring little additional treatment or care.  
However, on better sites, stands can become 
sodbound (exception Snake River wheatgrass) and 
may need attention in the form of fertilization and 
moderate spring/fall deferment.  Stands may also 
benefit from ripping if sod-bound conditions occur to 
increase forage production.  Care should be taken to 
avoid excessive tillage because stands may be 
damaged.  
 
Both wheatgrasses are competitive with weedy 
species, but can be crowded out by some aggressive 
introduced species.  
 
Environmental Concerns : Streambank wheatgrass is 
long-lived, spread primarily via vegetative means 
(rhizomes), but also spread  via seed distribution.  
They are not considered "weedy" or invasive species, 
but can spread into adjoining vegetative communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  
Most seedings do not spread from original plantings, 
or if they do spread, the rate of spread is not 
alarming.  They will probably cross with each other, 
but are not noted for crossing with other natives.  
 
Snake River wheatgrass is long lived and spreads 
primarily via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions.  Most 
seedings do not spread from original plantings.  It is a 
cross-pollinating species and is known to cross with 
bluebunch wheatgrass, quackgrass ( Elymus repens), and bottlebrush squirreltail (
Elymus elymoides).  
These crosses broaden the gene pool and do not 
generally dominate a site or crowds out the native 
ecotype and in many cases are sterile. 
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of stream bank wheatgrass has been 
very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row 
spacing of 28 to 36 inches are recommended 
(although rhizomatous, they should be maintained in 
rows).  Cultivation may be needed to maintain rows.  
 
Seed fields are productive for two to four years.  
Average production of 100 to 250 pounds per acre 
can be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch 
plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 200 to 400 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  Swathing, followed by combining of the 
cured windrows, best completes harvesting.  The seed 
heads readily shatter and require close scrutiny of 
maturing stands. Seed is generally harvested in mid 
July to mid August. 
 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Wheatgrass seed should be available through your 
local vendor. 
 
'Bannock' (E. lanceolatus  ssp. lanceolatus ) was 
developed by the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and released in 1995. It is a composite of collections 
from The Dalles, Oregon ; Pocatello, Idaho; and 
Quincy, Washington.  It is adapted to the Northwest 
and Intermountain regions where precipitation 
averages 8 inches or above.  It prefers moderately 
deep loamy soils, but does grow in sandy to clayey 
soils.  It is noted for rapid establishment, moderate 
formation of sod, high forage production and ability 
to survive and thrive under dry conditions.  Certified 
seed is available and Aberdeen PMC maintains 
breeder seed. 
 
'Critana' ( E. lanceolatus  ssp. lanceolatus ) was 
developed by the Bridger Plant Materials Center and 
released in 1971.  The original collection site was in 
north central Montana near  Havre. It is drought 
tolerant, has good seedling vigor and readily 
establishes on critically disturbed sites. I t is 
especially good as a sand dune stabilization species. 
"Critana' is noted for its variable genetic expression.  
Certified seed is available and Bridger PMC 
maintains breeder seed.

'Schwendimar' (E. lanceolatus ssp. lanceolatus ) was 
developed by the Pullman Plant Materials Center and 
released in 1994.  It was collected on wind blown 
sands along the Columbia River near The Dalles, 
Oregon.  It is adapted to northwest sites with 8 inches 
or greater precipitation and is recommended 
primarily for quick stabilization of coarse textured 
soils.  Certified seed is limited and Pullman PMC 
maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Secar' ( E.  wawawaiensis ) is a cultivar of Snake 
River wheatgrass and was originally identified as a 
variety of bluebunch wheatgrass.  The original 
collection site is along the Snake River gorge near 
Lewiston, Idaho.  It was released by the Pullman 
Plant Materials Center in 1980. It is adapted to 8 inch 
plus rainfall zones.  It is a bunchgrass with good 
seedling vigor and establishes well under drought 
conditions.  See bluebunch wheatgrass Plant Guide 
for discussion on management and use.  Certified 
seed is available and Pullman PMC maintains breeder 
seed. 
 
'Sodar' ( E. lanceolatus  ssp. psammophilus ) was 
released by the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center in 
1954.  The original collection was made in Grant 
County, Oregon.  Its drought tolerance, excellent 
seedling vigor, vigorous rhizomatous trait once 
established, and ability to compete with weeds 
characterizes it.  It is most commonly used for 
stabilization of critical sites.  Certified seed is 
available and breeder seed is  maintained by Aberdeen 
PMC. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Carlson, J.R. & M.E. Barkworth 1997.   Elymus 
wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Triticeae, Poaceae) .  
Phytologia 83:312-330.  
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.   Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000413.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State  Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited: 28mar02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.