Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLENDER 
WHEATGRASS 
Elymus trachycaulus  (Link) 
Gould ex Shinners ssp.  trachycaulus 
Plant Symbol = ELTRT  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
                                          
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Agropyron trachycaulum, Agropyron caninum  var. 
andinum . 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/pasture : Slender wheatgrass is 
both palatable and nutritious to livestock. Crude 
protein averages 22 to 25% in the spring and drops  below 10% in late summer to fall. Average dry 
matter yield is between 1000 and 2300 lb/acre. 
 
Wildlife
: Upland game birds and small mammals 
utilize the seed for food and the foliage for cover. 
Large ungulates, especially elk and bighorn sheep at 
higher elevations, readily graze this species. 
 
Erosion control : Slender wheatgrass is a short-lived 
perennial with good seedling vigor. It germinates and 
establishes quickly when seeded making it a good 
choice for quick cover on disturbed sites. It persists 
long enough for other, slower developing 
components of seeding mixtures to establish.  
 Jeanne R. Janish.  1977. © The New York Botanical Garden 
 
Reclamation : Slender wheatgrass was among the first 
native grasses widely used  for reclamation seedings 
in western Canada and the U.S. It has been 
successfully used for the reclamation of mine spoils, 
oil sands, roadsides right-of -ways, wildfire areas and 
other disturbed sites. It is especially valuable for use 
in saline soils. 
 
Legal Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Taxonomy 
Historically, slender wheatgrass has borne many 
different names. Carl Linnaeus originally placed all 
wheatgrasses in the genus  Triticum along with 
cultivated wheat. Later authors classified slender 
wheatgrass as  Agropyron caninum, however, it was 
separated to  A. trachycaulum  from that Old World 
species by having broader glumes (5 to 7 nerves 
instead of 3), glumes with membranous margins (not 
rigid), and having anthers averaging 1.5 mm long as 
opposed to 2mm. More recently, it was decided 
through the use of molecu lar, morphological and 
cladistic analysis that in  North America, the genus 
Agropyron  should be left to the introduced crested 
wheatgrass complex ( A. cristatum, A. desertorum  and 
A. fragile ), which moved slender wheatgrass to the 
genus Elymus . This move also required the change of 
the epithet to  trachycaulus in order to match the Latin 
genders. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae). Slender 
wheatgrass is an erect, tuft ed, bunchgrass ranging in

height from 2 to 2-1/2 feet.  It is a relatively short-
lived (3 to 5 years) perennial, cool-season C3 type, 
bunchgrass native to Western North America. 
 
Plants are perennial, occasionally producing short 
rhizomes. Culms are erect or decumbent at the base, 
reaching a height of 0.5 to 1.0 meters (20 to 40 
inches) tall. Stems are noted as having a 
characteristic reddish to purplish tinge at the base. 
The leaves are flat, usually 2 to 8 mm (0.08 to 0.31 
inches) wide, stiffly ascending or somewhat lax. 
Sheathes are commonly glabrous or somewhat 
scabrous with auricles  short or lacking.  
 
The inflorescence is a long, spicate raceme ranging 
from 5 to as much as 25  cm (2 to 10 inches) long. 
Spikelets are solitary at each node of the rachis, 3 to 
7 flowered and about 10 to 20 mm (0.4 to 0.8 inches) 
long. Spikelets overlap al ong the inflorescence, the 
rachis internodes being 5 to 8 mm (0.2 to 0.3inches) 
long. Glumes are lanceolate to oblong with 5 to 7 
nerves. The first glume ranges from 6 to 10 mm (0.24 
to 0.4 inches) long, while second glumes are slightly 
longer, from 7 to 12 mm (0.3 to 0.5 inches). 
 
Distribution 
Slender wheatgrass is found in many plant 
communities including Wyoming, basin and 
mountain big sagebrush, mountain brush, aspen, 
ponderosa pine, spruce-fir and lodgepole pine. It is 
found from 1300 to 3500 meters (4,500 to 12,000 
feet) in elevation. The species range includes Canada, 
Siberia, Mexico and all states except those in the 
southeastern U.S.  
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation 
Slender wheatgrass grows naturally in moist to dry 
sites receiving more than 250 mm (10 inches) annual 
precipitation. This species is not as drought tolerant 
as crested, thickspike and streambank wheatgrasses 
and may succumb to drought due to its late 
maturation. It prefers loamy  to clayey soils and grows 
at elevations from 1,300 to 3,500 meters (4,500 to 
12,000 feet). Slender wheatgrass is well adapted to 
basic soils (up to pH=8.8) and moderately saline 
conditions with a salinity tolerance ranging from 10 
to 20 mmhos/cm.  
 
Establishment 
Seeds should be planted in  a firm, weed-free seed 
bed. Dormant fall planting is preferred for dryland 
seedings made in areas receiving less than 16 inches  mean annual precipitation. 
Areas receiving over 16 
inches of mean annual precipitation and fields that 
are irrigated can be seeded in late fall or early spring. 
(Note: dormant fall seedings are more prone to be 
negatively affected by soil crusting and mid to late 
spring seedings are more prone to drying out). 
 
Seeds should be drilled to a depth of ¼ to ¾ inch at a 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) rate of approximately 6 lb 
PLS/acre for field plantings.  
 
For critical area plantings, turf applications and 
broadcast plantings the PLS seeding rate should be 
1.5 to 2.0 times the drill seeding rate. 
 
For native seed mixtures, lim it slender wheatgrass to 
1 to 2 pounds PLS/acre because higher rates effect 
the establishment of slower developing native 
species. 
 
Fertilizer is not recommended for establishment, as it 
usually benefits the weeds. On disturbed sites 
fertilizer should be applied according to soil test 
results. 
 
Management 
Slender wheatgrass is best suited as a filler 
component in seed mixtures containing slower 
establishing, long-lived perennials. It does well for 
hay and pasture when co mbined with legumes. 
Because this species is short-lived and only 
moderately tolerant of grazing, stands should be 
managed carefully to ensure seed production occurs 
every other year for long-term survival. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Although slender wheatgrass is native to Western 
North America, it can be viewed as “weedy” due to 
its ability to quickly establish in disturbed areas.  
 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service Office or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding this 
species’ status and use. We ed information is also 
available from the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Seed Production 
Plant at a rate of approx imately 3.4 pounds PLS/acre 
or 25 to 30 seeds per linear foot of drill row at 36 
inch row spacing. 
 
For stand establishment, apply 55 lb/acre of 11-55-0 
(high phosphorus fertilizer) as a soil amendment prior 
to planting or during seeding. If planting into grain 
stubble, after initial seedling establishment, apply 30 
lb/acre nitrogen for dryland or 60 to 80 lb/acre

nitrogen for irrigated fields. No additional nitrogen is 
necessary if planting into summer fallow. Irrigate 
enough to keep soil moist for establishment and to 
prevent soil crusting. Seeds should germinate within 
8 to 10 days. Weeds can be controlled after the 3 to 5 
leaf stage with low rates of Bromoxynil. Be sure to 
read and follow all label directions when using any 
pesticide. Caution should be exercised when using 
cultivation on young seedlings because of the 
possibility of uprooting.  
 
For established stands, apply 50 lb/acre nitrogen each 
year in late fall on dryland and 60 to 80 lb/acre 
nitrogen in late fall under irrigation. 
 
On established stands keep soil moisture above fifty 
percent field capacity during the growth period. 
Before the flowering stage apply enough water to 
carry plants through pollination. After pollination, 
irrigate to recharge the soil profile for seed set.  
Control weeds chemically (Bromoxynil, Metribuzin, 
2,4-D or dicamba), by roguing or mechanical 
cultivating.  
 
Seed is ready for harvest in late July to early August. 
The recommended harvest method is by direct 
combining or by swathing followed by combining. 
Windrows should be allowed to dry in the field for 6 
to 7 days before combining.  
 
Seed yields range from 200  to 400 lb/acre in dryland 
to 500 to 600 lb/acre under irrigation. Seed should be 
dried to 12 percent or less moisture prior to storage. 
When stored properly, cleaned seed should retain its 
viability for about five years. Stands can be expected 
to survive for 3 to 5 years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No insect or disease problems have been noted for 
this species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
‘Adanac’ was released by  the Agriculture Canada, 
Saskatoon Research Station and the Agriculture 
Canada Experiment Farm in 1990. Plants are taller 
than those of Revenue, but have fewer leaves. 
Adanac averaged 7% higher hay yields than Revenue 
during a four-year study.  Adanac also rated higher 
than Revenue in establishment, persistence, seed 
yield and productivity under saline conditions. 
However, digestibility and protein content are 
somewhat below those of Revenue. This release is 
recommended for use in Saskatchewan, Canada. 
Breeder seed is maintained by the Agriculture 
Canada, Saskatoon Research Station and the 
Agriculture Canada Experiment Farm, Indian Head. 
 
‘Elbee’ was released in 1980 by S. Smoliak and A. 
Johnson of Agriculture Canada Research Station, 
Lethbridge, Alberta. This is an eight-clone synthetic 
variety selected for aggressiveness of rhizomes, and 
forage and seed yields. This variety has excellent 
germination, high seedling vigor, drought tolerance, 
early spring growth and an aggressive root system. It 
is primarily intended for range and pasture seedings 
in the dark soil zones of  the prairies as well as for 
revegetation of roadsides and industrial disturbances. 
Breeder seed is available through Agriculture Canada 
Research Station, Lethbridge, Alberta. 
 
‘AEC Hillcrest’ was released by the Alberta 
Environmental Centre in 1994. Its primary uses are in 
reclaiming and revegetation of disturbed sites in the 
mountains and foothills of Alberta. This cultivar 
belongs to a different subspecies than the others 
discussed here ( Elymus trachycaulus  ssp. 
subsecundus ) and is therefore difficult to compare 
directly. Data show AEC Hillcrest producing similar 
plant cover to Revenue at elevations around 1800 
meters. Hillcrest seeds also tend to ripen two weeks 
earlier than Revenue, an important quality in the 
shortened growing season of Alberta. Breeder seed is 
maintained by the Alberta Environmental Centre, 
Vegreville, Alberta. Foundation and Certified seed is 
maintained by Peace Valley S eeds, Rycroft, Alberta. 
 
‘Primar’ was released by the NRCS Plant Materials 
Center in Pullman, Washington in 1946. Originally 
collected near Beebe, Montana, Primar was selected 
for use in sweetclover-grass conservation mixtures 
for pasture, hay and green manure. Plants are high in 
vegetative production and show resistance to leaf 
rust, stem rust and stripe rust. This cultivar is adapted 
to short-lived dr yland seedings in areas receiving 
over 16” annual precipitation. Pullman Plant 
Materials Center maintains Breeder seed and 
Washington Crop Improvement Association maintain 
Foundation seed.  
 
‘Pryor’ was released cooperatively by the NRCS 
Plant Materials Center in Bridger, Montana and the 
Montana and Wyoming Agricultural Experiment 
Stations in 1988. The original collection was made in 
Carbon County, Montana, five miles north of 
Warren. It is superior to other previously released 
slender wheatgrasses in dr ought tolerance, saline 
tolerance and seedling vigor. It also matures earlier 
and has a larger mean seed  size (213,000 seeds/kg 
compared to 320,000 seeds/kg). For these reasons it 
is used primarily in mixt ures for reclamation and 
conservation plantings in low precipitation, alkali 
conditions. Breeder and Foundation seed are

maintained by the NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana.  
 
‘Revenue’ was originally collected in Saskatchewan 
in 1961. It was selected from over 750 native and 
introduced collections evaluated between 1959 and 
1969 and released in 1970 by the Canada Department 
of Agriculture. Revenue is said to be superior to 
Primar in establishment, forage and seed yield and in 
salinity tolerance. It also has a higher leaf-to-stem 
ratio, better digestibility and greater smut resistance 
than Primar. It is similar to Primar in maintaining 
good stands for three to five years. It is adapted for 
use on saline soils and in short pasture rotations. 
Breeder seed is maintained by the Canada 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
‘San Luis’ was released cooperatively in 1984 by 
Colorado, and New Mexico Agricultural Experiment 
Stations, NRCS, and the Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center. The original collection 
was made by Glenn Niner in 1975 near Center, San 
Luis Valley, Rio Grande County, Colorado. Due to 
its outstanding rapid establishment and longevity it is 
well suited for soil stabilization on slopes and 
disturbed sites. It performs best above 1,800 meters 
elevation in areas receiving  over 35 cm (14 inches) of 
annual precipitation. It is recommended for ski 
slopes, roadsides, mine land reclamation and 
transmission corridors. Breeder and Foundation seed 
is maintained by the Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and W. C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 
the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
 
Barkworth, M.E. 1997. Taxonomic and 
nomenclatural comments on the Triticeae in North 
America.  Phytologia . 83(4): 302-311. 
 
Block, D.N.  Rangeland Ecosystems and Plants: 
Elymus trachycaulus.  
(
http://www.usask.ca/agriculture/plantsci/classes/ran
ge/agropyrontrach.html, 3 December 2004). 
Department of Plant Sciences. University of 
Saskatchewan, (insert city). 
 
Cornforth, B., L. St. John and D. G. Ogle. 2001.  Seed 
production standards for conservation plants in the 
Intermountain West. Technical Note 14. USDA-
NRCS, Boise.  
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977.  Intermountain flora: vascular  plants of the intermountain West, USA. The New 
York Botanical Garden, Bronx. 
 
Darroch, B.A. and S.N. Acharya. 1996. AEC 
Hillcrest awned slender wheatgrass. Can. J. 
Plant Sci. 
76: 345-347. 
 
Haas, R.J., K.K. Sedivec, & D.A. Tober. 1997.  Grass 
varieties for North Dakota .  Extension Service 
Circular R-794. 
(
http://www.ext.nodak.edu/extpubs/hay.htm).  North 
Dakota State University, Bismarck.   
 
Hitchcock, A.S.  1951.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States . USDA, Washington, D.C.   
 
Janish, J.R.  1969.   Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest, Part 1: Vascular Cryptogams, 
Gymnosperms, and Monocotyledons.  University of 
Washington Press, Seattle. 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2003.  Grass, grass-like, forb, legume, 
and woody species for the intermountain West . 
Technical Note 24. USDA-NRCS, Boise. 
 
Poole, B., J. Dickerson, B. Wark, D. Burgdorf, R. 
Maher, T. Bush, & C. Miller. 1998.   Vegetating with 
native grasses in northeastern North America . 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Program and Ducks 
Unlimited Canada.  
 
Skinner, David M. 2004. Propagation protocol for 
production of Elymus trachycaulus (Link) Gould ex 
Shinners seeds; Pullman Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington. 
(
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 3 December 
2004). University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Resear ch Nursery, Moscow. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000417.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2004. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 
(http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge. 
 
Van Bruggen, T. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames. 
 
Wark, D.B., W.R. Poole, R.G. Arnott, L.R. Moats, & 
L. Wetter 1994.   Revegetating with native grasses .  
Ducks Unlimited Canada, Stonewall.

Prepared By:  
Derek J. Tilley 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Larry Holzworth  
USDA NRCS Montana St ate Office, Bozeman, 
Montana 
 
Wayne Crowder 
USDA NRCS Plant Mate rials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 
Mark Majerus  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, 
Montana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 10Dec04djt; 21jan05dgo; 1Jan05lsj; 6Jan05wac; 
14Jan05lkh, 20Jan05 rln; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.