Plant Guide
COMMON WOOLLY 
SUNFLOWER  
Eriophyllum lanatum  (Pursh) 
Forbes  
Plant Symbol = ERLA6  
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA  
 
 Eriophyllum lanatum.  Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Herbarium  
Alternate Names 
Oregon sunshine, golden yarrow, yarrow leaved 
eriophyllum,  dwarf woolly sunflower, Pursh’s 
wool yleaf  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat:   Eriophyllum lanatam  attracts 
beetles, syrphid  flies, bees, moths and butterflies  
(Mooring 1975) .  Butterflies that are known to visit 
this plant include:  orang e sulfur, red admiral, 
comma,  and  skipper  (Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower 
Center 2011) .  An endangered butterfly in Oregon,  Fender’s Blue
 ( Icar icia icarioides fenderi)  relies on 
E.  lanatum  for a source of nectar (Schultz 2001).  
 
Ornamental:   This plant is hardy to Zone 3 and can 
be used in perennial borders, along pathways, and in 
rock gardens and embankments (Rugged Country 
Plants 2011). T he Lady Bird Wildflower Center 
(2011) recommends selecting a local ecotype, 
pla nting several plants in a group,  and pruning the 
dead branches.  
 
Rangeland vegetation:   This plant is quick to 
establish and can be used for revegetation and 
diversification  of rangeland in a variety of  habitats.     
 
Ethnobotanical:  People of the  Miwok tribe made a 
poultice of the leaves of this plant and bound them to 
aching parts of the body; the Skagit rubbed the lea ves 
on skin to prevent chapping;  and the Chehalis used 
the drie d flowers as a love charm (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database 2011).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  
Eriophyllum lanatum is a native forb or subshrub , 
and  may be a n annual, biennial, or  short- or long-
lived perennial d epending on site conditions.  It  has a 
multi -branched , erect to spreading  form  and  grows to 
10 to 60  cm (4 to 24  in) tall.  Stems and leaves are 
covered with white hairs.  Leaves are 2.5 to 7.5 cm (1 
to 3 in) long and irregularly divided into narrow 
lobes.  Flowers are solitary , on long peduncles and 
bloom Ma y through July.  The flower head is 4 to 6.5 
cm (1.5 to 2.5 in) wide with  golden yellow disk 
flowers and 8 to 12 yellow  ray flowers, each 1.5 to 2 
cm ( 0.6 to 0.8 in) long.  Flower bracts are broad, 
erect and keeled.  S eed is narrow, smooth , has four 
angles  and a crown of scales or  short pappus .  ( Burke 
Museum  of Natural History and Culture 2011; 
Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973; Knopf 2001; Lady 
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center 2011; Mooring 
2001 ). 
 
This plant was first collected by Lewis and Clark 
along the Clearwater River near Kamiah , Idaho, on 
June 6, 1806  (Lewis and Clark Herbarium 2011) .  It 
was named Actinella lanata by Pursh and renamed  
Eriophyllum lanatum by Forbes. The genus name