Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BOTTLEBRUSH 
SQUIRRELTAIL & 
BIG SQUIRRELTAIL 
Elymus elymoides  (Raf.) 
Swezey 
& 
Elymus multisetus  M.E. Jones 
Plant Symbol = ELEL5 & ELMU3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
For E. histrix : Elymus elymoides  (Raf.) Swezey var. 
brevifolius  (J.G. Sm.) Barkworth;  Elymus elymoides 
(Raf.) Swezey ssp.  californicus (J.G. Sm.) 
Barkworth;  Elymus elymoides  (Raf.) Swezey ssp. 
elymoides ; Elymus elymoides  (Raf.) Swezey ssp. 
hordeoides  (Suksdorf) Barkworth;  Sitanion hystrix 
(Nutt.) J.G. Smith;  Elymus hystrix L. var. bigeloviana 
(Fern.) Bowden and Elymus hystri x L. var. histrix 
For E. multisetus : Sitanion jubatum  J.G. Sm. 
 
Uses 
Reclamation/re-vegetation : Squirreltail displays 
many qualities which make it a good choice for what 
has been described as “assisted succession.” It is a 
short-lived perennial grass  which can act as an early-
seral species by competing with and replacing annual 
weedy species following fire. It is thought that after 
squirreltail establishes, annual weedy species should 
decrease in frequency an d longer-lived, native 
perennials may be more successfully reseeded and 
established.  
 
Its ability to germinate in the late fall and very early 
spring at a wide range of temperatures add to its 
capability to compete with cheatgrass ( Bromus 
tectorum  L.). Studies also indicate that squirreltail is 
capable of establishing  in medusahead wildrye 
( Taeniatherum caput-medusae  (L.) Nevski) infested 
sites. This makes squirreltail one of the more 
competitive native grasses available for reseeding 
disturbed rangelands. It is also a self-fertilizing 
species which allows it to produce seed despite 
sparse stands following seeding.  
 Image courtesy of Mike Haddock Kansas State University Used with permission
 
Squirreltail is considered to be one of the most fire 
resistant native bunchgrasses. Older plants contain 
relatively low amounts of dead material when 
compared with other native bunchgrasses. This 
allows for hot, but quick burns which do not 
penetrate and damage the crown. However, during 
dry years plants can be damaged by severe burns. As 
an early-seral species, new plants often increase for 
two to three years following burns.  
 
Erosion control : When in large, dense stands, 
squirreltail is very effective at controlling wind and 
water erosion, due to its persistent ground cover.  
 
Forage/wildlife : Squirreltail is considered to be fair 
to desirable forage for cattle, horses and sheep in 
spring before seed head development and late 
summer to fall after seed shatter. The long, sharp 
awns of the florets and gl umes can be injurious to 
grazing animals during mid to late spring into 
summer. Leaves green up in very early spring and are 
palatable through the fall, especially following rain. 
The tendency for some leaves to remain green 
through the winter makes squirreltail an important, 
though not especially nutritious, winter forage 
species. Table 1 shows crude protein levels for the 
spring, summer and winter.

Table 1. Crude protein levels by season 
 % Crude protein 
Spring 18.5 
Summer 8.0 
Winter 4.3 
(Adapted from Monsen et al, 2004 ) 
 
Legal Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Taxonomy 
Though bottlebrush and big squirreltail are 
commonly referred to as  Sitanion hystrix (Nutt.) J.G. 
Smith and  Sitanion jubatum  J.G. Smith, respectively, 
squirreltail is becoming more widely accepted 
through cytological and  molecular evidence as 
belonging to the genus  Elymus.   
 
The squirreltail complex,  Elymus section  Sitanion , is 
composed of two species, E . multisetus  (J.G. Sm.) 
M.E. Jones (big squirreltail) and  E. elymoides  (Raf.) 
Swezey (bottlebrush s quirreltail), with E. elymoides  
being further divided into four subspecies:  elymoides, 
brevifolius  (J.G. Sm.) Barkworth,  californicus (J.G. 
Sm.) Barkworth, and  hordeoides (Suksd.) Barkworth. 
The following key will be useful in separating the 
various members of section  Sitanion including 
subspecies. 
 
1.   glumes 3- to many-cleft; auricles mostly 
      apparent, circa 1mm in length           E. multisetus 
1.   glumes entire or 2-cleft; auricles mostly < 1mm 
                                                                 E. elymoides 
      2.   spikelets usually 2 per node 
            3.   lowermost floret of one or both spikelets  
                  at each node sterile and reduced to a  
                  glume-like structure 
                  4.   glumes 2-cleft; awns of glumes longer  
                         than those of the lemmas 
                                                              ssp. elymoides 
                   4.   glumes entire; awns of lemma longer  
                         than those of the glumes   
                                                            ssp.  californicus 
            3.   lowermost floret fertile and not reduced 
                                                             ssp. brevifolius 
      2.   spikelets 3 per node, the floret of the central  
            spikelet fertile, those of the lateral spikelets 
            sterile and rudimentary            ssp . hordeoides                     In general, squirreltail is adapted to a wide range of 
ecological and topographical conditions. Plants can 
be found from 600 to 3,500 meters (2,000 to 11,500 
feet) elevation in desert shrub to alpine plant 
communities.  The different species-subspecies are 
adapted to sites receiving as little as 8 inches mean 
annual precipitation on upland sites or 5 to 9 inches 
in low lying areas that re
ceive additional moisture. 
Big squirreltail is normally found in sites with 10 
inches or more mean annual precipitation. Squirreltail 
grows well in medium to fine-textured soils, but also 
commonly occupies coarse-textured to gravelly soils. 
It tolerates low to moderately saline to alkaline run-in 
 
Description 
General : Squirreltail is a cool-season C-3 bunchgrass 
native to the western United States. Foliage can be  glabrous but is more often white hairy throughout. 
Plants are short, 10 to 45 cm (4 to 25 inches) tall, 
with culms erect to spreading. Leaf blades are flat to 
involute, 1 to 6 mm (0.04 to 0.24 inches) wide. The 
inflorescence is a spike from
 2 to 17 cm (0.8 to 6.7 
inches) long, not counting the awns. Internodes of the 
inflorescence are from 2 to  10 mm (0.08 to 0.40 
inches) long with the rachis disarticulating regularly. 
At maturity the spike can be  over 12 cm (4.7 inches) 
wide due to the widely spreading awns. Awns are 
scabrous and may grow from 2 to as much as 10 cm 
(0.8 to 3.9 inches) long, these often becoming purple 
with maturity. 
 
Squirreltail is a self-pollinating allotetraploid and is 
known to hybridize with other species of  Elymus as 
well as with members of  Hordeum (barley) and 
Pseudoroegneria  (bluebunch wheatgrass). Plants 
flower from late May to August. 
 
Distribution : Squirreltail (in the broad sense) can be 
found throughout western North America from 
Canada to Mexico. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Bottlebrush and big squirreltail grow in a 
wide range of habitats, from shadscale communities 
to alpine tundra.   Elymus elymoides  ssp. elymoides  is 
common at low to middle el evations in the western 
states. Subspecies  californicus is native to mid-
elevations up to alpine areas of Canada, California, 
Nevada and Utah. Subspecies  brevifolius is found in 
a wide variety of habitats including desert and 
mountain plant communities, while subspecies 
hordeoides  is restricted to the low lands of the Great 
Basin.  Elymus multisetus occupies a similar range to 
ssp.  elymoides , but is typically found in somewhat 
wetter, more mesic sites often in and near mountain 
foothills.  
 
Adaptation

or overflow sites with electrical conductivity (EC) 
generally less than 10. 
 
Establishment 
For best results, seed should be planted to a depth of 
¼ to ½ inches into a firm weed-free seedbed. For 
pure stands the recommended drill seeding rate is 7 lb 
pure live seed (PLS) per acre. Seed can be planted in 
early spring, but late dormant fall seeding is 
recommended for best annual weed suppression. 
 
Squirreltail does not establish well into existing 
perennial shrub communities without mechanical 
treatment to reduce shrub density. Studies show four 
times the establishment success rate of squirreltail 
when planted after thinning big sagebrush ( Artemisia 
tridentata  Nuttall) as opposed to an untreated site. 
Similarly, it has been difficult to establish squirreltail 
in stands of crested wheatgrass ( Agropyron cristatum 
[L.] Gaertner). It is recommended that crested 
wheatgrass and other perennial species competition 
be eliminated or severely  reduced prior to seeding 
native seed mixtures that include squirreltail. 
 
Management  
Seeds germinate in the fall or spring. Plants green up 
early and remain green through the fall and into 
winter. Stands should be protected from heavy 
grazing, especially during flowering to ensure 
sufficient seed production to maintain the stand. New 
plantings should also be protected from grazing for at 
least two growing seasons. A direct seeded 
squirreltail stand in a big sagebrush/bluebunch 
wheatgrass community in south-central Idaho has 
survived for 30 years with recruitment from natural 
reseeding.  
 
Wildland seed collection occurs from July to 
September before disarticulation of the spike. Best 
germination rates come from  seed collected in stands 
with fifty percent of the seed heads having divergent 
awns and the other half having straight awns of a 
reddish color. This occurs approximately one week 
prior to disarticulation. One hour collecting for a 
single person averages a yield of about 1.6 oz of 
clean seed. Seed yields can vary widely depending on 
stand density and age.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Plants are known to be susceptible to rust. 
 
Seed Production 
Plant seed in a 36-inch betw een-row spacing at a rate 
of 2.4 lbs PLS/acre for 30 PLS per foot of row. Fields 
should be weed free and have good field moisture to 
a depth of at least four inches. Soil should be kept  moist throughout the germination phase (about 14-28 
days). Fifty percent of germination should occur 
within 15 to 30 days after planting. Broadleaf weeds 
can be controlled with low rates of bromoxynil at the 
three to five leaf stage. Always apply herbicides 
according to label directions. No fertilizer should be 
applied during the first year to discourage annual 
weed competition. 
 
Soil moisture should be carefully maintained during 
early green-up, boot stag
e, milk stage of seed 
development and after harvest. No irrigation should 
be applied during flowering to encourage seed set. 
Fertilize established fields at 100 lb nitrogen and 40 
lb phosphorus per acre in mid-September. Soil testing 
is recommended to ensure proper rates of 
fertilization. 
 Photo courtesy of L&H Seed Company Production field of Fish Creek Germplasm ( Elymus elymoides  ssp. elymoides) 
 
Broadleaf weeds can be controlled with herbicides. 
Application should occur prior to boot stage. 
Between-row cultivation can be used to control other 
weeds for the life of the stand. 
 
Seed is ready to harvest in about mid-July of the 
second growing season (see “management” section 
for timing). Harvest by windrowing followed by 
combining. Some report di fficulty with mechanical 
harvesting due to the ready disarticulation of the 
rachis of mature seed he ads. Swathing prior to 
maturity and curing in windrows will help reduce this 
problem. Flail-vac and seed stripping harvesting 
equipment have also been used with varying degrees 
of success. 
 
Because of the large amount of inert material 
produced from awns and glumes, this is a very time-
consuming species to clean. Thresh seed through a 
hammer mill to remove awns. Follow with a clipper 
or other separator. Purity should exceed 90% with 
greater than 85% viability. Big squirreltail, in

particular, has proven difficult to debeard without 
seed damage. Some seed companies have modified 
equipment that has resulted in improved seed 
viability. 
 
Seed yields under irrigated conditions average 
approximately 200 lb/acre with 190,000 seeds/lb. 
Harvested seed should be dried to 12% or less 
moisture before storing. Storing seed in a cool dry 
environment will retain viability for several years. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Because of the broad array of subspecies of 
squirreltail and the genetic variation between species 
and subspecies, careful identification of the species 
and subspecies native to the planting site is 
recommended. Care should be taken to match the 
appropriate phenotype and genotype of the plant 
materials with those of the local plant communities to 
improve the chance of stand success and to prevent 
genetic contamination of existing populations. 
 
Fish Creek Germplasm, 2003 (E. elymoides  ssp. 
elymoides ): This natural track, selected class 
germplasm was released by the USDA-ARS Forage 
and Range Research Laboratory in Logan, UT in 
cooperation with BLM, Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station and USDA-NRCS. It was 
originally collected by T.A. Jones as accession T-
1223 in Blaine County, Idaho in August 1995. The 
native site was described as a big sagebrush and 
Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa secunda Presl.) community 
at approximately 1450 meters  (4,760 feet) elevation. 
Estimated annual precipitation at the site is 35-38 cm 
(14-15 in). Fish Creek shows a 33% lighter awn mass 
as compared to Sand  Hollow. The spike also 
disarticulates in a determinate fashion at the base of 
the spike, two traits which make Fish Creek easier to 
harvest and to clean than other releases. Fish Creek is 
adapted to and intended for use in the Snake River 
Plain. Second generation seed is maintained by the 
USDA-ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory, 
Logan UT. G3 to G5 seed is available through the 
Utah Crop Improvement Association.  
 
Toe Jam Creek Germplasm, 2003 (E. elymoides ssp. 
californicus ): This natural track, selected class 
germplasm was released by the USDA-ARS Forage 
and Range Research Laboratory in Logan, UT in 
cooperation with BLM, Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station and USDA-NRCS. The original 
collection for Toe Jam Creek was made in Elko 
County, Nevada west of Tuscarora by J. Garrison of 
NRCS. Elevation at the site is 1829 meters (6,000 
feet), and average precipitation is estimated at 31cm  (12 in.). Toe Jam Creek is intended for use in the 
lower Snake River Plain 
and the northern Great 
Basin. Similar to Fish Creek, Toe Jam Creek exhibits 
a lower awn mass than Sand Hollow making them 
presumably easier to remove without damaging the 
caryopsis. G3 seed is maintained by the USDA-ARS 
Forage and Range Research Laboratory, Logan UT. 
Seed through G6 is available through the Utah Crop 
Improvement Association. 
 
Sand Hollow Germplasm, 1996 ( E. multisetus ): The 
Sand Hollow collection site is considerably drier than 
those typical for big squirreltail. It was originally 
collected in 1984 in Gem County, Idaho by Greg 
Painter of NRCS in a bluebunch wheatgrass, 
Sandberg bluegrass and tapertip hawksbeard ( Crepis 
acuminata  Nutt.) community. The collection site is at 
830 meters (2,720 feet) elevation and receives an 
average of 28 centimeters (11.0 inches) annual 
precipitation. Sand Hollow is considered to be 
adapted to the mountain foot hills of the Snake River 
Plain region of Idaho and in adjacent regions of 
Oregon, Nevada and Utah. It was released as a 
selected class germplasm for high seed production, 
higher-than-average seed weight and late heading 
date. G2 seed is maintained by the USDA-ARS 
Forage and Range Research Laboratory, Logan UT. 
Seed from G3 and G4 generations are available for 
seed certification through the Utah Crop 
Improvement Association. 
 
Tusas Germplasm, 2001 (Elymus  elymoides  ssp. 
brevifolius ): Tusas Germplasm bottlebrush 
squirreltail was released by the NRCS and New 
Mexico State University Agricultural Science Center 
at Los Lunas, New Mexico. This natural track, 
selected class release is a composite of eight 
accessions from throughout New Mexico. Collection 
site elevations ranged from 1,460 meters (4,800 feet) 
to 2,800 meters (9,200 feet). From the initial 131 
collections, eight were selected for vigor, late 
flowering and higher seed yi eld. An equal number of 
seedlings from each accession were taken to form the 
composite, Tusas. It is intended for use in the 
southwestern United States for erosion control, 
wildlife food and cover, revegetation of disturbed 
sites and restoration of weed infested rangelands. 
Breeder and G2 seed are maintained by the NRCS 
NM Plant Materials Center.  Seed is available through 
the New Mexico Crop Im provement Association. 
 
Pueblo Germplasm and Wapiti Germplasm, 2005 
( Elymus  elymoides  ssp. brevifolius ): Pueblo and 
Wapiti Germplasm are natural track, selected class 
releases, each originatin g from a single source. 
Pueblo was originally collected in 1976 southwest of

Pueblo, Colorado in Pueblo County at an elevation of 
7,200 feet in shallow, gravelly soils. The original 
collection of Wapiti was made in 1981 along the 
Gooseberry Creek drainage in Rio Blanco County, 
Colorado. The original collection site was in a stony 
loam soil at 7,800 feet elevation. Eight bottlebrush 
squirreltail accessions were evaluated by the Upper 
Colorado Environmental Plant Center (UCEPC) from 
1983 to 1987 and compared for forage production, 
seed production percent stand, leaf height, vigor, leaf 
abundance and stem height. Of these, two accessions 
were chosen for further development, Pueblo and 
Wapiti. Both are intended for use in erosion control 
and forage production for livestock and wildlife as 
well as a variety of conservation applications.  These 
releases should be considered as potentially adapted 
within the natural range of the species. The UCEPC 
will maintain G1 and G2 seed. G2 seed will be 
available to growers. Growers may produce one 
generation (G3) beyond G2 for Pueblo and Wapiti 
Germplasm seed. Seed used for certified seed 
production must be obtained from UCEPC. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Arredondo, J.T., T.A. Jones  and D.A. Johnson. 1998. 
Seedling growth of Intermountain perennial and 
weedy annual grasses.  Journal of Range 
Management. 51: 584-589. 
 
Clausnitzer, D.W., M.M. Bo rman and D.E. Johnson. 
1999. Competition between Elymus elymoides  and 
Taeniatherum caput-medusae . Weed Science. 47: 
720-728. 
 
Cornforth, B., L. St. John and D G. Ogle. 2001. 
Technical Note 14: Seed production standards for 
conservation plants in the intermountain West. 
USDA-NRCS. Boise, ID. ID-TN 14, Dec. 2001. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977.  Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West , U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
 
Doescher P.S. 2001. Techni cal Note: Early harvest of 
squirreltail seed. Journal of Range Management. 54: 
197-199. 
 
Jones, T.A. 1998. Viewpoint: The present status and 
future prospects of squirreltail research. Journal of 
Range Management. 51: 326-331. 
 
Larson, S. R., T.A. Jones,  C.L. McCracken and K.B. 
Jensen. 2003. Amplified fragment length 
polymorphism in  Elymus elymoides , Elymus 
multisetus , and other  Elymus taxa. Canadian Journal 
of Botany. 81: 789-804. 
 
Monsen, S.B., R. Stevens and N.L. Shaw. 2004. 
Restoring western ranges and wildlands. USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136. 884 p. 
 
Ogle, D.G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2003. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legum e, and woody species for the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. ID-TN 
24. 41p. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database 
(http://plants.usda.gov). National Plant Data Center 
(accessed 08March2006), Ba ton Rouge, LA 70874-
4490 USA.  
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 1993.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press. Provo, Utah. 
 
Wilson, F.D. 1963. Revision of  Sitanion (Triticeae, 
Gramineae). Brittonia. 15: 303-323. 
 
Winslow, Susan R. 2002. Propagation protocol for 
production of  Elymus elymoides  seeds; Bridger Plant 
Materials Center, Bridger, Montana. In: Native Plant 
Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(accessed 15 March, 2005).  Moscow (ID): University 
of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery. 
 
Prepared By:  
Derek J. Tilley , Range Conservationist (Plants) 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John , Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Larry Holzworth, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Montana Stat e Office, Bozeman, MT 
 
Thomas A.  Jones

USDA-ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory, 
Logan, UT 
 
Susan R. Winslow, Agronomist 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, MT 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Edited: 24Feb06djt; 24Feb06lsj; 24Feb06dgo; 
23Mar05srw;8Apr05taj; 05May05lkh. 23mar06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.