Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
VIRGIN RIVER BRITTLE BUSH 
Encelia virginensis (A. Gray)  
 
Plant Symbol = ENVI 
 
Alternative scientific names:  
Encelia frutescens  (A. Gray)  A. Gray var.  virginensis (A. Nelson) S.F. Blake   
Encelia  virginensis  A. Nelson var.  virginensis  
Encelia virginensis var actonii (Elmer) B.L. Turner.  
Description  
General :  Virgin River brittlebush is a native evergreen shrub up to three feet 
high and three feet wide with many slender branchin g stems growing from the 
base.  Younger stems are hairy, while older stems may have fissured bark.  
Leaves are oval, sim ple, 0.5 to 1 inch long , with a smooth margin. Short, soft 
hairs give the leaves a grayish green appearance. Leaf arrangement is alternate 
and opposite.  Flowers heads are borne singly on hairy stems and have yellow 
ray flowers less than 0.5 inches long, and yellow to orange disk flowers.  The 
blooming period is typically March through June.  The fruit is a dark brown to 
black achene, 0.2 to 0.3 inches long. Virgin River brittlebush is distinguished 
from other Encelia  species by its smaller mature plant size, smaller leaves, 
and the presence of both ray and disk flowers (Abrams, 1923; Baldwin et al., 2002; Kiel & Clark, 2016; Univ. of Arizona, 
2016).  
Distribution :  Virgin River brittlebush is found in California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and Baja California. 
Please refer to the PLANTS Database for the most current map of species distribution.  
Habitat :  Virgin River brittlebush inhabits desert scrub between the elevations of 1 ,500-5, 000 ft. on desert flats, rocky slopes, 
and roadsides.  
Adaptation:  Virgin River brittlebush is found in the Mo jave Desert. Associated plants include creosote bush (Larrea 
tridentata ), Joshua tree ( Yucca brevifolia ), Mojave yucca ( Yucca schidigera), Mormon tea ( Ephedra viridis), and white 
bursage ( Ambrosia dumosa) (Kiel  & Clark, 2016; United States Department of Agriculture, 2006).  
Uses  
Range Revegetation:  Virgin River brittlebush can be used in the revegetation of disturbed areas. Rodgers (1994) found that 
when outplanted as container stock, Virgin River brittlebush ha d a greater than 90% survival rate on an abandoned strip mine 
site in Joshua Tree National Monument.  
Pollinator Habitat:   Virgin River brittlebush provides a nectar source native bees and butterflies. At the Tucson Plant 
Materials center, Western pygmy -blu e butterflies ( Brephidium exilis ) were observed foraging on the flower heads.  
Ethnobotanical:  Native American people used Virgin River brittlebush as a medicine. The Kawaiisu made a decoction of 
the leaves and flowers which they used as a wash for reducing rheumatic pains. This decoction was also  used to treat cuts and 
bruises on horses (Zigmond, 1981). The Tubatulabal made a decoction of the roots for use as a wash for rheumatism 
(Voegelin, 1938).  
Status  
Threatened or Endangered:  No.  
 
Wetland Indi cator:  UPL  
Weedy or Invasive:  This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats, and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, 
stat e natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding its status or use.  
Virgin River brittlebush, Photo by Heather Dial, USDA NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center