Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TEXAS CUPGRASS 
Eriochloa sericea (Scheele) 
Munro ex Vasey  
Plant Symbol = ERSE5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 Hitchcock 1950 Manual of the grasses of the United States 
 
Uses 
Texas cupgrass is a highly palatable forage grass 
(Gould, 1975).  It is readily eaten year round by all 
classes of livestock. It can be used as a component in 
native range restoration projects. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  Texas cupgrass ( Eriochloa sericea ) is a 
tufted, warm-season, perennial grass that grows 3 to 
3 ½ feet in height (Correll & Johnston, 1996).  This 
erect grass is a member of the  Paniceae tribe of 
grasses (Hitchcock, 1971).  There is no known 
commercial variety of Texas cupgrass. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Texas cupgrass grows mostly on well-
drained prairies, and brushy, rocky slopes with tight 
loamy soils (Correll & Johnston, 1996). 
 
Adaptation 
Texas cupgrass is found in Oklahoma, Texas, and 
Northern Mexico (Gould, 1975).  In Texas, it can be 
found in North Central Texas, the eastern portion of 
the Rolling Plains, south to the eastern part of the 
Edwards Plateau and the the Rio Grande Plains, and 
rarely on a few sites in East Texas (Correll & 
Johnston, 1996).  It prefers clay and clay loam soils 
(Hatch, Schuster, & Drawe, 1999). 
 
Establishment 
Texas cupgrass can be grown from seed.  A 1990 
germination test conducted by the Kika de la Garza 
Plant Material Center staff yielded 50 percent 
germination.  A second germination test conducted in 
the summer of 2000, yielded approximately 40% 
germination after only 14 days at 20 °C for 12 hours 
of darkness and 30ºC for 12 hours of light. 
 
Management 
Texas cupgrass survives only under moderate grazing 
pressure (Gould, 1975).  It  will persist in overgrazed 
pastures only under the protection of shrubs (Hatch, 
Schuster, & Drawe, 1999).  Texas cupgrass is an 
indicator of good range condition. It is seldom a key 
management species; however, because it rarely 
dominates a site.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Texas cupgrass has several problems from a seed 
production standpoint.  First of all, some of the taller 
plants tend to lodge, which makes harvesting seed a 
problem.  Second, seed retention is poor.  Seed 
shatter tends to occur fairly rapidly after the seed has 
ripened making it difficult to harvest a stand because 
all the heads do not ripen at once. Third, there 
appears to be an ongoing problem with spittlebugs on 
the seed heads, which decreases the quantity of viable 
seed.  Finally, Texas cupgrass appears to be 
susceptible to smut on the seed heads, a problem 
which can also affect seed quality.

In an attempt to increase seed retention, a study was 
conducted at the Kika de la Garza PMC in the spring 
of 2000 with Texas cupgrass.  Treatments of 
Spodnam, a chemical used to increase seed retention, 
were tried with no success.  The plants treated with 
Spodnam and the untreated plants showed no 
significant difference in seed retention (Kika de la 
Garza PMC, 2000).  
 
References 
Correll, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1996.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  The University of Texas at 
Dallas, Richardson, Texas. 
 
Gould, F.W. 1975.   The Grasses of Texas .  Texas 
A&M University Press, College Station, Texas. 
 
Hatch, S L., J.L Schuster, & D.L. Drawe 1999.  
Grasses of the Texas Gulf prairies and marshes.   
Texas A&M University Press, College Station, 
Texas. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1971.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States, Volumes 1&2, 2nd edition . Revised by 
Agnes Chase.  Dover Publications, New York. 
 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 2000.   A 
seed retention study of Texas cupgrass and Plains 
bristlegrass.   Technical Note, vol 3 (3).  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas 
 
Edited: 08Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.