Plant Guide
FLAT-TOP 
GOLDENTOP 
Euthamia graminifolia (L.) 
Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = EUGR5 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May  Plant 
Materials Center   
 
Thomas G. Barnes @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database / Barnes, 
T.G., and S.W. Francis. 2004 . Wildflowers and f erns of Kentucky. 
University Press of Kentucky.  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names : 
bushy, common, fragrant, grass -leaved, or flat -topped 
goldenrod 
 
Scientific Alternate Names :  
Solidago graminifolia  (L.) Salisb.  
Solidago lanceolata  L.  
Chrysocoma gram inifolia L.  
 
Uses  
Wildlife Use : Euthamia graminifolia  provides a 
nectar source for pollinators and is well -suited for use 
in pollinator restoration. Preliminary observation 
found  that flat -top goldentop attracted 13 different 
species of Hymenoptera and Lep idoptera in Cape 
May, New Jersey. The  European honey bee ( Apis 
mellifera ), common buckeye ( Junonia coenia), and 
eastern carpenter bee ( Xylocopa virginica) were most 
frequently observed visiting the flower.  
 
The wildlife  value of this species is considered low; 
nevertheless, songbirds such as the American 
goldfinch ( Carduelis tristis) and the swamp sparrow 
( Melospiza  g eorgiana) feed on the seeds  (Hilty, 
2002) . Deer and rabbit enjoy browsing the plant.   
The flower attracts the goldenrod soldier beetle 
(
Chauli ognathus pe nsylvanicus) and black blister 
beetle ( Epicauta pensylvanica ). The goldenrod 
soldier beetle larvae are beneficial insects known to 
feed on aphids, maggots, cat erpillars, and 
grasshopper eggs;  while the adults help to pollinate 
plants
 (Trigg, 200 5). Black blister beetles produce 
cantharidin, a poisonous substance that  may poison 
animals that graze  the plant (Marlin, n.d.) . Please 
refer to Hilty (2002b) for a complete list of insects  
that visit this plant.  
 
Erosion Control : E . graminifolia  c an be u sed as a 
primary or  secondary species for erosion control or 
vegetation cover . 
 
Ethnobotany  
Infusions with flower heads were used by the Forest 
Potawatomi to cure fevers. Leaves and oil have been 
used as a diuretic, diaphoretic, astringent, pulmonary 
aid,  analgesic, and stimulant. It was used as a hunting 
medicine by the Ojibwa tribe (Great Lakes region) by 
smoking flowers to simulate the odor of a deer’s 
hoof. They also infused the flowers to relieve chest 
pain. The Chippewa used a decoction of the root to 
relieve lung trouble and chest pain.  
 
Status  
E. graminifolia  is a native, facultative wetland plant 
that  usually occurs in wetlands (67 –99%) but is 
occasionally found in non- wetlands. Please consult 
the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natura l Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : E. graminifolia  is a n upright , erect, native 
perennial  with a many -branched inflorescence. It is  
an herb of the Asteraceae family whose species name 
means  “grass-leaf” . It grows to 3 –6 ft in height with a 
1 –2 ft spread.  T he upper ½ of the plant appears  bushy 
due to its branched stems and grass -like, narrow to 
linear, alternate leaves. It grows from a  long -slender 
rhizome.  
 
The stalk -less 2 –4 in  long leaves taper to a long 
point, and narrow t owards the stem. The leaf has 3 –5 
nerves underneath and is minutely r ough-pubescent 
along nerves and  margins. There  are a few resinous 
dots on the underside of the  leaf.  The lower leaves 
are deciduous early in plant’s life cycle and the upper

leaves are reduced towards the inflorescence. The 
leaves omit a scent when crushed.  
 
The primary stalk supporting the flower cluster is 
winged and pubescent with hairs lying flat on the 
wing margins.  The flower heads are 2 –2.5  in  high,  
are arranged in dense, stalk -less, small ,  flat -topped 
clusters of 20 –35 flowers . It has pale to bright yellow 
flowers that bloom in the late summer or early fall. 
The outer flowers of the cluster  open first. The flower 
heads are cone- shaped and attached at the pointed 
end. The whorl of small leaves beneath the flower is 
ovoid to bell -shaped. The obtuse or rounded, yellow 
bracts around the flower are somewhat sticky. These  
overlapping bracts are 3. 1 mm long and occasionally 
have green tips.   
 
T he  .5 mm  long seed is a hard, pubescent, one -
seeded,  indehiscent  white nutlet. The seed is attached 
to hair -like bristles (pappus). The receptacle is finely 
fringed.  
 
E. graminifolia var.  graminifolia is distinguished by 
its relatively narrow leaves that are 11 –20 times as 
long as wide ( Gleason and Cronquist, 1963) . E. 
graminifolia  var. hirtipes  is the hybrid of E. 
graminifolia  and  E. caroliniana (Fernald, 1950) , and 
is distinguished by its relatively broad, ha iry leaf 
blades and few -flowered head.  
 
Distribution : E. graminifolia  can be found from New 
Brunswick to Saskatchewan, Alberta, Florida, 
Nebraska,  and Wyoming. It is found in USDA 
Hardiness Zone 3 –9.  Its elevation ranges from 260 –
1427 f t. 
 
For current dist ribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Habitat:   
E. graminifolia  can be found i n moist, open ground; 
meadows; prairies; roadsides; ditches;  inter-dunal 
flats; exposed lakes;  conifer swamps; lowland 
forests ; calcar eous seeps;  and sandy moist shorelines . 
It is tolerant of poor, gravelly, sandy, or dry soils and 
once established, can tolerate droughty conditions. It 
is also found in s haded wood edges  or sunny  fields 
and clearings.  
 
Generally,  E. graminifolia  i s found in habitat that is 
noticeably wet, however it does grow in drier 
conditions, especially in old fields, were it may 
dominate.  It is considered a ruderal species  and can 
grow in strongly acidic to mildly alkaline conditions.  
 
Establishment  
Seed can b e sown year -round in a greenhouse that is 
at least 65°F. T he recommended planting is 3  seeds 
per  2 in  plug, watered regularly. It can also be  sown  outdoors from seed in the fall or sow
n the seed in a 
coldframe.  
 
E. graminifolia  is a prolific rhizomatous pe rennial 
that spreads aggressively through vegetative 
reproduction.  When growing from vegetative 
material  divide rootball (rhizomatous clumps) while 
plant is dormant. Cuttings should be kept in the 
greenhouse at least 3 months to allow for ample root 
and shoot development . When transplanted into field, 
plant on 1.5 –2 foot centers.  
 
Unwanted s eed dispersal from wind can be prevented 
by the development of a vegetative curtain or buffer 
with native shrubs, vines, or understory trees.   
 
Management  
Adding nitrog en will increase plant size, including an 
increase of stem height, number of leaves, and stem 
diameter.  E. graminifolia seems  to have a delayed 
response to n itrogen, and may store access N over 
winter in its rhizomes. Adding N has been shown to 
increase th e density of stems in the second year after 
fertilization, thereby eliminating other plant species 
and reducing community diversity. Management of 
flat -top goldentop should consider the negative e ffect 
fertilization may have o n existing community 
structure . 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Allelopathic chemical properties have been found in  
root and leaf extracts of E. graminifolia  and may 
interfere with the growth of other species.  Leaf 
leachates tend to interfere with seed germination 
while root leachates ne gatively affect the root growth 
of competing plants. Crops such as radish and lettuce 
are susceptible to allelopathic competition and should 
not be grown in the same area.  Maples have also been 
negatively affected by similar  Solidago species. 
 
Environmenta l Concerns 
Due to rhizomatous growth, E. graminifolia  is 
somewhat aggressive. This plant may become a 
noxious weed so is  perhaps not a good choice for 
more formal gardens unless controlled with a 
complimentary buffer planting. It is n ot as aggressive 
as  S. Canadensis  or  S. rugosa.  E. graminifolia  is 
considered invasive in Europe.  
Seeds and Plant Production 
When collecting seed wait for all seeds to develop 
and dry on the  plant because bloom is rotational and 
some seeds will be mature before others. Because  the 
seeds are ver y tiny, it is more efficient to cut off the 
entire plant head.  
 
Dry collected seeds for 1 –2 weeks in open paper bags 
or open bins. The seed is viable for up to 3 years in 
cold storage at 40˚F. For pr e-planting, cold stratify

seeds. There are 350,000 seeds/ oz or 5.6 million 
seeds/ lb.  
 
References  
Butcko, V.M. and R. J. Jensen. 2002. Evidence of 
tissue -specific allelopathic activity in Euthamia 
graminifolia  and  Solidago c anadensis 
(Asteraceae).  Am. Midl. Nat.  148 (2): 253- 262.  
http://www.bioone.org/doi/  
full/10.1674/0003-
0031%282002%29148%5B0253%3AEOTSAA
%5D2.0.CO%3B2  (accessed 3 Feb. 2012)
 
Encycl opedia of life. http://www.eol.org.  (accessed  7 
Feb. 2012)  
Fernald, M.L. 1950. Gray ’s manual of botany. 8th ed. 
American Book Company, NY.  
Gleason, H.A. and A. Cronquist. 1963. Manual of  vascular plants of northern United States and 
adjacent Canada. Van  No strand Reinhold 
Company, NY, NY.  
Hilty, J. 2002a . Illinois wildflower. Grass -leaved 
goldenrod 
http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/prairie/plant
x/gr_goldenrodx.htm  (accessed 3 Feb.  2012)  
Hilty, J. 2002b. Illinois wildflower. Flower -visiting 
in sects of grass -leaved goldenrod. 
http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/flower_insec
ts/plants/gr_goldenrod.htm  (accessed 7 Feb. 
2012)  
Marlin, B. n.d. Black blister beetle ( Epicauta 
pennsylvanica ) Red planet. 
http://www.cirrusimage.com/beetles_blister_Epi
cauta_pennsylvanica .htm (accessed 3 Feb. 2012)  
Pratt Jr., C.R. 1984. The response of Solidago  graminifolia  and S. juncea  to nitrogen fertilizer 
application: changes in biomass allocation and 
implication s to community structure. Bull. 
T orrey Bot. Club. 111 (4):  469 -478.  
Smith , H.H. 1933. Ethnobotany of the f orest 
Potawatomi Indians. Bull. Publ.  Mus . Cty Mil. 7 
( 1 ):  51.   
Trigg, R. 2005. Margined solider beetle pa trolling 
our prairies. Chicago wilderness magazine 
(Spring). 
http://www.chicagowildernessmag.org/issues/spr
ing2005/soldierbeetle.html  (accessed 3 Feb. 
2012)  
 
Prepared By:  Christopher M. Sheahan.  USDA-
NRCS,  Cape May Plant Materials Center , Cape May, 
NJ . 
 
Citation:  Sheahan, C.M.
 2012. Plant guide for  flat -
top goldentop ( Euthamia graminifolia ). USDA-
NRCS, Cape May Plant Mat erials Center. Cape May, 
NJ.  08210.    
Edited:
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrc s.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER