LEAFY SPURGE 
Euphorbia esula L . 
Plant Symbol = EUES  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Leafy spurge.  William M. Ciesla, Forest Health Management 
International, Bugwood.org. 
Alternate Names 
Common  Names:  wolf’s milk, faitours -grass , tithymal  
Scientific  Names:  Considerable taxonomic confusion 
surrounds leafy spurge varieties, subspecies and hybrids.  
The PLANTS D atabase recognizes 2 varieties  Euphorbia 
esula  var. esula,  and Euphorbia esula var.  uralensis  (= 
Russian leafy spurge)  
Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
Caution: This plant can be toxic.  
Uses  
Leafy spurge is a noxious, introduced, aggressive invader 
plant that can o vertake large areas, displace desirable 
plant communities, and reduce aesthetic and economic  values and wildlife habitat.  Cattle and horses avoid leafy 
spurge.  The milky sap, which contains ingenol, a toxic 
compound, can cause severe diarrhea and weaknes
s in 
cattle and horses forced to consume it.  Leafy spurge can 
also cause blistering and hair loss around horses’ hooves 
and can be irritating to the skin, eyes and digestive tracts 
of humans and other animals.  Sheep and goats tend to be 
less bothered by the toxic sap properties and are often 
used in concert with herbicides and other biological 
agents to manage heavy infestations of leafy spurge 
(Bourchier, et. al., 2006; Gucker, 2010).  
 
Leafy spurge seed is consumed by mourning doves.  The 
plant provides nesting habitat for western meadowlarks 
but are not utilized by other bird species (Gucker, 2010).  
Grasshopper sparrows and savannah sparrows have had 
their populations reduced in areas of heavy weed 
infestation.  Leafy spurge reduces habitat for bison, d eer, 
and elk and is a major threat to the endangered western 
prairie fringed orchid ( Platanthera praeclara) because 
leafy spurge has established and spread into much of the 
only remaining suitable habitat of the orchid (Bourchier, 
et. al., 2006).    
 
Althou gh leafy spurge is an invasive plant and most 
efforts are to control or manage the plant, it has been 
evaluated for use as a biofuel, as an antiviral against 
herpes simplex and in China, as a dilution of boiled plant 
material to control maggots, mosquito larvae, rats, and 
some plant diseases (Gucker, 2010).  
Status  
Leafy spurge is recognized as a noxious weed in Alaska, 
Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, 
Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Massachusetts, Minnesota, 
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, No rth Dakota, 
Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin, 
and Wyoming.  
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Leafy spurge produces a prolific, and often deep, massive 
root system.  It can produce abundant seed in the second 
and subsequent growing seasons.  Seed is forcibly ejected 
from the plant when ripe and all animals that come in 
contact with the plant can disperse seed.  Vehicles and 
road maintenance equipment can also disperse seed.  Seed 
can also be spread by ants and by water as the seed can 
float and survive underwater storage (Gucker, 2010).  
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

This plant is weedy and invasive in many regions and 
habitats and will displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resources department, or state agriculture 
departm ent regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  
General :  Leafy spur ge is a member of the spurge 
(Euphorbiaceae) family.  It is a strongly rooted (often 
growing in clumps), introduced broadleaf weed that 
grows 30 -70 cm tall.  The roots can extend to soil depths 
of up to 4.5 m.  It does not have morphologically 
structured r unners or rhizomes as some have reported but 
does exhibit shoot -bud production by roots (Gucker, 
2010).  The plants are glabrous and erect with numerous 
leaves and the stems ooze a milky sap when damaged.  
The principal leaves are alternate, broadly linear  to 
narrowly oblong, 3 -9 cm long and 3- 8 mm wide and 
essentially 1 -nerved.  The leaves just below the flowers 
are heart -shaped.  The inflorescence is an umbel with 
showy yellowish- green colored bracts that are flared 
horn -like on each side.  Flowers are gr eatly reduced and 
lack both sepals and petals. A central female flower is 
surrounded by five groups of male flowers.  The fruit is a 
small, 3 -chambered capsule 3 -3.5 mm long and the seed 
is ellipsoid, 2 -2.5 mm long, and mostly smooth 
(Cronquist et. al., 19 97; Gucker, 2010).  When seed is 
ripe the capsules explode to eject seeds up to 15 feet from 
the plant.  The seeds have elaisomes (fleshy structures 
attached to the seed) that aids in dispersal by some ants 
(Gucker, 2010).  
 
 
Leafy spurge seed with elaisomes attached on left 2 seeds.  Julia 
Scher, USDA APHIS PPQ, Bugwood.org. 
There is considerable taxonomic confusion with leafy 
spurge because multiple introductions into North  America 
resulted in a complex of variable genotypes.  The only 
species reco gnized to hybridize with leafy spurge is 
cypress spurge ( Euphorbia cyparissias ).  The hybrid is 
known as Euphorbia x pseudoesula  (Gucker, 2010). Distribution
:  Leafy spurge is native to Europe and Asia 
and was first reported in Massachusetts in 1827, likel y 
established from contaminated soil from ship ballasts.  
Contaminated crop seed including oats, smooth brome 
and alfalfa brought by European settlers accelerated the 
spread westward into North America.  Leafy spurge is 
abundant in the northern Great Plains and prairie regions 
of Canada.  It has been found in 35 states with the most 
extensive infestations in the mid -western and western 
states of Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Nebraska, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming as 
well as the southern po rtions of all six provinces in 
Canada (Bouchier, et, al., 2006).   By 2005, leafy spurge 
had infested approximately 5 million acres in the United 
States (Gucker, 2010).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the  
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Leafy spurge is found in many different habitats 
from streambanks to dry, upland sites and invades 
disturbed and undisturbed areas including pastures, 
abandoned cropland, roadsides, woodlands, riparian 
communities, meadows and m ountain ridges (USDA 
Forest Service 2012).  
Adaptation  
In Europe, leafy spurge is often found on sandy soils.  In 
North America it is found on fine to coarse textured, and 
on moist to dry soils but is most aggressive under dry 
conditions where competition f rom desirable plants is 
reduced.  Leafy spurge can tolerate temperatures from  -
50- 100°+ F and annual precipitation ranging from 7- 25 
inches.  Soil texture and fertility can affect growth and 
distribution of leafy spurge roots.  In fine textured soils 
leafy  spurge roots are thicker (greater branching) in the 
top 6 inches of soil and on coarse textured soils, roots are 
thicker with less branching at soil depths greater than 30 
inches.  High levels of soil nitrogen can reduce the 
biomass of leafy spurge roots with greater root 
concentrations closer to the soil surface (Gucker, 2010).  
Establishment  
Leafy spurge reproduces by seed and from root sprouting.  
First -year plants do not produce seeds.  Seed dormancy is 
controlled by the seed coat and is overcome by war m, 
moist conditions with temperature ranging from 79 -82° F.  
Most seedlings emerge early in the spring often following 
heavy precipitation.  Seeds planted to a depth of 0.5 and 2 
inch depth achieved maximum germination and seeds 
typically germinate better in fine textured soils than 
coarse textured soils. Seedlings grow rapidly and are 
capable of vegetative regeneration within a week of 
emergence and able to resprout even after being severed 1 
inch below the soil surface (Gucker, 2010).  
 
Leafy spurge shoots  emerge from established plants from 
mid -April to early May and flowering begins in late May 
to mid -June but can extend to later months depending on 
latitude and environment.  In the northeastern states

flowering may occur until October.  Mature seeds develop 
about 30 days after pollination.  Flowers are pollinated 
primarily by insects and high levels of seed can be 
produced (up to 3,400 pounds per acre in a Saskatchewan 
study).  Ripe seed is forcibly ejected up to 15 feet from 
parent plants and seed may remain viable in the soil for 
up to five years (Gucker, 2010)  
 
Leafy spurge can spread prolifically from the root crown, 
root buds and root pieces and can occupy a large area in a 
relatively short time (from 0.5 -11 feet annually), and is 
considered to be mor e important to the persistence and 
spread of established stands than from seed production 
(Gucker, 2010).  
 
Leafy spurge may also exhibit allelopathic properties to 
inhibit competition from other plants but field studies 
have not shown allelopathy to be a consistent property of 
the species (Gucker, 2010).  
Management  
Leafy spurge stands that are established over large areas 
are extremely difficult and expensive to eradicate.  Early 
detection and eradication of stands just beginning to 
occupy otherwise desirab le plant communities should be 
given high priority for treatment.  Manage for and 
maintain healthy plant communities; use of certified 
weed -free hay, straw, mulch and gravel; detect, map and 
eradicate new stands as soon as possible; implement 
monitoring and follow up treatment for missed plants and 
seedlings; and combine mechanical, cultural, biological, 
and chemical methods for effective control are all actions 
that should be considered when planning management of 
leafy spurge (USDA, Forest Service, 2012).  
Environmental Concerns  
Leafy spurge is highly invasive , listed as a noxious weed 
in many states,  is able to establish and persist in many 
different  plant communities , and is difficult to control 
once it has established in an area.  
Control  
Physical:  Physical methods alone are mostly ineffective 
in controlling leafy spurge.  Because of the expansive root 
system, hand pulling or grubbing are not effective.  Hand 
cutting or mowing can reduce seed production and its 
competitive ability but will only suppr ess growth.  Plants 
should be clipped within 4 inches from the ground just 
before seed set and then repeated throughout the growing 
season.  Flowering parts that have been mowed must be 
removed and destroyed since seed will ripen if left in 
place (USDA, Fo rest Service, 2012).  
Tillage can be effective but only when reseeding takes 
place. Areas that are suitable for tillage and seeding 
should be tilled at 3 week intervals to a depth of at least 4 
inches beginning when leafy spurge begins growth in the 
spring.   If using tillage in conjunction with herbicide 
application allow plants to grow 4 -6 inches tall before 
spraying and wait at least 1 week after spraying before  resuming tillage.  Equipment must be cleaned after field 
operations to prevent movement of seed
s or root parts to 
uninfested areas (USDA, Forest Service, 2012).  
 
Prescribed fire is not recommended for control of leafy 
spurge because the plant rapidly regenerates new shoots 
from the root system.  Fire may be used in conjunction 
with herbicide control  or grazing to remove litter which 
could enhance reseeding efforts (USDA, Forest Service, 
2012).  
 
Land managers, road crews, and the public need to be 
educated to identify noxious species so they can help 
report suspected infestations and the importance of  not 
travelling through infested sites.  Vehicles, humans and 
livestock should be discouraged from moving through 
infested areas and to check and remove seeds prior to 
leaving an infested area to help stop the spread of leafy 
spurge.  Weed screens on irrig ation water from infested 
areas can help prevent seed transportation through 
irrigation canals (USDA, Forest Service, 2012).  
 
Chemical:  Long -term control of large, well established 
leafy spurge stands with herbicides alon e usually has not 
been  very succes sful and is very expensive .  A waxy layer 
on the leaves and stems makes chemical control difficult 
without the  us e of surfactant s and the roots are able to 
purge c hemicals  from the root system  (Gucker, 2010) .  
Herbicide application is most effective during  the fall 
because chemicals are more easily transported to the root 
system after flowering.  Picloram (Tordon 22K) has long 
been used on leafy spurge because of its selective control 
while allowing grasses to return naturally but is a 
restricted use herbicide.  Aminocyclopyrachlor 
(Perspective or Streamline) is a newer herbicide that is 
showing effective control in laboratory testing.  Imazapic 
(Plateau) is effective and especially useful on permeable 
soils, around trees, or near surface water.  Dicamba 
(Cl arity) is less expensive than Picloram products and is 
not a restricted use herbicide.  Glyphosate (Roundup, 
Rodeo) is a non -selective herbicide that is recommended 
only in conjunction with grass seeding (USDA, Forest 
Service, 2012).    
 
Please contact your  local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document  only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Biological :  Grazing of sheep or goats in combination 
with either herbicide application or  use of insects can 
lower seed production of leafy spurge and decrease its 
spread.  Sheep and goats (especially Angora goats) will 
readily graze young leafy plants and are not as susceptible 
to poisoning as other livestock.  To maximize suppression 
of leaf y spurge, sheep or goats should graze the plants at a

moderate to severe rate of utilization.  Studies have shown 
that stocking rates of 3-6 sheep per acre per month, 1 -2 
ewes with lambs per acre per month, or 12 -16 Angora 
goats per acre per month are usually adequate.  Grazing 
should begin in the spring when plants are 2 -6 inches tall 
and continue until all of the yellow bracts on the stem 
have been consumed.  If using grazing in combination 
with herbicide application, remove animals early in the 
fall and allow 3 -4 inches of regrowth before application.  
Animals should be quarantined 5 -6 days to prevent 
spreading seed to noninfested sites (USDA, Forest 
Service, 2012).  
 
Using host -specific natural enemies of leafy spurge is 
referred to as “classical biological control”.  Numerous 
biological agents for control of leafy spurge have been 
tried throughout the United States with varying degrees of 
success.  Currently there are twelve leafy spurge 
biological control species permitted for release in the 
United State s.  Bourchier et. al. (2006) provides detailed 
information on the permitted insects for control of leafy 
spurge and guidelines to plan, implement, monitor and 
evaluate an effective leafy spurge biological control 
program.  There are seven beetles (Coleoptera), two flies 
(Diptera), and three moths (Lepidoptera) permitted for 
release.  Leafy spurge flea beetles ( Aphthona spp.) appear 
to be the most successful control agents for leafy spurge 
in North America.  Larvae are root and stem feeders 
which do the grea test damage by creating wounds on the 
roots that allow plant pathogens to enter and cause 
deterioration of the root system.  Adults feed on leafy 
spurge leaves and flowers but have little or no impact on 
growth and development of leafy spurge.  Different f lea 
beetle species have different habitat preferences and for 
optimal biological control, a variety of flea beetle species 
should be released and the beetles will sort out their 
preferred habitats (Bourchier, et. al., 2006).  If using 
grazing in combinatio n with flea beetles, graze once in the 
spring and once in the fall to allow the beetle to complete 
its life cycle on the plant (USDA, Forest Service, 2012).  
 
Any strategy adopted for managing leafy spurge must 
involve careful planning, maintaining repetiti ve treatment 
over multiple consecutive years, periodically monitoring 
treated areas and spot treatment, using sound grazing 
management practices and monitoring the return of 
desirable plant species (USDA, Forest Service, 2012).  
  References
 
Bourchier, R. H ansen, R., Lym, R., Norton, A., Olson, D., 
Randall -Bell, C., Schwarzlander, M, Skinner, L. 
2006.  Biology and Biological Control of Leafy 
Spurge [Online].  U.S Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Health Technology Enterprise 
Team.  
http://www .fs.fed.us/foresthealth/technology/pdfs/Le
afySpurgeBiocontrols.pdf  (accessed 16 December, 
2013)  
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, N., Holmgren, P. 1997.  Intermountain Flora. Volume Three, Part A.  
Subclass Rosidae (except Fabales).  The New York 
Botanical Garden, B ronx, New York. 
Gucker, C. 2010.  Euphorbia esula.  In: Fire Effects  Information System [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis (accessed 12 
Dece mber, 2013)  
USDA Forest Service, 2012.  Field Guide for Managing  Leafy Spurge in the Southwest. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region.  
TP-R3 -16- 2. 10 p.  
 
Prepared By : 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
Citation  
St. John, L., Tilley D. 2014. Plant Guide for Leafy spurge 
( Euphorbia esula).  USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, 
Idaho 83210.  
P ublished  January, 2014 
Edited: 19Dec2013ls; 2Jan2014djt; 08 Jan2014 jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER