Plant Guide
FRISCO BUCKWHEAT 
Eriogonum soredium Reveal 
Plant Symbol = ERSO2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
Frisco buckwheat. Daniela Roth, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service  
Status 
In 2007 the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) was 
petitioned to list Frisco buckwheat as either endangered or 
threatened. In 2011 FWS announced a determination that 
listing was warranted; however listing of Frisco 
buckwheat was  precluded by higher priorit y actions 
( USDI -FWS  2011).  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  
General :  Buckwheat family (Polygonaceae).  Frisco 
buckwheat is a mound forming perennial sub -shrub. The 
plant lies close to the ground reaching heights of only 2 to 
4 cm ( 0.8 to 1.6 in) with the m ounds spreading as much  as 
50 cm ( 20 in) across. The leaves are ellip tic to oblong, 2 
to 5 mm ( 0.08 to 0.2  in) long with white tomentum (a 
covering of closely matted or fine hairs) on both surfaces. 
The inflorescence is a cluster of white or pink flowers, 2 
to 3 mm ( 0.08 to 0.12  in) long. The fruit is a 2 to 2.5 mm 
( 0.08 to 0.1  in) long achene (Welsh et al. 2008 ). 
Distribution :    
Frisco buckwheat is endemic to the Great Basin. It is 
known from four populations in the  San Francisco 
Mountains in north -central Beaver County, Utah.  All 
populations occur on privately owned lands.  Frisco  buckwheat shares the same distribution as Ostler’s 
pepperweed (
Lepidium ostleri ). 
 
Population estimates vary widely. The mound -forming 
nature of the plants makes it difficult to make accurate 
plant estimates where each mound could be counted as 
one or several plants. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Frisco buckwheat is found only on soils derived 
from Ordovician limestone outcrops. These rare soils are 
home to other rare plant species including Ostler’s 
pepperweed and Frisco clover ( Trifolium friscanum). All 
four populations of Frisco buckwheat exist  on sparsely 
populated slopes in pinion- juniper and sagebrush 
communities from 1,890 to 2,200 m ( 6,200 to 7,200 ft). 
Other associated species include Mormon tea ( Ephedra 
sp.), snakeweed ( Gutierrezia sarothrae ), dwarf mountain 
mahogany ( Cercocarpus intricatus ), and rock goldenrod 
( Petradoria pumila)  (USDI -FWS 2011) .  
Adaptation  
Frisco buckwheat is adapted to white limestone outcrops 
in areas receiving 200 to 300  mm (8 to 12 in) mean 
annual precipitation. Frisco buck wheat populations cover 
approximately 52 acres out of approximately 845 acres of 
suitable habitat. It is unknown if there are other factors 
limiting Frisco buckwheat distribution (USDI FWS 
2011).    
Establishment  
There is no known seed establishment informa tion for 
Frisco buckwheat.  
Management  
Over 90 percent of the known habitat for Frisco 
buckwheat occurs on private mining claims. There are no 
laws protecting endangered plant species on private, State 
or Tribal lands in Utah. However, m ining operations must 
prepare State environmental impact assessments and 
address the potential effects on State and federally listed 
species for operations that create 5 acres or more surface 
disturbance.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
The greatest threat to Frisco buckwheat comes from 
mining operations in close proximity to Frisco buckwheat 
populations. The area has historically been mined for 
precious metals, and is currently used for gravel quarrying 
for crushed limestone. These operations are expected to 
increase in the  future due to increased  demand (USDI -
FWS 2011).

Environmental Concerns 
There are a number of environmental factors which may 
affect Frisco buckwheat. Prolonged  drought due to 
climate change has the potential to eliminate the small 
populations of Frisco bu ckwheat. Additionally, i nvasion 
of cheatgrass ( Bromus tectorum ) has the potential to 
greatly increase the fire return interval in the Great Basin 
(Whisenant 1990). Frisco buckwheat is adapted to 
sp arsely covered plant communities and is likely not 
adapted  to frequent fires (USDI -FWS 2011.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
There is no known plant propagation information for 
Frisco buckwheat.  
References  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants; 12 -month finding on a 
petition to list Astragalus hamiltonii, Penstemon 
flowersii, Eriogonum soredium, Lepidium ostleri, 
and Trifolium friscanum as endangered or threatened. 
Federal Register. 76 (36): 10166- 10199. 
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. Higgins  [eds]. 2008. A  Utah flora, fourth edition, revised. 
Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University. 1019 pp.   
Whisenant, S. G. 1990. Changing fire frequencies on  Idaho's Snake River plains: ecological and  
management implications. In: Proceeding -
Symposium on cheatgrass invasion, shrub die -off,  and other aspects of shrub biology and management, 
(Eds., E. D. McArthur, E. M. Romney, S. D. Smith, 
and P. T. Tueller), USDA Forest Service 
Intermountain Research Station General Technical 
Report INT
-276:4- 10. 
 
Prepared By :   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D . 2012.  Plant Guide for Frisco buckwheat 
( Eriogonum soredium ). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials 
Center. 83210- 0296. 
Published  November 2012  
Edited:  16oct2012djt;  17oct2012ls ; 01Nov2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER