Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SNOW BUCKWHEAT
Eriogonum niveum Dougl. ex Benth. 
Plant Symbol = ERNI2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
Alternate Names 
canyon heather  
 
Uses 
Erosion control/reclamation/landscape:  Snow 
buckwheat is a very successful pioneer species 
(Tiedemann, et al 1997).  It tolerates extremely 
droughty soils and is a common occupant of dry, 
rocky southern exposures.  It is an excellent 
candidate for stabilizing skeletal soils exposed in 
road cuts, and mine spoils that lack soil development.   
 
Snow buckwheat grows to 0.5 m (20 in.) in height in 
most areas but may be as much as 1m tall and 1m 
wide on better sites.  The canopy, while quite short, 
can effectively protect the  soil from erosive winds.  
 
Snow buckwheat is a very useful xeriscaping plant, 
because it requires very little moisture and does not 
become weedy.  It can be shaped by careful pruning 
to produce a more formal looking round-full plant.   
The bloom period is very long and the white flowers 
take on a pink blush in late fall.            
 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife: Snow buckwheat has 
limited domestic livestock grazing value.  Sheep will 
utilize the tips of the flower heads and ignore the rest  
of the plant.  (USDA Fo rest Service Range Plant 
Handbook).   
 
Mule deer in north-central Washington are reported 
to make heavy use of snow buckwheat in the winter 
and early spring months (Burrell 1982).  Bighorn 
sheep also make heavy use of snow buckwheat, and it 
decreases in response to  bighorn sheep grazing 
(Wikeem and Pitt 1991).  Small birds and mammals 
use the canopy for cover.   
 
 Clarence Kelley USDA NRCS Pullman PMC 
Several species of bees and butterfies utilize snow 
buckwheat as a foodstuff, including the endangered 
Mormon Metalmark butterfly ( Apodemia mormo) 
(Royal British Columbia Museum 1995). 
      
Ethnobotany:  A tea brewed from the roots of snow 
buckwheat and a related species, Indian tobacco ( E. 
heracleoides ) were used by Native Americans as a 
diarrhea remedy.  Boiled roots and stems were used 
to treat a variety of ailments including cuts, colds, 
and blood poisoning (Parish et al. 1996).  It has been 
suggested that the Columbia Basin buckwheats were 
also used to develop dyes by the Native Americans 
(Sackschewsky and Downs 2001). 
 
Status 
This is a native species.  Consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current stat us, such as state noxious 
status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Buckwheat Family (Polygonaceae). Snow 
buckwheat is a deciduous, low growing, evergreen 
halfshrub.  
 
The crown gives rise to numerous short-woody 
stems.  Leaves attached to  the main stems are short 
and generally oblong.  The bottoms of the leaves are 
gray and very tomentose while the tops are only 
slightly hairy.  The flowering stems are tomentose 
and as much as 200mm in  length.  Leaves on the 
flowering stems are short and narrow.  The flower 
heads may be as long as 200mm and generally 
ascending.  The flowers are  white or light pink and 
turn brown at seed maturity in the fall.  The seeds are 
small and shaped like urns.  There are approximately 
943,000 seeds/kg (427,000 seeds/pound).

Distribution 
Hitchcock et al. (1964) described the distribution of 
snow buckwheat as the east slope of the Cascade 
Mountains from British Columbia, south to central 
Oregon, east to west-centr al Idaho. For current 
distribution of this species and its relatives, consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation  
Cold Hardiness Zone: 5a-7a. 
Mean Annual Precipitation: 150-460mm (6-18 in.) 
Elevation: 150-1500m (500-4900 ft.) 
MLRA: 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 23, 24, and 25 
Soil:  Well-drained sands to clays 
 
Snow buckwheat is common in big sage ( Artemisia 
tridentata ), antelope bitterbrush ( Purshia tridentata), 
and open Ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa) areas.  It 
also occurs in the canyon  grasslands of the Snake and 
Columbia River systems.  
 
It is primarily found in full sun but will grow in 
partial shade such as open Ponderosa pine hillsides.  
 
Snow buckwheat is comm on on steep slopes and 
rocky scabland soils that support little competing 
vegetation.  Its taproot enables it to acquire moisture 
percolating through the rock  cracks.  It occurs much 
less frequently on deep, moist soils. 
        
Species often associated  with snow buckwheat 
include the following: big sagebrush (Artemisia 
tridentata  - probably  wyomingensis, vasciana, and  
tridentata  subspecies), antelope bitterbrush (Purshia 
tridentata ), Ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa), 
western juniper ( Juniperus occidentalis ), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), sand dropseed 
( Sporobolus airoides ), Snake River wheatgrass 
( Elymus wawawaiensis ), Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa 
secunda ), Indian ricegrass ( Achnatherum 
hymenoides ), and needle-and-thread (Nassella 
comata ). 
 
Establishment 
Seeding : Snow buckwheat should be seeded in late 
fall (Tiedemann and Driver 1983).  Standard 
reclamation drills and broadcast seeders are capable 
of handling snow buckwheat  seed, however, ensure 
the seed is kept shallow (max. 6mm deep).  
Germination in the wild occurs during cool-wet 
conditions thus allowing the seedlings to develop 
while moisture is readily available and evaporative 
rates are low.   
 
Transplanting : Rooted transplants are easily 
outplanted.  The soil should be at least 75% of field 
capacity when planted.  Once fully established, snow 
buckwheat is long-lived and very persistent.  
 
Management 
Snow buckwheat is a low maintenance plant once 
established.  Cheatgrass and other winter annuals 
should be controlled the first year to allow good 
establishment.  Observations have shown that snow 
buckwheat withstands severe defoliation if the woody 
stems and crowns are not damaged.  
 
Digging up plants is not advised because it is difficult 
to extract a large enough portion of the root to 
support the plant.  Also, re moving plants in the wild 
severely disturbs the site  and leaves it especially 
prone to weed invasion. 
 
Its tolerance to fire is unknown, however, most 
Eriogonum  species which remain green year round 
are severely damaged by fire. 
 
Environmental Concerns  
Snow buckwheat is long-lived, spreading via seed in 
the wild.  It is not considered to be a "weedy" or 
invasive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities unde r ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  
 
Propagation   
Snow buckwheat seed should be grown in areas 
where it is native or areas that have long growing 
seasons.  Weeds can be  controlled by between-row 
cultivation.  No herbicides are labeled for snow 
buckwheat seed fields.   
 
Seed is fully ripe when the flowers turn brown.  
Shattering can be severe at  full maturity.  Mechanical 
harvest is possible providing that the cutting bar is set 
high enough to not damage the crown.  Observations 
have indicated that cutting back the woody stems 
reduces plant life and reduces seed production the 
following year.   
 
Seed shelf life can be as s hort at 12 months if not 
properly stored.  Seed is  best stored in cool-dry 
conditions.  
 
Plants are easy to produce  for out-planting.  Seed 
should be planted in mid-winter and allow for at least 
10 weeks growth before hardening.  Avoid potting 
media that does not drain well, and do not over-
water.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Umatilla' snow buckwheat was selected by the 
Pullman Plant Materials Center and released in 1991.  
It was developed from a native collection made in 
Umatilla County, Oregon.  It is primarily 
recommended for use in rangeland restoration 
plantings, upland wildlife habitat improvement 
plantings in semi-arid environments, and soil 
stabilization plantings on sites that will not support 
dense populations of conventional conservation 
species.  It has performed very well on mine spoils in 
central Washington (Zamora  and Leier 1993).   It is 
also well suited for xeriscape plantings, particularly 
where a native halfshrub is desired.   
 
Limited quantities of Foundation seed are available to 
growers from the Pullman Plant Materials Center.  
 
References 
Burrell, G.C. 1982. Winter diets of mule deer in 
relation to bitterbrush abundance.  J. Range Manage. 
36:508-510. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W. 
Thompson 1964. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of  Washington Press, Seattle, 
Washington. 
 
Parish, R., Coupe, R. and D. Lloyd 1996. Plants of 
southern interior British Columbia. Lone Pine Press, 
Vancouver, B.C., Canada. 
 
Royal British Columbia Museum 1995. 
>
http://rbcm1.rbcm.gov.bc.ca/end_species/species/m
metalm.html< 
 
Sackschewsky, M.R. and J.L. Downs 2001. Vascular 
plants of the Handford site. U.S. Dept. of Energy, 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Rep. 13688. 
Richland, Washington. 
 
Tiedemann, A.R. and C. H. Driver. 1983. Snow 
eriogonum; a native halfshrub to regetate winter 
game ranges.  Reclam and Reveg Res. 2:31-39. 
 
Tiedemann, A.R., S.M. Lambert, J.R. Carlson, C.J. 
Perry, N.L. Shaw, B.L. Welch, and C.H. Driver 1997. 
‘Umatilla’ snow buckwheat for rangeland restoration 
in the interior Pacific Nort hwest.  Rangelands. 19:22-
25. 
 
Wikeem, B.M. and M.D. Pitt 1991. Grazing effects 
and range trend assessment on California bighorn 
sheep range. J. Range Manage. 44:466-470. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  
 
USDA NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 030106.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Zamora, B.A. and J.W. Leier 1993. The potential of 
snowy buckwheat ( Eriogonum niveum) for 
revegetation of xeric mine spoil sites in the Pacific 
Northwest.   IN: Abstracts 8
th Wildland Shrub Symp. 
Arid Land Restoration, Las Vegas, Nevada. 
 
Prepared By 
Mark Stannard and Wayne Crowder 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Stannard 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 Edited 06jan03 dgo; 30jan03 jsp;  09jun03 ahv; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.