Plant Guide
VIRGINIA WILDRYE 
Elymus virginicus L.  
Plant Symbol = ELVI3 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS PMC or State PM 
Program  
 R. 
Alan Shadow  
USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center  
 
 Alternate Names   
Wildrye   
 
Uses   
Livestock:   
Virginia wildrye is palatable and nutritious to all classes 
o f livestock. It may be grazed fall through early spring 
before it produces its characteristic, awned, seed head. It 
may also be cut for hay; however, grazing and haying 
should be deferred after the plant goes to seed. The seed 
heads are often heavily infected with ergot which causes 
toxicity problems in livestock (Phillips Petroleum 
Company, 1963). Proper management is needed to avoid 
selective grazing by livestock. Selective grazing weakens 
the stand and can lead to its elimination.   Wildlife and Conservat
ion  
Virginia wildrye is palatable and nutritious forage for 
large game animals such as deer. Birds and small 
mammals also forage for the seed and utilize the plant 
fibers for denning and nesting material (National Plant 
Information Network, 2009). The see d is reported to be 
utilized by mallard and lesser scaup ducks when found in 
association with wetlands, and Canada geese will graze 
young foliage (Hilty, 2009).   
Virginia wildrye may be mixed with warm season grasses 
for restoration and conservation planti ngs, and provides 
an important cool season component to seed mixtures.   
 
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious s tatus, and wetland indicator values).   
 
Description   
General :  
Virginia wildrye is a native, cool season, perennial, bunch 
grass. It is similar to Canada wildrye ( Elymus canadensis) 
in appearance, but is typically shorter in height with 
shorter awns on the  seed head. The seed heads are more 
erect than those of Canada wildrye which typically bow 
or droop (Philips Petroleum Company, 1963). There is 
evidence of variation in E. virginicus and E. canadensis 
due to hybridization of the two species (Grelen and 
Hughes, 1984). It reaches approximately three feet in 
height, lacks rhizomes and reproduces by seed and tillers.   
 
Seed heads are typically 3 to 6 inches in length, erect, and 
have numerous, coarse awns. Each spikelet has 2 or more 
florets that decrease in size  as they extend to the end of 
the inflorescence. The glumes bow outward at the base 
producing a “U” shape and are strongly nerved (Hatch et 
al., 1993). The spiklets are densely packed on the 
inflorescence. They are sessile, have a pair of glumes with 
a clu ster of 2 to 4 lemmas, and their florets (Hilty, 2009). 
Virginia wildrye blooms in the spring from March 
through May, and is wind pollinated (Hilty, 2009).   
 
Color may vary from green to silvery blue, and foliage 
often has a waxy appearance. The culms are tufted, 
strictly erect, or decumbent at the base. The ligule is a 
minute, truncated membrane (Gould, 1975). The 
alternately arranged leaves are approximately 12 inches in 
length and  2/3 inch in width. Virginia wildrye is typically 
hairless, but may have short pubescent on the leaf sheaths 
(Hilty,  2009).