SHEEP FESCUE 
Festuca ovina L. 
Plant Symbol = FEOV 
 
Figure 1. Sheep fescue in xeriscape garden. D. Ogle, NRCS, ID  
Alternate Names 
None 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Sheep fescue Festuca 
ovina L. is an extremely variable cool season grass. In the 
western United States, sheep fescue is often confused 
with Arizona fescue in the southwest and Idaho fescue in 
the northwest. Historically almost all fine leaved, non-
rhizomatous fescues were identified as F. ovina. Many of 
these specimens have been re-identified as other species 
(Barkworth 2007). The PLANTS web site indicates F. 
ovina has been mis-applied to specimens of F. 
brachypyhlla Schult ex Schult. & Schult f. ssp. 
brachyphylla and F. brevipila Tracy (F. trachyphylla 
(Barkworth 2007)). Festuca trachyphylla, like F. ovina is 
native to Europe while F. brachyphylla f. ssp. 
brachyphylla is circumpolar with North American 
representatives (Barkworth 2007).   
 
Sheep fescue is a densely tufted, cool season, dwarf 
bunchgrass. Its numerous basal leaves are narrow, 
involute, stiff, semi-erect and short, 4 to 8 in and less than 
half the culm length. Plants are short, 12 inches tall, with 
numerous fine, stiff to semi-erect stems. 
 
The panicle is narrow, dense, nearly spike-like in 
appearance and protrudes well above the basal leaves on 
stiff, naked culms. Panicles are about 4 in long with 4 to 5 
flowers per spikelet. The seed is tipped with 1/8 to 1/4 in 
awns. The slightly unequal glumes persist after seed 
shatter (Cronquist et al., 1977).   
Distribution:  Sheep fescue is a cool season perennial 
grass native to Europe (Barkworth 2007). Within North 
America, sheep fescue has been planted in open forests 
and mountain and foothill slopes from Alaska to North 
Dakota and south to Arizona and New Mexico. It has also 
been introduced to many locations in eastern North 
America. For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat:  Sheep fescue occupies diverse habitats. 
Collections show altitudinal variation in habitat extending 
from 1,000 to 13,000 ft. Although it may be found at any 
elevation between these extremes, it is most prevalent 
from about 3,000 to 8,000 ft. It grows on all exposures in 
a wide variety of soil conditions. It is best adapted to silt 
loam or sandy loam soils, however is occasionally found 
on loamy sand soils, and on shallow, dry, gravelly soils. 
Common habitats are exposed bench lands, hillsides and 
ridges, parks, meadows, forestlands, and open ponderosa 
and lodgepole pine stands. It is often found in association 
with big bluegrass, mountain brome, bluebunch 
wheatgrass, slender wheatgrass, geranium, western 
yarrow, mountain big sagebrush, antelope bitterbrush and 
ponderosa pine.    
Adaptation 
Sheep fescue is best adapted to areas with 12 or more 
inches of precipitation. It has excellent cold tolerance, 
good drought tolerance, and moderate shade tolerance. It 
is more drought tolerant than Idaho fescue and hard 
fescue. It will tolerate weakly saline to alkaline and acidic 
soil conditions, and will not tolerate high water tables or 
flooding. It can withstand fire in autumn, but requires 2 to 
3 years to fully recover after burning.   
Uses 
Grazing/range/pasture: In rangeland and pastureland 
plantings, sheep fescue is a competitive understory grass 
that controls erosion. Although it is sometimes grazed by 
sheep, it is seldom utilized by cattle or horses and is not 
considered to be an important forage species. 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Hay: Due to its short dense tufts, it is not a good species 
for hay production.  
  
Wildlife: Sheep fescue provides very little cover for 
hiding or nesting habitat.   
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Sheep Fescue Plant Guide.  Idaho, 1982. 
Erosion control/reclamation: The primary use of sheep 
fescue is ground cover. It is ideal for stabilization of 
disturbed soils because of its dense root system. Its low 
growth form and low maintenance requirements make it 
ideal for ground cover purposes.    
  
It is commonly used to protect roadsides, airport landing 
strips, industrial and residential areas, ditch and canal 
banks, skid trails, clear cuts, ski hills, camp sites and other 
recreation areas from erosion. It provides excellent cover 
and erosion control in areas between trees rows of 
shelterbelts, windbreaks and tree farms. Sheep fescue 
withstands moderate equipment traffic and requires 
minimal maintenance.  This characteristic makes it useful 
in vineyards, orchards, and farm equipment yards.    
  
Its good drought tolerance combined with strong bunch 
type root systems and adaptations to a variety of soils 
make this species ideal for reclamation in areas receiving 
12 to 24 inches annual precipitation. This grass can be 
used in areas where irrigation water is limited to provide 
ground cover.   
  
 
Weed control: Sheep fescue is an excellent weed control 
species because it has an extensive and dense bunch type 
root system. Once a good stand is established, it excludes 
the invasion of most weeds.    
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Planting Guidelines 
Planting: Sheep fescue seed should be planted with a drill 
at a depth of 1/4 inch or less. The single species seeding 
rate is 4 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or about 
60 PLS per square foot (Ogle et al., 2009). If used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  
When broadcast planting seed and for harsh critical 
planting areas, the seeding rate should be increased to 8 
pounds PLS per acre or 120 PLS per square foot.  
Mulching and irrigation during the establishment year are 
beneficial for stand establishment. 
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in very 
early spring on heavy to medium textured soils or in late 
fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seedings are not recommended 
unless irrigation is available. Seedling vigor is good; 
stands are generally slow to develop and seedlings may be 
very hard to find during the establishment year. 
 
It should not be planted with aggressive introduced 
grasses, but is very compatible with slower developing 
native grasses such as bluebunch wheatgrass 
(Pseudoroegneria spicata), thickspike wheatgrass 
(Elymus lanceolatus ssp. lanceolatus), streambank  
wheatgrass (Elymus lanceolatus ssp. psammophilus), big 
bluegrass (Poa secunda) and needlegrass species 
(Achnatherum spp., Hesperostipa spp., Nassella spp., 
Stipa spp., and Ptilagrostis spp.). 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of broadleaf herbicides 
such as 2,4-D should not be made until plants have 
reached the four to six leaf stage.  Mow above seedlings 
when weeds are beginning to bloom to reduce weed seed 
production.  Grasshoppers and other insects may damage 
new stands and use of insecticides may be required.  Be 
sure to read and follow pesticide label directions.  
Management 
Sheep fescue “greens up” in March to early April and 
matures in late June to mid-July.  It is a cool season plant; 
therefore it produces most of its growth in the spring and 
again in the fall, if moisture is available. Growth during 
the summer is minimal and dependent on precipitation or 
irrigation.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Sheep fescue is a low maintenance plant requiring little 
treatment or care. Its primary pests include grasshoppers. 
It is resistant to common turf diseases.  
Environmental Concerns 
Sheep fescue hybridizes with Idaho and western fescue 
resulting in somewhat larger plants. It is long-lived, and 
spreads primarily via seed distribution.  It is not 
considered "weedy", but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.   
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed production of sheep fescue has been very successful 
under cultivated conditions. Row spacing of 24 to 36 
inches are recommended and it should be cultivated and 
maintained in rows. 
 
Seed fields are generally most productive for four to five 
years. Average production of 300 pounds per acre can be 
expected under dryland conditions in 16 inch plus rainfall 
areas. Average production of 700 pounds per acre can be 
expected under irrigated conditions. Harvesting is best 
completed by direct combining or swathing in the hard 
dough stage, followed by combining of the cured 
windrows. Sheep fescue averages 680,000 seeds/pound 
(Smith et al., 1998).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Foundation and Registered seed is available through the 
appropriate state Crop Improvement Association or 
commercial sources who grow certified seed.  
 
‘Covar’ sheep fescue was released in 1977 by 
Washington Agricultural Research Center, Washington 
State University, Agricultural Experiment Stations of 
Oregon and Idaho in cooperation with the USDA, NRCS, 
Pullman Plant Materials Center. It originated from Konya, 
Turkey (Alderson and Sharp, 1994). The name is to 
identify it as an excellent cover. It is an aggressive 
competitor that forms an attractive drought tolerant, 
erosion and weed control cover. ‘Covar’ is more drought 
tolerant than other fescues including Idaho, red, western 
and hard fescue. 
 
‘Bighorn’ sheep fescue is a PVP turf grass release by 
Turf-Seed Inc. for improved turf performance, a powder 
blue color and it has a soft texture. Date of release and 
nativity is unknown. 
 
‘MX-86’ sheep fescue is a turf variety developed by 
Jacklin Seed Company. It was released in 1989. ‘MX-86’ 
is very short and requires very little maintenance.  The 
seed is enhanced with endophyte to improve its insect 
resistance. Nativity is unknown.  
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in the 
United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C.  
Barkworth Mary E., L.K.; Anderton; K.M. Capels; S. 
Long; and M.B. Piep (ed.). 2007. Manual of Grasses 
for North America. Intermountain Herbarium and 
Utah State University Press. Utah State University, 
Logan, Utah. 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J.  L. 
Reveal, & P. K. Holmgren 1977.    Intermountain 
flora.  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York 
Hafenrichter, A.L., Mullen, L.A., and R.L. Brown;  
 1968. Grasses and Legumes for Conservation in the 
Pacific Northwest and Great basin States. USDA – 
SCS. Agr. Handbook 339, 69 p.  
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950. Manual of the Grasses of the  
 United States. USDA, Washington, DC.  
Ogle, D., L. St John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth.  
 2009. Grass, grass-like, forb, legume and woody 
species for the Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS. 
ID-TN 24. Boise, ID  
Smith, S., S. Smith, R. Haas and L. Holzworth. 1998.  
 Native Grass Seed production manual. USDA-NRCS, 
Ducks Unlimited and Manitoba Foage Seed 
Association.  
USDA, Forest Service 1996. Fire effects information  
 system. Version: 000413. 
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>. Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
USDA, NRCS 2010. The PLANTS database.  
 <http://plants.usda.gov>. National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
 
Citation 
Ogle, D., M. Stannard, P. Scheinost, and L. St John. 2010. 
Plant guide for sheep fescue (Festuca ovina L.). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho and 
Washington Plant Materials Program.  
Published May 2010, revised November 2014 
Edited 01Apr2010sj; 01Apr2010pls; 05Apr2010ms; 
07Apr2010dgo; 07Apr2010jab; 21Nov2014plsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov.

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER