Plant Guide
GREEN ASH 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = FRPE  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @  USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database/USDA 
SCS. 1989. Midwest wetland flora  Field office illustrated guide to 
plant species. Midwest National Technical Center, Lincoln.  
Alternate Names 
Alternate names include: red ash, swamp ash, or 
water ash (Kennedy, 1990).  
Uses  
Li vestock: Green ash stems are browsed by livestock 
(Johnson, 1971). Cattle utilize green ash habitats for 
shade, water, protection, and shelter during calving 
season (Gucker, 2005).  
 
Wildlife : Green ash seeds, stems, and foliage provide 
cover and food for several small animal species 
including rabbit. Both game and nongame bird 
species use this habitat for food, nesting sites and 
roosts (Gucker, 2005). Black birds, finches, 
grosbeaks, and cardinal feed on ash fruits (Twedt and 
Best, 2004). In a study by Hopkins (2004), the 
Coopers hawk and mountain bluebird nested only in 
green ash woods.  
  Residential: Green ash is popular as a shade tree in 
residential areas because of its good form
 and 
adaptability to a wide range of sites . 
 
Windbreak : Green ash is used fr equently in 
windbreaks and shelterbelt plantings. It is 
recommended to plant the tree in the central rows of 
multi -row windbreaks (Dickerson, 2002).  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
c urrent status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Green ash is a native spreading, round 
topped tree which grows to a height of 70 feet or 
more. The deciduous leaves are pinnat ely compound, 
8 to 12 inches long, with 5 to 9 leaflets. The leaflets 
are oblong, lustrous green on both sides or somewhat 
paler beneath. The twigs are pale gray along with 
brown bark. The fruit (samara), usually containing 
one seed, is light colored, 1 to  2 inches long and ¼ to 
1/3 inch wide with a wing (Vines,  1960).  
Distribution :    For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Green ash is found in areas with 15 to 60 
inches of yearly p recipitation. It is found growing 
naturally in bottomlands subject to frequent flooding 
or overflow (Stewart and Krajicek, 1973). Green ash 
is moderately tolerant to shade. Some woody species 
associated with green ash include box elder ( Acer 
negunda), red maple ( A. rubrum), pecan (Carya 
illinoensis ), eastern cottonwood ( Populus deltoides), 
black willow ( Salix nigra), and American elm 
( Ulmus americana)  (Kennedy, 1990). 
Adaptation  
Green ash grows on clay to sandy or silt soils 
(Stewart and Krajicek, 1973). It will also perform 
well when planted on neutral to alkaline medium to 
coarse textured upland sands and loams with good 
moisture (Kennedy, 1990). The species has a wide 
range of adaptation from eastern Montana, Great 
Plains, and eastern half of the United States (Vines, 
1960).

Establishment  
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium. Green ash h as shown 
severe chlorosis when grown on a soil with a pH of 
8.1 (Wright, 1965). Tests on a riverfront site in 
Mississippi have shown that green ash grew well on 
silt  loam soils  with pH ranging between 7.5 and 8.0 
(Kennedy, 1990). Gilmore and Boggess (1963) n oted 
that hardwoods such as  green ash need better quality 
planting sites than pine  ( Pinus  sp.). 
 
Management  
Green ash does not grow as fast as red maple ( Acer 
rubrum ) or elm;  therefore it may be crowded out over 
time. Control the surrounding vegetative com petition 
to maintain green ash (Dickerson, 2002). If this 
species is being used in a landscape, prune 
established trees every three to four years to maintain 
good form and structure (Colorado State University, 
2011)  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Insects will feed on green ash. Oystershell  scale 
( Lepidosaphes ulmi ) can cause serious damage to 
seedlings and small trees in the Northeast. 
Carpenterworm ( Prionoxystus robiniae ) bores into 
large branches and trunks, allowing the entrance of 
fungi. The brown headed ash sawfly ( Tomostethus 
multicinctus ) and the black headed ash sawfly 
( Tethida barda) also cause damage. The ash borer 
( Podesesia syringae ) damages the stems, thereby 
degrading lumber quality and contributing to decline 
in shelterbelt planting s (Solomon, 1975 and Wright, 
1965).  
 
The emerald ash borer ( Agrilus planipennis) has been 
detected in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and 
Canada. The beetle is responsible for the loss of 
millions of ash ( Fraxinus sp.) trees. The beetle lays 
eggs between bark  layers and crevices. After about 
one week, larvae hatch and begin to feed on an 
infected tree’s inner bark and phloem. The larvae 
change to prepupa and overwinter in the tree. The 
following spring, after pupation, adults emerge from 
holes they made in the  tree. Symptoms include: 
branch dieback, branching on the tree trunk  and 
vertical bark s lits (USFS, 2004) . 
 
A fungus ( Mycosphaerella fraxinocola) creates a leaf 
spot which may lead to defoliation of young trees. 
R ust  fungal infections can  distort petioles and small 
twigs. Green ash in Texas and Oklahoma has shown 
susceptibility to Phymatrotrichum omnivorum  which 
causes root rot (Wright, 1965) . Old er trees may be 
attacked by a fungus, Polyporus fraxinophilus , which 
attacks wood  and turns it into a yellow pulp  (Vines, 
1960) .  Seeds and Plant Production
 
Green ash seeds begin to fall as soon as they ripen in 
the fall (Wright, 1965). Color can be an indicator of 
maturity. The samaras don’t change color from green 
to yellow or brown until the embryo is full grown 
( Bonner, 1974). If picked slightly green, keep the 
samaras from overheating (Kennedy, 1990). Seed 
clusters can be collected by hand or with pruners and 
seed hooks. Another method is to shake the limbs and 
collect the dried samaras on a sheet beneath the tree. 
Spread out the samaras for uniform seed drying. 
After drying, the samara clusters can be broken apart 
by hand, flailing, or running them through a brush 
machine (Bonner, 1974).   
 
Watch for da mage to the samaras by the ash seed 
weevil. The greatest damage has  been reported in 
seed   harvested in the northeast and Great Plains, 
with  less  amounts in the south (Bonner, 2008). 
Remove the stems and trash by fanning or air screen 
cleaners. Cleaned seed of  seed lots collected from the 
Midwest and Great Lakes region averaged 17,260 
seeds per pound. In contrast, cleaned seed collected 
in Arkansas  and Mississippi averaged 20,950 seeds 
per pound  (Bonner, 2008) . 
 
Dry the seeds down to between  7 and  10 percent 
moisture for storage. Seeds stored in sealed 
containers at this moisture level at 41 ° F kept their 
viability for seven years in a study by Bart on (1945). 
Some green ash seeds may germinate the following 
spring, while others may be dormant for several 
years. Dormancy could be a combination of internal 
factors and seedcoat effects (Bonner, 2008).  
 
Germination of seeds collected from the northern part 
of the range includes a two -step  process of warm 
stratification for 16 weeks at 68 ° F and then cold 
stratification for 16 weeks at 38 ° F. A one hour 
resoak in water should be completed weekly in the 
warm phase and every 2 weeks in the cold phase. 
Usuall y only cold stratification is needed for seed 
collected in the southern part of the range. Seed 
dormancy may also be affected by seed age. Older 
stored seeds appear more dormant than  those that are  
freshly collected  (Bonner, 1974).  
 
Green ash samaras . Steve Hurst @USDA -NRCS PLANTS database

Seed s may  be sown in the fall to stratify in the 
nursery bed. Sow at approximately 80 to 100  seed /m 
(25 to 30/ft) of row with a row spacing of 15 to 30 
cm  (6 to 12 in.) apart . Cover the rows with burlap or 
greenhouse shade cloth until germination begins. 
Densities of 110 to 130  seed/m
2 (10 to 12ft2) are 
recommended to grow high quality seedlings  
(Kennedy, 1990) . Nursery seedlings normally 
develop no side branches during the first year of 
growth. However, by the second year a small number 
may develop. Some young trees may have a s ingle 
straight stem until they are 15 ft. (5m) tall (Wright, 
1965).  
 
Mature height varies among green ash depending on 
the location. In the northern part of its range, green 
ash may reach heights of 50 to 60 feet and breast 
height diameters of 18 to 24 in.  On quality sites in the 
southern part of its range, trees may grow up to 120 
ft. in height and reach a breast height diameter of 24 
to 30 in. (Putnam, Furnival, and McKnight, 1960).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
This is not a complete listing of green ash cultivars 
and releases. Please consult your local nursery for 
more information concerning releases adapted to 
your area. ‘ Patmore’ was introduced by the Patmore 
Nursery, Brandon, Manitoba, Canada. This variety is 
pyramid al to oval shaped and is a seedless male tree.   
‘Summit’ was introduced by the Summit Nursery, 
Stillwater, Minnesota. This male variety has an 
upright, narrow growth habit.   ‘Marshall’s Seedless’ 
has a rounded growth form and less cold hardy than 
‘Patmore’ or ‘Summit’ (Colorado State University, 
2011) .  Dakota Centennial® Ash ( F. Pennsylvania 
‘Wahpeton’) is an upright, fast growing male tree 
introduced by North Dakota State U niversity, Fargo, 
North Dakota.  
  ‘Kindred’  is a male tree introduced by the late Ben 
Gilbertson, Kindred, North Dakota.   ‘Bergeson’ is a 
patented variety introduced by Bergeson Nursery, 
Fertile, Minnesota.  
  ‘Cardan’  is a seed strain cultivar released by th e 
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota and USDA Northern Great Plains 
Research  Lab oratory , Mandan, North Dakota  (North 
Dakota State University, 1999 and Dir, 1990).  ‘Oahe’ 
and Prairie Harvest germplasm are releases by the 
USDA - NRCS Pla nt Materials Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota.   
References  
Barton, L.V. 1945. Viability of seed of Fraxinus  after 
storage. Contributions of the Boyce Thompson 
Institute 13:427 -432.  
Bonner, F.T. 1974.  Fraxinus Ash. In Seeds of woody 
plants of the United States. C.S. Schopmeyer, 
tech coord. P. 411- 416. US Department of  Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook 450. 
Washington, DC.
 
Bonner, F.T. 2008.  Fraxinus Ash In  : Woody Plant 
Seed manual. P. 537 -543. US Department of 
Agricul ture, Agriculture Handbook 727. 
Washington, DC.  
Colorado State University Extension. Plantalk. 2011.  Available: 
http://www.ext.colostate.edu/ptlk/1735.html  
Dickerson, J . 2002. Plant fact sheet for green ash 
( Fraxinus pennsylvanica).  USDA-  NRCS New 
York St ate Office, Syracuse, New York.  
Dir, M. 1990. Manual of Woody Landscape Plants,  Their Identification, Ornamental Characteristics, 
Culture, Propagation and Uses. Stipes Publishing 
Company, Champaign, IL.  
Gilmore, A.R., and W.R. Boggess. 1963. Effects of  past agricultural practices on the survival and 
growth of planted trees. Proceedings, Soil 
Science Society of America. 27(1):98 -102.  
Gucker, C .L. 2005.  Fraxinus pennsylvanica. In: Fire 
Effects Information System, [Online ]. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Fore st Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory (Producer).  Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/   Accessed 
[201 2, August 8].  
Hopkins, R .B. 1984. Avian species associated with 
prairie woodland types. In : Noble, D.L.;  R.P. 
Winokur , eds. Wooded draws: characteristics 
and values for the northern Great Plains: 
Proceedings of the symposium; 1984 June 12- 13; 
Rapid City, SD: South Dakota School of Mines 
and Technology, Biology Department: 27- 35. 
Johnson, W .C. 1971. The forest unde rstory 
vegetation on the Missouri River floodplain in 
North Dakota. Fargo, North Dakota. North 
Dakota State University. 185. Dissertation.  
Kennedy, H .E Jr. 1990. Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Marsh. Green ash. In: Burns,  R.M. .; B.H. 
Honkala technical coordinators . Silvics of North 
America. Vol.2. Hardwoods. Agriculture  
Handbook 654. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service: 348 -
354.  
North Dakota State University. 1999. Green ash.  Available: 
http://www.ag.ndsu.edu/trees/handbook/th- 3-
99.pdf  Accessed [ 2012, August 11]  
Putnam, J .A., G.M. Furnival, and J.S. McKnight. 
1960. Management and inventory of southern 
hardwoods. US Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Handbook 181. Washington, DC. 
102 p.  
Solomon, J.D. 1975. Biology of an ash borer,  Podosesia syringae , in green ash in Mississippi. 
Annals of the Entomological Society of 
America. 68(2):325- 328.

Stewart, H. A. and J .E. Krajicek. 1973. Ash, an 
American wood. American Woods Series FS -
216. USDA Forest Service. Washington, DC. 7p.  
Twedt,  D.  J.; C. Best . 2004. Restoration of floodplain 
forests for the conservation of migratory 
landbirds. Ecological Restoration. 22(3): 194-
203.  
USDA Forest Service. 2008. What is the emerald ash  borer? Bulletin NA -PR -05- 04. 
Vines, R .A. 1960. Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the Southwest. Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press. 1104 p.  
Wright, Jonathan W. 1965. Green ash ( Fraxinus 
pennsylvanica  Marsh.) In Silvics of forest trees 
of the United States. H.A. Fowells, comp. p.185-
190. US Department of Agriculture, Agri culture 
Handbook 271. Washington, DC.  
 
Prepared By :  Melinda Brakie, Soil Conservationist  
USDA -NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacogdoches, Texas  
Citation 
Brakie, M.,  2013. Plant Guide for green ash  
( Fraxinus pennsylvanica ). USDA- Natural Resources 
C onservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials 
Center. Nacogdoches, Texas . 75964.  
Published  August 2013 
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials P rogram 
Web site http://plant -materials nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER