Plant Guide
RED FESCUE 
Festuca rubra L. 
Plant Symbol = FERU2 
Including: 
F . rubra  L. ssp. ar ctica  (Hack.) Govor.  (FERUA6) 
F. rubra  L. ssp. arenaria  (Osbeck) F. Aresch.  (FERUA3)  
F . rubra  L. ssp. aucta  (Krecz. & Bobr.) Hulten  (FERUA)  
F . rubra  L. ssp.  falla x (T huill.) Nyman  (FERUF3) 
F . rubra  L ssp. mediana  (Pavlick) Pavlick  FERUM8)  
F . rubra  L. ssp. pruinosa  (Hack.) Piper (FERUP5)  
F.  rubra  L. ssp . rubra  (FERUR2)  
F.  rubra  L.  ssp . rubra  var.  planifolia  Hack.  (FERUP3) 
F.  rubra  L. ssp. secunda  (J. Presl) Pavlick  (FERUP3)  
F . rubra  L. ssp.  vallicola  (Rydb.) Pavlick (FERUV)  
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho and Alaska  Plant 
M aterials  Program s 
 
‘Arctared’ Red  Fescue.  Alaska  Department of Natural Resources, 
Division of Agriculture, Plant Materials Center photo . 
Alternate Names 
Red fescue /creeping red fescue =  Festuca rubra  
Richardson’s fescue,  Arctic red fescue = F.  rubra ssp. 
arctica   Red fescue = 
F. rubra ssp. arenaria 
Aleut  fescue , red fescue =   F. rubra  ssp. aucta  
Chewing’s fescue,  Flatleaf red fescue = F.  rubra ssp. 
fallax  
Dune red fescue = F.  rubra ssp. mediana  
Rock fescue = F . rubra  ssp. pruinosa 
Red fescue = F . rubra  ssp. rubra  
Secund red fescue  = F. rubra  ssp. secunda  
 
Common and scientific names from PLANTS Database 
and  Barkworth et al. (2007).   Some taxonomists ignore 
the variation between the sub species and refer to the 
complex as Festuca rubra  without further differentiation   
Uses  
Erosion control: Red fescue is an excellent soil  stabilizer 
and  is used extensively for stabilizing waterwa ys, slopes, 
banks, cuts , and fills.   Due to its sod -forming nature , 
invasion of undesirable shrub species is reduced, but 
species diversity can also be limited (Wright and Czapla, 
2011 ).  Red fescue is used as a cover crop in orchards 
because of its low stature and ability to grow in partially 
shaded conditions.  
 
Recreation and beautification: Red fescue is used as a 
turf for lawns, athletic fields, golf courses, and 
playgrounds.  
 
Crop:  Red fescue  is used  for pasture  but is not a 
recommended species  for forage production.  Palatability 
and nutritional value for livestock is rated as fair (Walsh, 
1995).   Some varieties contain endophytes that in high 
levels may be harmful to livestoc k (Yoder, 2000). 
 
Wildlife:  Deer, elk , and moose utilize red fescue.  S now 
geese graze red fescue on salt marshes in Manitoba and 
on the Hudson Bay coast.  Cover value for small nongame 
birds and small mammals is rated as fair (Walsh, 1995).  
 
Other:  Red fe scue is useful in p hytoremediation of  soils 
contaminated by industrial activities such as mining, 
energy , and fuel production.  Red fescue has the ability to 
accumulate  copper, lead, manganese, and zinc metals 
from contaminated soils (Padmavathiamma and Li, 2009; 
Wong et al ., 1994) . 
Status 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).

Weediness 
Red  fescue can out -compete some native species on 
disturbed sites in temperate and arctic plant commu nities  
and may colonize disturbed areas naturally  by spreading 
rhizomes .  It does not generally develop a persistent  seed 
bank  in the soil .  Root leachates from red fescue have 
been shown to inhibit shrub growth (Walsh, 1995).   This 
plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  C onsult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service O ffice, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.go
v/.  
C onsult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description  
General :  Grass Family (Poaceae).  Red fescue is a 
perennial, cool season grass .   Most sub species are 
rhizomatous with the exception of ssp. pruinosa  and ssp. 
fallax  which are densely tufted.   Culms are hollow, 30-
100 cm (12- 39 in) tall and erect from a curved base.  
Leaves are mostly basal 5 -15 cm (2- 6 in) long and 1- 2 
mm (0.04- 0.09 in) wide.  Young shoots emerge from leaf 
axils and break through the bases of leaf sheaths.  The 
lower sheaths disintegrate into loose fibers.  The 
inflorescence is a narrow panicle 3 -20 cm (1.2- 8 in) long.  
Spikelets are three to ten flowered.  Lemmas are awnless 
to awned and range from 0 -4mm (0 -0.16 in) long (Walsh, 
1995).   The b ase of the  stems and spikelets are often 
reddish in color.   Red fescue is long -lived in northern 
latitudes and at high elevations.   Barkworth et al. (2007) 
provides a detailed taxonomic key to the subspecies.  
Distribution:  Red fescue is a mor phologically diverse 
complex of sub species that is widely distributed in the 
arctic and temperate zones of Asia, Europe, and North 
Amer ica  (Barkworth et al. , 2007) .  Eurasian plants have 
been introduced to other parts of the world and hundreds 
of cultivar s have been developed and widely distributed.   
It  is native  throughout the United States with the 
exception of the states of Arkansas, Florida, Kansas, 
Louisiana, Mississippi,  and South Dakota and is native to 
all the provinces and territories in Canada (P LANTS 
Database).   It is also found in Mexico, Europe, Asia, 
Africa, and New Zealand (Walsh, 1995).    For current 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat : Red fescue inhabits a wide range of ecological 
s ites and soils from sands and gravels and pebble beaches 
along sea coasts to moist meadows and disturbed soils 
from sea level to 11,000 ft (3350 m)  elevation.  
Adaptation  
Red fescue is adapted to a wide range of soil textures, is 
somewhat tolerant of salin ity, and requires at least 16 
inches of annual precipitation or supplemental irrigation .   It tolerates soils low in fertility
, is  somewhat  shade 
tolerant,  and may be  susceptible to snow mold in areas 
that have extended snow cover  (Ogle et al., 2011) .   It is 
tolerant of acid to slightly alkaline (pH 4.5 -7.5) soils and 
can tolerate spring flooding and some poorly drained 
sites.   It is somewhat tolerant of salt spray.  
Establishment  
Seed should be planted into a clean, firm seedbed to a 
depth of ¼ inch.  The  single species seeding rate is 4 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  For  erosion 
control  plantings, double the seeding rate  to 8 pounds PLS 
per acre.   There are approximately 614,000 seeds per 
pound  (1,350,000 seeds/kg) .  Red fescue is usually 
plant ed in a mixture and w hen used as a component of a 
seed mix,  the seeding rate is adjusted to the percent of 
mix desired .  Mixtures typically call for 20 -60 percent red 
fescue, depending on objectives and site conditions.  For 
turf applications, the seeding rate is 15 pounds PLS per 
acre (Ogle et al ., 2011).  
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but applications of broadleaf herbicides 
should not be made until plants have reached the four to 
six leaf stage.  Mow above grass seedlings  when weeds 
begin to bloom to reduce weed seed production.  I nsects 
may damage new stands and use of insecticides may be 
required.  Be sure to read and follow pesticide label 
directions.  
 
 
Red fescue seed.  Alaska Department of Natural Resources, 
Division of Agriculture, Plant Materials Center photo.  
Management 
Red fescue starts growth early in the spring, generally 
slows in mid -summer , and grows vigorously from late 
summer until freezing.  Growth during the summer is 
dependent on precipitation or irrigation.   Red fescue is 
tolerant of close grazing but  the stand and forage yield  
will decrease with overgrazing.  If grazed according to a 
grazing management plan and allowed adequate time to 
recover, it can maintain or even increase yield over time.  
For turf applications it can handle repeated mowing as 
long as cutting length is greater than 1½ inches.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Red fescue is most susceptible to billbugs ( Sphenophorus 
spp. ), white grubs ( Cyclocephala spp. ), and plant diseases 
including  dollar spot ( Sclerotinia homeocarpa, Lanzia 
spp., Moellerodiscus spp. ), pythium blight  (Pythium spp.), 
and red thread ( Laetisaria fuciformis) (UC IPM Online).  
Many turf type cultivars have high endophyte levels that 
resist many of the common insect proble ms (Cook, 2011). 
 
Environmental Concerns  
Red fescue is long -lived and spreads primarily by 
rhizomes.  It is considered “weedy”  by some and not so 
by others.  It  can spread into adjoining plant communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions.   For 
alternatives to control red fescue contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
Seed and Plant Production  
Red fescue plugs are easy to propagate  in a greenhouse.  
Seed is surface -sown into containers containing standard 
potting mix and seeds germinate within 15 days after 
planting .  Germination occurs at 2 7 °C  (80°F)  and 
transplant survival averages 80 percent (Young, 20 01), 
(Baskin and Baskin 2002) .  Roots should fill containers 
(but not be root -bound) and leaves and stems should be 
cut back to approximately 4 inches before transplanting.  
This typically occurs in 2 months.  
 
The largest red fescue seed producing area in the world is 
the Peace River region of Alberta and British Columbia, 
Canada.  In 1991, there were 125,000 acres of red fescue 
grown for seed.  The major variety grown is ‘Boreal’ but 
only 10- 20 percent is certified seed.  An increasing 
number of proprietar y varieties are being grown for seed  
in the Peace River region  (Yoder, 2000).  
 
Red fescue is a long -lived perennial but seed production 
is relatively short, lasting only one to two years.  Because 
of its rhizomatous growth habit, red fescue tends to sod in  
quickly.  Seedheads are suppressed as the stand ages and 
the vegetative tillers increase resulting in smaller seed 
yields  (Yoder, 2000).  
 
Because seedlings are very slow to develop, red fescue for 
seed production is often  seeded  with canola or wheat.  
The  annual crop acts as a nurse or companion crop to 
provide a sheltered environment for the developing red 
fescue seedlings and provides a  marketable product for 
the seed grower the first year.  Row spacing, seeding rate 
and method of seeding depends on equi pment available, 
whether or not a companion crop is used,  and site and soil 
conditions.    
If a companion crop is seeded, red fescue is usually 
b

roadcast at 1 -4 pounds per acre.  When seeded alone, red 
fescue is drilled in 12 -14 inch row spacing at 1- 3 pounds 
per acre or in 7 inch row spacing at 3 -5 pounds  PLS  per 
acre.   (The Alaska Plant Materials Center uses 36 inch 
row spacing for ease of cultivation).   Seeding depths 
should not exceed ½ inch.  Due to the narrow row 
spacing, between row cultivation is not employed and 
weed control is accomplished by herbicide application.  
Red fescue is traditionally fertilized in the fall with 30- 80 
pounds per acre of nitrogen (Yoder, 2000).  
 
Red fescue plants mature unevenly across a field so 
swathing followed by combinin g is most commonly used 
to harvest seed.  As fields mature they will change in 
color from green to red to brown.  The time between 
pollination and seed harvest is 20 -30 days.  Seed yields 
average around 800 pounds per acre (900 kg/ha) (Yoder, 
2000).  
Cultiv ars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are over 200 varieties of red fescue released .  Many 
of them are proprietary varieties  developed by private 
companies  and have been developed specifically  for 
lawn/turf applications  and are not discussed here.  The 
following red fescue releases have been made for 
conservation/restoration  applications  (often dual purpose 
turf/conservation)  and most of the information is from 
USDA (1994)  unless otherwise noted . 
 
‘Arctared’  was released  by the University of Alaska 
Agricultural Experiment Station and Agricultural 
Research Service in 1965 from a plant collection in the 
Matanuska Valley near Palmer Alaska.  It grows best on 
medium textured soils, will survive extremes of 
temperatures, pH, m oisture, and can thrive in both sun 
and shade.  It  is tolerant of fire.  It is used throughout 
Alaska for revegetating mines and highway right -of -ways 
and is also used for lawns and golf courses.  The Alaska 
PMC maintains Breeder and Foundation seed and 
Ce rtified seed is available  through the Alaska Seed 
Growers, Inc.  (Hunt and Wright, 2007a).  
 
‘ Banner II ’ ( F. rubra  ssp.  commutata ) was developed by 
McCarthy -Burlingham Research and Rutgers University 
and is endophyte enhanced for insect resistance.  It  is 
broadly adapted to areas where fine fescues and bluegrass  
are  used.  Breeder s eed is maintained by McCarthy -
Burlingham Research and Certified seed is available from 
O.M. Scott and Sons.  
 
‘Boreal’  was selected at the Canada Department of 
Agriculture Res earch Station, Beaverlodge, Alberta in 
1966.  The intended use is for lawn and pasture  and is 
best adapted to southern Alberta, Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba .  Breeder seed is maintained by the 
Beaverlodge Research Station and Certified seed is

available from United Grain Growers Ltd, Edmonton, 
Alberta.  
 
‘ Cindy  Lou ’ was developed by Cebeco Zaden B. V., 
Vlijmen, The Netherlands from selections of turf in 
northern Europe and released in the United States by 
International Seeds, Inc., Halsey, Oregon in 1991.  It is 
adapted to mostly the northern tier of the United State s 
and the southern region of Alaska and produces superior 
quality turf especially with lower mowing heights .  
Breeder seed is maintained by the developer and Certified 
seed is available from the releasing company.  
 
‘ Eco ’ ( F. rubra  ssp.  fallax ) was released  in 1993 by 
McCarthy -Burlingham Research and was bred from 
germplasm  collected in Europe and North America.  It is 
endophyte enhanced and shows  good recovery after 
drought .  It is disease resistant and produces high seed 
yields .  It is adapted to northern climates suited to fine 
fescue and bluegrass.  Breeder and Certified seed is 
maintained and available from the releasing company.  
 
‘ Ensylva ’ was released in 1978 by International Seeds 
Inc., Halsey, Oregon and was developed by Cebeco 
Zaden B.V., Vlijem, The Netherlands.  It is extremely 
fine -leaved, producing an attractive and dense turf under a 
wide variety of conditions.  It is adapted to mo stly the 
northern tier of the United States and the southern region 
of Alaska.  Breeder and Certified seed is maintained and 
available from the releasing company.  
 
Henderson Ridge Selected Class Germplasm  was 
released by the Alaska PMC in 1993.  It was collected on 
the Island of Attu in the Aleutians, Alaska in 1993.  No 
purposeful selection from this material was made.  It is 
better adapted to the coastal and southeastern regions of 
Alaska  than Arctared .  The Alaska PMC maintains early 
generation seed for commercial production  (Hunt and 
Wright, 2007b) . 
 
‘ Herald ’ was developed by Cebeco Zaden, and released 
by Van Engelen Zaden, T he Netherlands.  It has good 
seedling vigor, good resistance to dollar spot , and is lower 
growing than some strong creeping fescue -varieties.  It is 
adapted to mostly the northern tier of the United States 
and the southern region of Alaska.  Breeder and Certified 
seed is maintained and available from the releasing 
company.  
 
‘ Jamestown ’ ( F. rubra ssp.  fallax) was developed at the 
Unive rsity of Rhode Island from clones found on an 
abandoned golf course on Jamestown I sland off the coast 
of Rhode Island and was released by Rhode Island 
Agricultural Experiment Station in 1974.  It is fine -leaved 
with excellent persistence under low mowing and is 
adapted to most of the United States with the exception of 
the southeastern states.  Breeder seed is maintained by 
Lofts Seed Company in cooperation with Rhode Island  Agricultural Experiment Station and Certified seed is 
available
.   
 
‘ Jamestown II’  (F. rubra ssp.  fallax) is an improvement 
of Jamestown containing endophyte s which  improve s 
stress tolerance,  persistence, and insect resistance.  It is 
n ot recommended for forage production because of 
possible  adverse effects on grazing animals by 
endophytes.  It is adapted to most of the United States 
with the exception of the southeastern states.  Breeder 
seed is maintained by Rhode Island Agricultural 
Experiment Station and Certified seed is available.  
 
‘ Pathfinder ’ is an advanced generation synthetic cultivar 
selected from the progenies of 18 clones and was released 
by Lebanon Seaboard, Inc. in Pennsylvania in Septembe r, 
1991.  It has good drought tolerance and extensive 
rhizomes that give it good spreading characteristics and 
the ability to recover from injury.  It has performed well 
in field trials conducted in Canada and the United States 
and seed is commercially available (Ford, et al., 2001).  
References  
Barkworth, M., Anderson, L., Capels, K., Long, S. and 
Piep, M. (eds) 2007. Manual of Grasses for North 
America. Intermountain Herbarium and Utah State 
University Press. 627 p.  
Baskin, C. and Baskin, J.  2002.  Propagation Protocol for  Production of Container Festuca  rubra  L. Plants.  
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.  In: 
Native Plant Network .  
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org   Moscow, ID: 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery.  (accessed December 6, 
2011)  
Cook, T.  The Fine Fescues.  Oregon State University, 
Horticulture and Crop & Soil Science.  [Online] 
http://groups.hort.oregonstate.edu  (accessed 
December 16, 2011) 
Ford, T., Meyer, W, Smith, D., Bara, R, Funk, C. 2001.   Registration of ‘Pathfinder’ strong creeping red 
fescue.  Crop Science 41 (5); 1641- 1642. 
Hunt,  P., Wright, S. 2007a.  ‘Arctared’ Red Fescue – 
Erosion Control, Soil Stabilization, Turf Throughout 
Alaska.  Fact Sheet.  State of Alaska, Department of 
Natural Resources, Division of Agriculture, Plant 
Materials Center. 2p.  
Hunt, P., Wright, S. 2007b.  Henderson Ridge Germplasm  Red Fescue –  Erosion Control, Soil Stabilization, 
T urf Throughout Alaska.  Fact Sheet.  State of 
Alaska, Department of Natural Resources, Division 
of Agriculture, Plant Materials Center. 2p.  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 2011.  
Conservation Plant Materials for the Intermountain 
West.  T echnical Note 24.  USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 57 p.  
PLANTS Database.  Festuca rubra. [Online]  http://plants.usda.gov  U.S. Department of

Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(accessed December 6, 2011)  
Padmavathiamma, P. and Li, L. 2009.  Phytoremediation  of Metal -Contaminated Soil in Temperate Regions of 
British Columbia, Canada.  International Journal of 
Phytoremediation.  11:6.  575- 590. 
UC IPM Online.  Common problems found on Red  Fescue.  University  of California Agriculture and 
Natural Resources.   http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu  
(accessed December 16, 2011)  
USDA. 1994.  Grass Varieties in the United States.   Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  United States 
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation 
Servic e. 296 p.  
Walsh, R. 1995.  Festuca rubra.  In: Fire Effects  Information System, [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  (accessed 
December 6,  2011). 
Wong, Y., Lam, E. and Tam, N. 1994.  Physiological  Effects of Copper Treatment and its Uptake Pattern 
in Festuca rubra  cv. Merlin.  Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling.  Elsevier Science B.V.  
311- 319. 
Yoder, C. 2000. Creeping Red Fescue Seed Production in  the Peace River Region.  Agri -Facts.  Alberta 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Development. 19 p.  
Young, B. 2001.  Propagation Protocol for Production of  Container  Festuca rubra  L. Plants (Leach Tube), San 
Francisco , California.  In: Native Plant Network.  
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org   Moscow, ID: 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery.  (accessed December 6, 
2011)  
 
Wright, S. and Czapla, P. 2011.  Alaska Coastal 
 
Revegetation and Erosion Control Guide.  State  of 
Alaska, Department of Natural Resources, Division   
of Agriculture, Plant Materials Center.  178 p. plus 
Appendices.  Also on -line at plants.alaska.gov.  
 
 
Prepared By :   
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NR CS Plant Materials Center, 
 
Aberdeen, ID  
   
Peggy Hunt, State of Alaska, Plant Materials Center  
   
Stoney Wright, State of Alaska, Plant Materials Center  
 
Citation 
St. John, L., D. Tilley, P. Hunt , and S. Wright. 2012.  Plant 
 
G uide for R ed Fescue ( Festuca rubra)  USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center,   
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210 . 
Published January, 2012 
Edited:  21Dec2011ls; 21Dec2011dt; 28Dec2011ph; 
4Jan2012ls ; 4Jan2012ph ; 17Jan2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please  
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER