Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLANNELBUSH 
Fremontodendron 
californicum  (Torr.) Coville 
Plant Symbol = FRCA6  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden 
Alternate Names 
Fremontia 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The bark is cut at one end of the 
branches and peeled off in long strips.  These are 
washed and rubbed between the hands.  Three strands 
are rolled together on the upper thigh to make 
cordage a type of string or rope that was made into a 
pack strap and tumpline by the Kawaiisu.  The wood 
was also sometimes substituted for willow in the 
making of Kawaiisu baby cradles.  The inner bark 
was soaked in water and the infusion drank as a 
physic by the Kawaiisu.  Many other California tribes 
utilized the bark for cordage including the Owens 
Valley Paiute, Sierra Miwok, Western Mono, and 
Tubatulabal.  The Sierra Miwok made a hoop of the 
bark wrapped with buckskin for the hoop and pole 
game.  The Tubatulabal used rope made of 
flannelbush to lash bundles of tules together for a 
raft, to tie up crooks on pinyon staves, to bundle 
firewood into a load, and  for two ends of a pack 
strap.  The Western Mono used the young split 
branches to tie together their looped stirring sticks 
and to assemble different types of cone-shaped 
storage bins for acorns and manzanita berries. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Sterculia Family (Sterculiaceae).  Named 
after the explorer John C. Fremont, this shrub or 
small tree reaches 3-8 m in height.  The twigs have 
dense stellate hairs.  The shrub has ovate, soft to 
leathery leaves with 3 main lobes with hairs on the 
upper and lower surfaces.   The spectacular solitary 
flowers are 35-60 mm wide with no petals and 
subtended by 3 showy yellow, sepal-like bracts.  The 
ovoid fruit is chambered. 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The shrub is found from 400-2200 m in 
chaparral, oak woodland, and pine forests in the 
California Floristic Province, Arizona, and down to 
Baja California. 
 
Establishment 
The plants grow in extr emely rocky areas and are 
often found in crevices of rocks.  In southern 
California, these plants are found in areas containing 
very gritty soil and low rainfall.  Buy small seedlings 
and plant them in the fall in a pile of roadfill with no 
clay (mostly gravel and rock and very little soil).  
Plant the seedlings in mounds in full sun.  Plant in 
shallow holes and make sure that no soil covers the 
top of the ball of soil that contains the seedlings.  
Cover the soil with gravel and rock, then water.  
Keep the mound moist until new growth is several 
inches long (not over 4 inches), then stop watering.  
Water at the edge of the mound making sure that the 
water doesn't get within fift een inches of the trunk of 
the plant.  Leave the shrub alone from then on and 
use no fertilizer. 
 
Management  
You can prune this shrub at  any time of the year.  
Tribes in the Sierra Nevada burned individual shrubs 
or areas where the shrubs grew  in the fall or winter to 
induce rapid elongation of young epicormic branches 
which were harvested and split for cordage.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Steward, J.H. 1933.   Ethnography of the Owens 
Valley Paiute.  University of California Publications 
in American Archaeology and Ethnology 33(5):423-
438. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Voegelin, E.W. 1938.   Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records 2(1):1-84. 
 
Whetstone, R.D. & T.A. Atkinson 1993.  
Sterculiaceae .  Pages 1077-1078 IN:  The Jepson 
manual: Higher plants of California .  J.C. Hickman 
(ed.).  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press.  Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.