Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC BEACH STRAWBERRY  
Fragaria chiloensis (L.) P. 
Mill. ssp.  pacifica Staudt 
Plant Symbol = FRCHP  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Names 
Beach strawberry.  This subspecies is recognized as 
having three related subspecies:  chiloensis, lucida, 
and  sandwicensis .  Frageria chiloensis  ssp. 
sandwicensis  is known as the Sandwich beach 
strawberry. 
 
Use  
Ethnobotanic : This strawberry produces many more 
fruits than the wood strawberry and has a great 
flavor.  It was gathered and eaten raw by the Makah, 
Quileute, and Quinault of western Washington.  It 
was also harvested for its fruit by the native peoples 
of Alaska and coastal British Columbia.  The Wiyot, 
Pomo, and other tribes in California savored the 
fruits.  The plant is also used medicinally by the 
Quileute by chewing the leaves and spitting them on 
burns. 
 
Wildlife : The Portola woodrat and the valley quail eat 
the fruit and leaves of wild strawberries. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: This herbaceous perennial plant spreads by 
seed and also by short rhizom es and leafless stolons.  
The toothed leaves are leathery, basal with a petiole 
generally 2-20 cm.  They appear in leaflets of 3 and 
are glabrous (not hairy) above.  The flowers have 5 
white petals that are 10-18 mm, with numerous pistils 
and 20-35 stamens.  The five bractlets are unlobed.  
The red fleshy fruit is covered with achenes.   
 Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos  
 
Distribution 
This plant is found below 200 m, in dune and 
grassland communities of coastal California.  It is 
found from Alaska to coastal South America and 
Hawaii. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Dig up plantlets or runners and plant them in pots in 
summer.  Be sure to cover the stems and roots with 
soil.  Place the pots in a ho thouse to establish good, 
strong roots.  Water the plants or runners and keep 
them moist.  Plant the plants outdoors in the ground 
in the fall or winter after the rains have started.  They 
should be planted in full sun in a light, loose soil, 
about ten inches apart.  It will not take long for the 
plants to make a complete ground cover.  Lightly 
fertilize the plants during the growing season.  Note 
that those plants that have bigger flowers usually 
have less fruit and those with smaller flowers have 
more fruit.  Protect the plants from gophers, deer, 
squirrels, raccoons, and other wildlife.   
 
Management  
Keep the runners pruned ba ck because they can be 
invasive.  It is necessary to divide the patch every 
three to four years and start a new patch for increased 
vigor.  Younger plants are more vigorous and 
produce more berries. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Fragaria cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.

Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Ertter, B. 1993.  Fragaria. Page 952 IN:  The Jepson 
manual: Higher plants of California .  J.C. Hickman 
(ed.).   University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V. P.Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo plants .  American Indian Studies 
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Gunther, E. 1992.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington: The knowledge and use of indigenous 
plants by Native Americans.  University of 
Washington Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples: 
nutrition, botany, and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
Loud, L.L. 1918.   Ethnogeography and archaeology 
of the Wiyot territory .  University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and 
Ethnology.  14(3):221-436. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.