Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WOOD 
STRAWBERRY  
Fragaria vesca L. 
Plant Symbol = FRVE  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Woodland strawberry; California strawberry 
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic: The fruit was gathered by native 
peoples throughout the United States and Canada.  
Such cultural groups include the Micmac, Huron, 
Potawatomi, Creek, Blackfoot, Iroquois, and many 
other groups.  The fruit was eaten raw and not 
preserved by California Indian tribes including the 
Coast Yuki and the Karok.  Furthermore, a tea was 
made from the leaves by  the Upriver Halkomelem 
and Sechelt of British Co lumbia, the Cowlitz of 
Washington and the Micmac of the maritimes. 
 
Wildlife : The Portola woodrat and the valley quail eat 
the fruit and leaves of wild strawberries. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  This herbaceous 
perennial plant spreads by seed, short rhizomes and 
leafless stolons.  The toothed leaves are thin and 
basal with a petiole generally 3-12 cm.  They appear 
in leaflets of 3 and are sp arsely hairy above.  The 
flowers have 5 white petals with numerous pistils and 
20-35 stamens.  The five br actlets are often 2-lobed.  
The red fleshy fruit is covered with achenes. 
  Carl Lindman © Gerhard Keuck from Bilder ur Nordens @ Project Runeburg 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found in northwestern California, the 
Cascade Ranges, the Sierra  Nevada, central-western 
California, San Bernardino Mountains, Peninsular 
Ranges, to eastern North America, and south to Baja 
California and also Europe.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : This plant is found below 2000 m in 
partial shade of closed-cone pine, evergreen, mixed 
conifer forests, and chaparral and has a very wide 
distribution.   
 
Planting: Dig up plantlets or runners and plant them 
in pots in summer, make sure to cover the stems and 
roots in soil.  Place the pots in a hothouse to establish 
good, strong roots.  Water the plants or runners and 
keep them moist.  Plant the seedlings outdoors in the 
ground in the fall or winter after the rains have 
started.  They should be planted in full sun in a light, 
loose soil, about ten inches apart.  It will not take 
long for the plants to make a complete ground cover.  
Lightly fertilize the plants during the growing season.  
Note that those plants that have bigger flowers 
usually have less fruit while those with smaller 
flowers have more fruit.  Protect the plants from 
gophers, deer, squirrels, raccoons, and other wildlife.   
 
Management  
Keep the runners pruned ba ck because they can be 
invasive.  It is necessary to divide the patch every 3 
to 4 years and start a new patch for increased vigor.  
Younger plants are more vigorous and produce more 
berries.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
FRVE is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Chesnut, V.K. 1902.  Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII.  Reprinted by 
the Mendocino County Historical Society in 1974. 
 
Dixon, R.B. 1905.   The Huntington California 
expedition: the Northern Maidu .  Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History 17(3):119-346. 
 
Ertter, B. 1993.   Fragaria. Page 952 IN: The Jepson 
Manual: Higher Plants of Ca lifornia.  J.C. Hickman 
(ed.).  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Gifford, E.W. 1965.   The Coast Yuki.  Sacramento 
Anthropological Society Paper 2:1-97.  Sacramento, 
California. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples: 
Nutrition, botany, and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Schenck, S.M. & E.W. Gifford 1952.   Karok 
ethnobotany .  Anthropological Records 13(6):377-
392. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.