Plant Guide

WHITE ASH

Fraxinus americana L.

Plant Symbol = FRAM2 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
Alternate common names 
Biltmore ash, Biltmore white ash, cane ash, small-
seed white ash 
Uses 
White ash is a good tree for open areas such as parks 
and campuses; it also is used as a lawn, shade, and 
street tree, even though its potential large size can 
make it incongruous with a small area.  It is an erect, 
graceful tree, often with bronze-purple fall foliage. It 
is easy to transplant and numerous cultivars have 
been developed, including seedless (male) forms.  
Other selections are based on yellow to orange and 
purple fall colors, persistence of leaves in the fall, 
height, crown shape (broadly to narrowly oval) and 
density, growth vigor, and cold hardiness.  White ash 
also has been used in re-vegetating disturbed sites.   
The wood of white ash is valued for its strength, 
hardness, heavy weight, and elasticity (shock 
resistance). Native Americans appreciated its 
usefulness for tools and implements, and it is used 
extensively today for tool handles.  Its use in wooden 
baseball bats is famous.  The wood is also used in 
furniture, doors, veneer, antique vehicle parts, 
railroad cars and ties, canoe paddles, snowshoes, 
boats, posts, ties, and fuel.  White ash is the most 
valuable timber tree of the various ashes.   
White ash was used by Native Americans for a 
variety of medicinal purposes: a decoction of the 
leaves as a laxative and general tonic for women after 
childbirth; the seeds as an aphrodisiac, a diuretic, an 
appetite stimulant, a styptic, an emetic, and as a cure 
for fevers; and a bark tea for an itching scalp, lice, 
snakebite, and other sores. Juice from the leaves has 
been applied to mosquito bites for relief of swelling 
and itching.    
White-tailed deer and cattle browse white ash and 
beaver, porcupine, and rabbits may eat the bark of 
young trees.  The seeds are eaten by wood duck, 
northern bobwhite, turkey, grouse, finches, 
grosbeaks, cardinals, fox squirrel, mice, and many 
other birds and small mammals.  The tendency of 
white ash to form trunk cavities makes it valuable for 
cavity nesters such as redheaded, red-bellied, and 
pileated woodpeckers. Once primary nest excavators 
have opened up the bole, it is an excellent habitat for 
secondary nesters such as wood ducks, owls, 
nuthatches, and gray squirrels.   
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description  
General: Olive family (Oleaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 20-30 m tall, maintaining a central leader 
(strong apical dominance) in youth with an even 
distribution of branches, developing a dense, conical 
or rounded crown at maturity.  The trunk is long, 
straight, and free of branches for most of its length 
(except when open grown).  The bark is thick, dark 
gray, with a uniform, diamond-shaped ridge and 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

furrow pattern.  Leaves are deciduous, opposite, 
pinnately compound, 20-38 cm long, leaflets usually 
7(5-9), short-stalked, ovate to ovate-lanceolate or 
elliptic, acuminate, 6-13 cm long and 3-6 cm wide, 
sometimes with a few teeth near the tip, dark green 
and smooth above, whitish below.  Flowers are 
numerous, very small, green to purplish, in small 
branched clusters near the branch tips, usually either 
male (staminate) or female (pistillate), a single tree 
usually bearing only one sex (the species dioecious). 
Fruits are samaras 2.5-5 cm long, hanging in clusters, 
with a narrow wing extending about 1/3-1/4 of the 
way down the cylindrical body.  The common name 
is in reference to the white color of the wood.   
This species flowers in April-May, the male first, 
before appearance of the leaves; fruiting August-
October, the seeds dispersed September-November.  
The pollen is already airborne during the 7-10 days 
when the female flowers are receptive. 
Variation within the species: A number of variants 
have been described within the species, including F. 
americana var. biltmoreana (Beadle) J. Wright ex 
Fern. (= F. biltmoreana Beadle) and F. americana 
var. microcarpa A. Gray, but the distinctions 
between these have not been generally confirmed and 
formal variants are not currently recognized. 
Diploids (2n=46), tetraploids (2n=92), and 
hexaploids (2n=138) occur within the species, but it 
is difficult to associate differences in ploidy level 
with other patterns of variation.  
Distribution 
White ash grows over most of eastern North 
America, absent only from the outer Atlantic and 
Gulf coastal plains.  It occurs from Nova Scotia west 
to eastern Minnesota and south to Texas and northern 
Florida, northward barely into southern Quebec and 
Ontario.  It is cultivated in Hawaii.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment 
Adaptation: White ash grows best on deep, well-
drained, moist soils with other hardwoods at 
elevations of about 0-1050 meters.  It rarely forms 
pure stands.  It occurs on middle slopes in the 
Northeast, on slightly elevated ridges in the 
floodplains of major streams in the coastal plain, and 
on slopes along major streams in the central states.  
Primary associates are eastern white pine, northern 
red oak, white oak, sugar maple, red maple, yellow 
birch, American beech, black cherry, eastern 
hemlock, and yellow poplar.  
White ash is primarily characteristic of early and 
intermediate stages of succession.  The seedlings are 
shade tolerant but can also establish in full sun. 
Mature individuals are shade intolerant – after 
persisting for a few years in moderately dense shade, 
trees developing inside closed stands reach the 
overstory by responding quickly to openings in the 
canopy.  
General: White ash begins producing seed at a 
minimum age of 20 years.  A good seed crop is 
produced at intervals of 2-3 years, although the males 
flower heavily each year.  To best overcome 
dormancy, stratify under moist conditions for 30 days 
at 14/30° C (night/day) then for 60 days at 5° C. A 
forest floor seed bank may retain viable white ash 
seeds for 3-4 years.  Germination can occur on 
mineral soil, humus, or leaf litter, and seedlings 
develop best in partial sun.  Mature trees may reach 
200 years of age.   
White ash resprouts from the root crown after 
logging or fire.  Sprouting ability decreases with age. 
Management 
White ash prefers moist, deep soils for best growth 
but is adaptable to a wide range of soil pH.  Full sun 
is best.  Young plants are easily transplanted and 
established. White ash has been successfully used in 
the reclamation of strip mines in Ohio, Kentucky, and 
Pennsylvania.  Seedlings provide a better start than 
direct seeding, and planting should be in mixtures 
with other hardwoods.  White ash is more ornamental 
than green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica) but is less 
adaptable, grows at a slower rate, and is more 
susceptible to pests and diseases.  
Bud grafting generally propagates white ash 
cultivars.  The species also can be propagated by 
conventional methods of grafting and layering; open 
field and bench grafting of unpotted stock have been 
successful.   
Fire kills the aboveground stem and crown of white 
ash, but it resprouts from the root crown after fire. 
White ash is moderately susceptible to decay and 
insect damage induced through fire damage.  
Environmental Concerns 
Ash decline (or “ash dieback” or “ash yellows”) is 
the most serious problem affecting white ash.  The 
decline is especially prevalent in New York, 
Pennsylvania and Vermont but occurs from the Great 
Plains to the Atlantic coast at 39°–45° N latitude.  
Mycoplasma-like organisms (MLO, the cause of ash 
yellows) have been found associated with most of the

dying trees.Not all dying trees are infected and ash 
decline is thought to result from multiple causes – 
MLO plus various fungi and viruses, as well as 
atmospheric pollution and drought. Maintenance of 
good tree vigor is the primary control 
recommendation.   
White ash is sensitive to ozone, sulfur dioxide, 
nitrous oxides, and associated acid deposition, which 
may cause the appearance of necrotic lesions on the 
leaves.  Most of recent ash decline has occurred in 
areas with high levels of these gases. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  These 
plant materials are readily available from commercial 
sources. 
References 
Griffith, R.S. 1991.  Fraxinus americana.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler). The fire effects information 
system [Data base]. USDA Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
<http://fire.org/feis/plants/tree/fraame/all_frames.htm 
l> 
Schlesinger, R.C. 1990.  Fraxinus americana L. 
White Ash.  Pp. 333-338, in R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala (tech. coords.).  Silvics of North America. 
Volume 2. Hardwoods.  USDA Forest Service Agric. 
Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/volume 
_2/fraxinus/americana.htm> 
USDA, NRCS 1993.  Northeast wetland flora: Field 
office guide to plant species. Wetland Science 
Institute, Laurel, Maryland. 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom, Formerly BONAP, North Carolina 
Botanical Garden, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.