Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIAN RICE 
Fritillaria camchatcensis  (L.) 
Ker-Gawl  
Plant Symbol = FRCA5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Kamchatka lily, rice root, black lily, Mission bells 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Virtually all Northwest Coast peoples 
of British Columbia and southeast Alaska ate the 
bulbs of “Indian rice,” which resemble tight clusters 
of white rice.  The bulblets grow relatively close to 
the surface and are easily extracted.  They were dug 
up in the spring (before fl owering), in the summer, or 
the fall (after flowering) using a digging stick, a 
wooden spade, or fingers.  They were cooked 
immediately, or could be partially dried, then stored 
in a cool place for winter us e.  They were cooked for 
about 30 minutes in a cedarwood box, by boiling for 
a short time then mashing to a paste, or occasionally, 
by baking in ashes.  Indian rice bulbs were used as an 
item of trade.  Even when cooked, they are slightly  bitter, and some people soaked them in water 
overnight to reduce the bitter flavor.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
 W.S. Atkinson from Abrams (1940) Used with permission of publishers © Stanford University
General
: Lily Family (Liliaceae).   Fritillaria 
camchatcensis  is a tall herbaceous perennial growing 
from a white bulb surrounded by numerous, tightly 
clustered rice-like bulblets .  The stems are 20-50 cm 
tall, sturdy and unbranched, bearing 1-3 whorls of 5-
11 lance-shaped leaves.  The flowers of Indian rice 
are bell-shaped and noddin g, each with greenish-
brown to brownish- purple tepals, sometimes 
streaked with yellow.  The flowers have a 
disagreeable odor.  The capsules are angled and many 
seeded.  The species are a ttractive in native garden, 
but are fast disappearing from much of their range. 
 
Distribution 
Indian rice grows in moist  areas, from tidal flats to 
wet meadows, from Alaska to western Washington.  
Indian rice grows in prairi es and grassy bluffs to 
woodland and coniferous forests from near sea level 
to above 5,000 ft. in elevation.  It occurs from British 
Columbia to Oregon.  In Washington, riceroot grows 
on both sides of the Cascades, but it only grows on 
the west side in Oregon.  Riceroot extends east from 
British Columbia and Washington to northern Idaho.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Fritillaria camchatcensis  has become quite 
uncommon in the wild.  In addition, salt marsh, 
estuarine wetland, and freshwater wetland habitat has 
declined by over 90 percent throughout much of the 
United States.  Wild harvesting for non-traditional 
use should be restricted to salvage sites with 
appropriate approval s and permits.  
 
Fritillaria species are frequently found in areas with 
soil moisture persisting throughout most of the 
growing season.  It is often found on coarse-grained 
soils of glacial origin.  Riceroot tolerates shade, but 
prefers sun.  Fritillaria  propagates readily from seed, 
and the rice-like bulblets can  be used for propagation.

This species grows well in well-drained, loam soils 
that are neutral to slightly acid. 
 
Live Plant (Bulb) Cultivation 
Fritillaria species have bulbs that do well in moist 
shade.  Bulbs may be planted in pots or in a 
greenhouse bed or bulb frame.  It is best to store 
Fritillaria  bulbs in slightly moist bark, peat, shredded 
wood, or some other material.  Buy the bulbs as early 
as possible before they begin to grow.  Bulbs tend to 
deteriorate or rot if kept too long. 
 
Plant bulbs in soil that is rich in nutrients and humus 
and also retains moisture.   Incorporate plenty of leafy 
mold or some other organic matter, such as well-
rotted manure or compost, before planting.  Acid-
loving woodland bulbs thrive in the peat garden, 
where at least half the soil is leaf mold, peat, or 
compost. 
 
Bulbs in containers should not be allowed to dry out 
when growing and should be fed regularly with a 
high-potassium fertilizer to boost flower production.  
Wait until seeds have set and foliage begins to 
senesce before lifting bulbs out of soil, then clean 
them and store them in a cool, moist place.  Watch 
bulbs to prevent them from rotting or being affected 
by a fungal disease.   
 
Bulbs can increase naturally by forming bulblets 
around the bulb (the “rice” in “Indian rice”).  
Propagate the bulbs by separating these bulblets from 
the mother bulb and planting them.  Bulbs should be 
separated every year or two. 
 
Seed Propagation 
This species grows readily from seed.  Most bulbs 
take 3-5 years to reach mature flowering stage.  
Fritillaria  species do not flower regularly even in 
nature, and so are described as “shy-flowering.”  
Collect seed immediately when capsules are ripe, as 
they split and seeds may be shed quickly.  Let the 
seeds dry without heat, and store them until sown in 
labeled paper packets in a co ol, dry, airy place.  Do 
not use plastic bags, as the seeds are likely to rot. 
 
The best times to sow seeds are fall, but if seed is 
available earlier, sow immediately.  Germination 
should follow in early spring. 
 
The recommended potting soil for seed germination 
and emergence is a commercial sand-based mix; with 
one-quarter part coarse sand added if the mixture 
does not have a sandy appearance.  Space large, flat 
seeds of  Fritillaria  one seed’s width apart.  Sieve a 
light covering of the soil mix over the seeds so that  they are no longer visible and then cover with a 
generous layer of grit or aquarium gravel.  Label the 
pots with the plant name, seed source, and date.  
Stand the pots in a shady place in the open garden, or 
plunge them in a sand frame, and keep them moist. 
 
When the seedlings have germinated, bring the pots 
into full light in a cold frame or greenhouse.  Keep 
them moist until they show definite signs of dying 
down, and then water them very sparingly.  
Fritillaria
 seedlings should be kept slightly moist 
during this senescent period.  Start watering again in 
early fall, or as soon as there is new growth, and keep 
the pots watered until the growth dies down.  Leave 
most bulbs for two growing seasons before repotting, 
unless they grow vigorously.  Larger bulbs are 
formed if these seedlings are fed the second year.  
Use a commercial liquid feed as used for tomatoes, 
but at half the manufacturer’s recommended strength.  
After two years, remove the bulbs from the pots after 
they have died back.  Separate out the bulblets, clean 
them gently, and repot them in clean, moist soil.  For 
Fritillaria  species, use a soil mix of one part 
sterilized leaf mold, one part peat or compost, and 
one part sterilized soil, with a further 1.5 parts of 
coarse horticultural sand or  seed-grown perlite.  It is 
better to grow seedlings in pots for 3-4 years before 
planting them outside. 
 
Management 
Traditional resource management  of Indian rice 
includes the following (Turner and Deur 1999):  
•   Ownership of individual patches and their output 
by chiefs, ensuring long-term care and 
enhancement of plant production. 
•  Root feasts as a means of redistributing plant 
wealth and meeting ceremonial obligations. 
•  Specialized digging sticks as a harvesting tool to 
cultivate and turn over the soil. 
•  Harvesting at a set time of year before or after 
plants have set seed. 
•  Regular use of same sites over time/generations. 
•  Care and assiduity in harvest. 
•  Turning of the soil or sod. 
•  Replanting and leaving bulblets behind, to re-
grow the following year. 
•  Weeding root patches. 
•  Individual patches and landscapes were burned 
regularly. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
FRCA2 is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil

Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. 1940.  Illustrated flora of the Pacific 
states.  Vol. I.  Ophioglo ssaceae to Aristolochiaceae .  
Stanford University Pres s, Stanford University, 
California.  p. 423. 
 
Brickell, C. & E. McDonald (eds.) 1993.   The 
American Hortic ultural Society encyclopedia of 
gardening.  The definitive practical guide to 
gardening techniques, planning, and maintenance .  
Darling Kindersten. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hitchcock, C. L. & A. Cronquist (eds.) 1973.   Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest.  An illustrated manual .  
University of Washington Press, Seattle & London.  
730 pp. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N. J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples .  
Nutrition, Botany, and Use.  Food and Nutrition in 
History and Anthropology Volume 8.  Gordon & 
Breach Science Publishers.  Pgs. 239-242. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.   Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians.  Part I.  Coastal peoples .  B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.   Food plant of British Columbia 
Indians.  Part II.  Interior peoples .  B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. & M.A.M. Bell 1983.  The ethnobotany 
of the Southern Kwakiutl Indians of British 
Columbia .  Econ. Bot. 27:257-310. 
 
Turner, N.J. & D.E. Deur 1999.   “Cultivating the 
clover”: Managing plant resources on the northwest 
coast .  Presentation at Society of Ethnobiology 
meetings, Oaxaca, Mexico. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982.   The ethnobotany of 
the Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island .  British 
Columbia Provincial Museum, Cultural Recovery 
Paper No. 2, Queen’s Printer, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982.   Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island .  B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2.  
99 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. & H.V. Kuhnlein 1983.   Camas 
(Camassia spp.) and riceroot (Fritillaria ssp.): Two 
liliaceous “root” foods of the northwest coast 
Indians .  Ecology of Food and Nutrition 13:199-219. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie 
1983.  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island .  B.C. Provincial Museum 
Occasional Paper No. 24.  165 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson & 
A.Z. York 1990 .  Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia .  Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000327.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.