Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MOUNTAIN 
STRAWBERRY  
Fragaria virginiana  Duchesne 
Plant Symbol = FRVI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Wild strawberry, Virginia strawberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Indigenous peoples throughout parts of 
Canada picked and ate the savory fruit of this plant.  
Midwestern prairie and Great Lakes tribes, such as 
the Omaha, Hidatsa, Mandan, Dakota, Pawnee, 
Blackfoot, Cheyenne, and the Winnebago ate these 
strawberries raw, cooked or dried.  The Winnebago 
and Blackfoot made a tea w ith an infusion of the 
young leaves of this plant. 
 
Wildlife : The Portola woodrat and the valley quail eat 
the fruit and leaves of wild strawberries. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  This herbaceous 
perennial plant spreads by seed and also by short 
rhizomes and leafless stolons.  The toothed leaves are  thin and basal with a petiole generally 1-12 cm.  They 
appear in leaflets of 3 and are generally glabrous 
above.  The flowers have 5 white petals that are 4-9 
mm. with numerous pistils and 20-35 stamens.  The 
five bractlets are unlobed.  The red fleshy fruit is 
covered with achenes.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found between 1200 and 3300 m in 
meadows and forest openings.  It occurs in the 
Klamath Ranges, high Cascade Range, Modoc 
Plateau, Sierra Nevada, to eastern North America. 
 ©  Michigan State Univ. @ Kellogg Biological Research Station 
 
Establishment 
This strawberry is best established at higher 
elevations where a good frost occurs (over 600 m).  
Dig up plantlets or runners and plant them in pots in 
fall--being sure to cover the stems and roots in soil.  
Place the pots in a sheltere d place to establish good, 
strong roots.  Water the plants or runners and keep 
them moist.  Plant the seedlings outdoors in the 
ground in late winter or early spring.  They should be 
planted in full sun, in a light loose soil, about ten 
inches apart.  It will not take long for the plants to 
make a complete ground cover.  Lightly fertilize the 
plants during the growing season.  Note that those 
plants that have bigger flowers usually have less fruit 
and those with smaller flowers have more fruit.  
Protect the plants from gophers, deer, squirrels, 
raccoons, and other wildlife. 
 
Management  
Keep the runners pruned ba ck because they can be 
invasive.  It is necessary to divide the patch every 3 
to 4 years and start a new patch for increased vigor.  
Younger plants are more vigorous and produce more 
berries. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
FRVI is somewhat available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”

References 
Ertter, B. 1993.  Fragaria.  Page 952 IN: The Jepson 
Manual: Higher Plants of Ca lifornia.  J.C. Hickman 
(ed.). University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region .  University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie: An ethnobotanical guide .  
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples: 
Nutrition, botany, and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951 .  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.