Plant Guide
MOUNTAIN ROUGH 
FESCUE  
Festuca campestris  Rydb.  
Plant Symbol =  FECA4 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS WA  PM Program
 
1. Mountain Rough  Fescue,   photo by Francis Njenga  
Alternate Names 
R ough Fescue  
Buffalo  Bunchgrass  
Previously known as Festuca  scabrella, the currently 
accepted name is Festuca campestris  
Uses  
Grasslands dominated by rough fescue  are some of 
the most productive grasslands in Canada  (  Aiken 
and Dar byshire 1990, MSU EB69 ).  
 
Livestock:  R ough fescue is highly palatable to 
livestock .   It is excellent  forage for cattle and horses 
and good for sheep and wildlife  during all growth 
stages. It  produces good hay and is valuable for 
winter grazing because it retains much of its protein 
and palatability (Stubbendieck, et.al 2003).    
  Wildlife 
- R ough fescue is an important source of 
forage for  mule deer and bighorn sheep. It is used by 
elk on  winter ranges (Jourdonnais and Be dunah 
1986 ), although,  elk will avoid plants with large 
amounts of old litter. Sharp -tailed grouse often nest 
under clumps of rough fescue in northwestern 
Montana  (Giesen and Connelly 1993).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Grass family (Poaceae).  R ough fescue is a 
native,  perennial, cool -season  bunchgrass.  Individual 
rough fescue plants oft en form large-diameter 
bunches averaging 12 –  14 inches in diameter, 
sometimes as large as 2 feet.    Festuca campestris 
culms are erect, 1  to  4.5 ft.  tall, glabrous, scabrous, 
naked below the  panicle, and purplish at the base.   
Leaves are bas al 12- 30 inches  long,  0.03- 0.08 inches  
in diameter,  folded, mostly erect, stiff, and pointed. 
Lower surface of the leaves are often scabrous.  
Sheaths are closed f or less than 1/3 their length and 
are often persistent.  Inflorescences are panicles, 
generally  3.5-7  inches  long, open or loosely 
contracted, with usually 2 branches per node. The 
branches are erect to stiffly spreading.  Spikelets are 
0.3 -0.5 inches  long  and have 3 -7 florets. Glumes are 
exceeded by the upper most florets. Lemmas are 
0.25- 0.40 inches  long with either a sharp point or 
short  awn (  Anderton and Barkworth 2009, 
Stubbendieck, Hatch, and Landholt 2003) .  I n the fall 
mountain rough fescue often h as a creamy colored 
appearance when compared with bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoregneria spicata).   
   
Prior to 1984 Festuca campestris , F. hallii, F. altaica  
were often treated collectively as F. scabrella .  
Today  Festuca campestris  is generally regarded as a 
species separate from F. hallii  and  F. altaica .  
Festuca campestris   has double the chromosome 
number of the other two species.  (Pavlick and 
Looman 1984, Aiken and Darbyshire 1990).