Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK ASH 
Fraxinus nigra  Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = FRNI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Basket ash, hoop ash, brown ash, swamp ash, water 
ash 
 
Uses 
The wood of black ash is strongly ring-porous, 
making it ideal for basketry splint, barrel hoops, 
snowshoe frames, canoe ribs , and material for woven 
chair seats.  Each growth  ring has a distinct porous 
area (spring growth) and a dense area (summer 
growth), the latter usable as splint, which can be 
permanently bent.  It separa tes into thin sheets when 
soaked and pounded.  The wood is softer, lighter 
weight, and easier to work than white ash.  It is  darker colored with more grain and used largely for 
furniture and interior finish.   
 
 
Ethnobotanic
: Black ash is an important tree for the 
making of lacrosse sticks used by the Mohawk and 
other tribes of the Eastern  United States.  Trunks at 
least 6 to 8 inches across ar e harvested for their bark.  
The Abnaki, Ojibwa, Malecite, Meskwaki, and other 
cultural groups use the bark to make baskets.  The 
inner bark of the black ash was used to make a bark 
barrel by the Iroquois which was used for storing 
dried vegetables, fruits, and seeds, as well as 
clothing.  The tree traditionally was a valuable 
medicine to many tribes in  Eastern North America.  
The Iroquois steeped the ba rk of the tree together 
with the roots and bark of other plants to treat 
rheumatism.  The Menomini used the inner bark of 
the trunk as a valuable medicine and as a seasoner for 
other medicines.  The Meskwaki made a tea from a 
mixture of the wood with the root of  Smilacina 
racemosa  to loosen the bowels.  They also used the 
inner bark of the trunk as a remedy for any internal 
ailments.  Non-Indian settlers used a bark infusion as 
a bitter tonic. 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Black ash is not an outstanding ornamental, but it is 
cold tolerant, good for wet soils, and relatively 
tolerant of atmospheric pollution.  Cultivars and 
hybrids have been developed, emphasizing upright 
growth, oval crown form, growth vigor, bright yellow 
fall foliage, persistence of fall foliage, and 
seedlessness.   
 
Wildlife : The winged seeds are eaten by a number of 
birds including wood ducks, quail, bobwhite, purple 
finches, and pine grosbeaks.  Mammals also eat the 
seeds including beaver, porcupines, and white-footed 
mice.  Rodents and sometimes wild turkeys shuck off 
the wing and eat only the seed inside.  White-tailed 
deer and moose feed on the twigs and foliage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Olive family (Oleaceae).  Native trees 
growing mostly 12-18 m tall (9-13 m at 50 years; 15-
18 m at 100 years), the largest reaching 21 m, with

ascending branches, narrow crown, and slender trunk, 
sometimes bent or leaning; bark gray, becoming 
corky-ridged and shallowly furrowed, divided into 
large irregular plates with thin, papery scales that rub 
off easily.  Leaves are deciduous, opposite, 15-40 cm 
long, pinnately compound with 7-11 oval to lance-
shaped leaflets each 8-14 cm long, tapered to a long 
slender tip, only the end leaflet stalked, with finely 
toothed margins, dark green above, lighter green 
beneath with some rusty hairs, turning purple to 
brown in the fall.  Flowers are small, purplish, 
usually in clusters near the branch tips; some trees 
produce either male flowers or female flowers, but 
others have a mixture of the two kinds while others 
have bisexual flowers (the species polygamo-
dioecious).  Fruits are winged nutlets (samaras) 2-4.5 
cm long and 1cm wide, winged to the base, borne in 
terminal or axillary clusters, the cluster hanging at 
maturity.   The common name is perhaps in reference 
to the dark wood; the other common names are 
clearer in allusion.    
  
Variation within the species:  Variants have not 
generally been recognized  within black ash.    
 
Distribution: Black ash is native to the Great Lakes 
and Acadia regions of North America, in 
southeastern Canada from Newfoundland to eastern 
Manitoba, south to Iowa, Illinois, West Virginia, and 
Virginia.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Black ash most commonly grows in moist to wet 
muck or shallow organic so ils, especially in swamps, 
floodplains, terraces, ravine s, and on small, poorly 
drained upland pockets.  It also may grow on sands 
and loams with high water tables.  It can tolerate 
standing water for many weeks, but best growth is on 
better-drained sites.   
 
It is a shade intolerant pioneer species and normally 
becomes established in even-aged pockets or stands 
following some kind of disturbance.  Seedlings, 
saplings, and sprouts tend to dominate the 
regeneration layer under partial openings in the 
canopy.  It sometimes occurs in pure stands, 
especially on wetter upland sites, but usually is mixed 
with eastern white cedar,  tamarack, black spruce, 
balsam fir, American elm, red maple, and silver 
maple.  It is also may be sparsely present in mature 
forests dominated by larch, birch, and even beech-
maple.   
 
Flowering: May-June, with the leaves or just before; 
fruiting: June-September dispersed: July-October.   
  
Establishment 
Adaptation : The habitat of the tree is in wet woods 
and swamps and it occurs in Delaware, West 
Virginia, Indiana and Iowa, north into the Canadian 
provinces of Newfoundland, Quebec, and Manitoba. 
 
Planting : Black ash is difficult to grow.  Good seed 
crops in black ash are produc ed irregularly (1-8 year 
intervals).  Seeds may remain dormant for up to 8 
years under natural conditions.  Most do not 
germinate until the second spring after being 
released.  The seed can germinate in hardwood leaf 
litter or under 0.6-1.8 centimeters of soil.  Grass, 
brush, and hardwood reproduction must be controlled 
for successful seedling establishment. 
 
Ash fruits are usually gathered in the autumn when 
their color has faded from green to yellow or brown.  
Clusters should be collected by hand or with pruners 
and seed hooks or gathered from the ground.  
Samaras should be spread in shallow layers for 
complete drying.  Plant the seeds in the fall of the 
year, one-half inch below the surface of the soil 
through drilling or broadcasting.  No stratification 
methods appear to work.  Some recommend 
stratifying seeds 60 days at 14/30 C ° (night/day), then 
90 days at 5 ° C.  Otherwise, stored seeds are best 
sown as soon as possible in a cold frame or an 
outdoor seedbed.  In direct planting of the seed, one 
must be patient as it may take two winters before the 
seeds to germinate.  During this time, keep the soil 
moist during the growing season.  The seeds usually 
germinate the second spri ng--and after germination 
the seedlings grow rapidly, up to one foot per year.  
 
Shade the beds for a short time after germination.  
Keep the bed weed-free even though the seeds 
haven't germinated.  Mulching with wood chips, 
straw, or burlap helps keep down the weeds.  Also, 
the area needs to be deer-p roofed, as the deer like to 
browse the young seedlings.  At the end of the second 
year out-plant the seedlings during the spring, while 
they still are dormant.  The soil should have good 
drainage and no standing water.  The plants need full 
sunlight.  Space the plants  4 to 8 feet apart.  After 
out-planting, no care is needed.  Pruning may be 
required to keep straight stems for certain 
ethnobotanical purposes. 
 
Older trees of black ash are known to have reached 
130 years, but older ones probably exist.

Black ash produces fast-growing sprouts from stumps 
up to 30 cm in diameter.  Sprouts originate from 
adventitious buds on the sides of the stump and at the 
root crown.  Trees also will root sucker.   
 
Management 
Forests managed to yield black ash should be 
selectively cut.  Clearcutting often results in 
inadequate natural regeneration or loss of advanced 
regeneration because of rising water tables or 
increased competition with grass and brush.   
 
As with many other tree species on wet sites, 
individuals of black ash are shallowly rooted and 
subject to windthrow.   
 
Black ash is easily damaged by fire and can be killed 
or top-killed by severe fire but it probably sprouts 
from the root crown following such damage.  Burned 
sites also may be re-colonized through the wind-
dispersed seed.   
  
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Fraxinus cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Coladonato, M. 1994.  Fraxinus nigra.  In: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://fire.org/feis/plants/tree/franig/>  
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Lyford, C.A. 1945.  Iroquois crafts.  U.S. Department 
of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Nuss, S. 2000.   Black ash basketry .  Web site.  
<http://basketry.about.com/hobbies/basketry/library/
weekly/aa123098.htm>  Accessed September 2000.   
 
Smith, H.H. 1923.   Ethnobotany of the Menomini .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4(1):8-175. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Tardif, J., S. Dery, & Y. Bergeron 1994.   Sexual 
regeneration of black ash (Fraxinus nigra Marsh.) in 
a boreal floodplain .  Amer. Field Nat. 132:124-135.   
 
Tardif, J. & Y. Bergeron 1999 .  Population dynamics 
of Fraxinus nigra in response flood-level variations, 
in northwestern Québec . Ecol. Monogr. 61:107-125.   
 
Vennum, T. 1994.  American Indian lacrosse .  
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Wright, J.W. & H.M. Rauscher 1990.   Fraxinus nigra 
Marsh.  Black Ash.  Pp. 000-000, IN: R.M. Burns 
and B.H. Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of North 
America .  Volume 2.   Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/volume
_2/fraxinus/nigra.htm> 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, NPDC, Davis, California 
 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California   
 
Edited 30nov00 jsp; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.