Plant Guide
GREAT VALLEY 
GUMWEED  
Grindelia camporum  Greene  
Plant Symbol = GRCA  
 
Contributed by:   USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California  
 
Figure  1:  Great Valley gumweed in bloom, with immature flower buds 
and open flowers . Photo M. Bliss, NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, 2012.  
Alternate Names  
Common  Alternate Names:  
c ommon gumplant  
Great Valley gumplant   
re sinweed   
boton de oro (golden button)  
 
Scientific  Alternate Names :   
Grindelia bracteosa  J.T. Howell  
Grindelia  camporum  Greene var. camporum  
Grindelia  camporum  Greene var. parviflora  
Grindelia hirsutula  Hook. & Arn.  var.  davyi  (Jepson) 
M.A. Lane  
Grindelia paludosa  Greene 
Grindelia  procera  Greene 
Grindelia  robusta  Nutt.  
 
Please Note:  The Grindelia  genus represents a highly 
variable array of ecological forms occurring over a large 
area of North America in diverse habitats.  Some sources 
have grouped  G. camporum into a much larger complex 
under the species name Grindelia hirsutula , combining 25 
previously separate taxa  (Strother, 2006).  This genus is 
currently the subject of extensive genetic research to 
determine which morphologies represent true 
phylogenetic di fferences and how much variability is 
phenotypic or the result of hybridization  ( Bartoli, 2012 ; 
Moore, 2012;  USDA  ARS, 2012) .  Therefore, this plant 
guide  applies best only to G. camporum  as it was initially 
described and not under the umbrella grouping of  G. 
hirsutula . 
 
Uses  
Horticulture:  Great Valley g umweed is  an attractive 
ornamental  for use in wildflower meadows and butterfly 
gardens.   It flowers from May to late October or early 
November , providing color through the summer and 
autumn months  (Munz, 1968; Moore, 2012) .  
 
Wetland  Restoration : This species  thrive s in disturbed 
areas,  along stream banks , and in alluvial soils 
(Timmerman, 1987), which makes Great Valley gumweed 
a good  candidate for riparian and wetland  restoration 
projects .  Wetla nd plants have enormous ecosystem 
importance and  help to balance water salinity, prevent soil  
erosion, and may reduce runoff pollution  into waterways. 
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects:  H igh drought and salt 
tolerance allows this plant  to persist throughout the late 
summer months  when other plants wither , ( Hoffman 
1986; Timmerman, 1987)  making it  an important late -
season source of pollen and nectar for native bees, honey 
bees, syrphid flies, and butterflies .  For t his reason , it is 
often planted in pollinator  meadows and hedgerows.  
Great Valley gumweed  is an obligate out -crosser,  
meaning it cannot self -fertilize and relies entirely  upon 
the pollination services of insects for reproductive success  
( Dunford, 1964; Schuck, 1988). 
 
 
Medicinal:  Historically, Great Valley gumweed has been 
used  in herbal remedi es to treat respiratory maladies, 
dermatological conditions, blood disorders, and minor 
injuries  (See Ethnobotany  below).   Grindelia  is presently  
available from  herbal supplement stores and is touted for