Plant Guide

BROOM 

SNAKEWEED

Gutierrezia sarothrae  Pursh

Plant Symbol = GUSA2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
@ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
snakeweed 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Broom snakeweed was used by 
numerous Native American tribes for a variety of 
reasons. The Blackfoot use the roots of broom 
snakeweed in an herbal steam as a treatment for 
respiratory ailments.  The Dakota use a concentrate 
made from the flowers as a laxative for horses.  The 
Lakota took a decoction of the plant to treat colds, 
coughs, and dizziness.  The Navajo and Ramah 
Navaho rubbed the ashes of broom snakeweed on 
their bodies to treat headaches and dizziness.  They 
also chewed the plant and applied it to wounds, 
snakebites, and areas swollen by insect bites and 
stings.  The Comanche used the stems of broom 
snakeweed to make brooms for sweeping their 
residences. 
Wildlife: 
Broom snakeweed is utilized by some large ungulates 
including mule deer and pronghorn antelope.  Broom 
snakeweed can comprise up to 28% of the pronghorn 
diet. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
Description 
General: Sunflower Family (Asteraceae). Broom 
snakeweed is a perennial subshrub that ranges from 2 
to 10 dm in height.  It is native to the U.S.  The stems 
are bushy and branch upwards from the woody base. 
The non-woody stems range from smooth to having 
some short hairs.  The stems may be resinous and 
therefore sticky when touched.  The leaves are 
alternate and range from linear to linear and 
threadlike in shape. The leaves are from 5 to 60 mm 
long and 1 to 3 mm wide.  Dense clusters of flowers 
form at the ends of the stems.  There are 3 to 8 ray 
florets per cluster and 2 to 6 disk florets per cluster.  
The flattened part of the ray corolla or ligule is 
yellow in color and 1 to 3 mm long.  The whorl of 
bracts that is found at the base of the flower cluster is 
3 to 6 mm tall and 2 mm across.  The bracts are 
narrow and green in color at the apex and along the 
midnerve.  The achenes have a modified calyx 
consisting of 8 to 10 acute scales.  The acute scales of 
the ray achenes are about one-half as long as those of 
the disk achenes. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Adaptation 
Broom snakeweed is found in open, dry plains and 
upland sites.  Broom snakeweed is killed by fire.  Re-
establishment occurs via wind dispersed seeds.  
Broom snakeweed densities usually increase 
following fire, if the seeds in the seed bank are left 
undamaged by heat. 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Establishment 
Broom snakeweed flowers are pollinated by various 
insects.  Regeneration occurs primarily through wind 
dispersed seeds.  Most germination and seedling 
establishment occurs during the winter and spring.  
Broom snakeweed seeds are dormant at maturity and 
require a 4 to 6 month after-ripening period prior to 
germination. The most successful germination 
occurs  between 59 to 86 °F, at or near soil surface. 
Broom snakeweed prefers full sun, well-drained soil, 
and low moisture. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, broom snakeweed should not be prone to 
debilitating pests. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
References 
Austin, D.D. & P.J. Urness 1983. Overwinter forage 
selection by mule deer on seeded big sagebrush-grass 
range. Journal of Wildlife Management 47(4): 1203-
1207. 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians. Papers of 
the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
City of Boulder, Colorado 2001.  Open spaces and 
mountain parks. 
http://www.ci.boulder.co.us/openspace/nature/garden 
s/grow-tip.htm 
Elmore, F.H. 1944.  Ethnobotany of the Navajo. 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico. 136 pp. 
Gilmore, M.R. 1913.  Some Native Nebraska plants 
with their uses by the Dakota.  Collections of the 
Nebraska State Historical Society 17:358-370. 
Hocking, G.M. 1956.  Some plant materials used 
medicinally and otherwise by the Navaho Indians in 
the Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.  El Palacio 56:146-
165. 
Johnston, A. 1987. Plants and the Blackfoot. 
Lethbridge Historical Society, Lethbridge, Alberta. 
68pp.  
Martin, S.C. 1975.  Ecology and management of 
southwestern semidesert grass-shrub ranges: the 
status of our knowledge. RM-156.  USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Ft. Collins, Colorado. 39 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
Smith, A.D. & D.M. Beale 1980. Pronghorn 
antelope in Utah: some research and observations. 
Publication No. 80-13. Utah Division of Wildlife 
Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah. 88 pp. 
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2001.  Fire effects information system. 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Boise, Idaho. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/shrub/gutsar 
/index.html 
Vestal, P.A. 1952. The ethnobotany of the Ramah 
Navaho. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 40:1-95. 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson

USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
Edited: 30May2002 jsp ; 19may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.