Plant Guide
STICKY PURPLE 
GERANIUM 
Geranium viscosissimum  AFisch 
& C.A. Mey ex. C.A. Mey  
Plant Symbol = GEVI2 
Contributed by NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington  
 
 Pamela Scheinost, Pullman Plant Materials Center 
 
 Alternate Names   
Sticky geranium, pink geranium, cranesbill This species 
should not be confused w ith Geranium richardsonii 
Fisch. & Trautv., which is also sometimes referred to as 
sticky geranium.  G. richardsonii has pale pink to white 
flowers, and has leaves with hairs only along the veins on 
the lower sides, whereas leaves of G. viscosissium , and 
ar e sticky -hairy all over. Other common names for G. 
richardsonii  include Richardson’s geranium and white 
geranium. There are reports of possible hybridization 
between the two species (Parish et al 1996).   
Uses   
Ornamental:  Sticky purple geranium is an excel lent 
choice for sustainable urban landscapes because it needs 
little supplemental irrigation, it blooms continuously May 
through August, and the foliage turns red in the fall (Mee 
et al 2003). The plant grows well in areas receiving full 
sun or partial sha de. It can spread if it receives too much 
shade or water.     
Ethnobotanical: 
The roots and leaves of sticky purple 
geranium were used by the Blackfeet, Okanagan, Colville, 
Sanpoil, Nlaka’pmx and other Native American tribes. 
Medicinal uses included a cold remedy, a dermatological 
aid, and treatment for sore eyes. It was also used to make 
a love potion and as a food preservative (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database 2010; Parish et al 1996). Herbalists 
apply it to cuts to help blood clotting or use it internally to 
stop bleeding (Parish et al 1996).   
 
Wildlife:  Seeds of this plant are eaten by birds and small 
mammals (Mee et al 2003) and leaves are foraged by 
small mammals, deer, elk and bears (Robson and Kingery 
2006).   
 
Pollinator habitat: Sticky purple geraniu m is pollinated 
by flies, butterflies and native bees (Mee et al 2003). 
Finer (2003) found within the Palouse ecoregion of 
eastern Washington, seed set of sticky purple geranium 
declined with reduced habitat size, as did pollinator 
visitation, richness and  diversity.   
 
Status   
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description   
General : Rose Family  (Rosaceae). Sticky purple 
geranium is a native perennial forb that grows to 40 to 90 
cm tall. It has sticky glandular hairs that densely cover the 
stems and leaves. Leaves are basal, on long stalks and 
have blades 5 to 12 cm wide. The leaves are deeply 
pa lmately lobed into 5 to 7 sharply toothed divisions. 
Flowers are 2.5 cm wide, occur in open clusters near the 
top, and have 5 petals. Petals are pinkish -lavender to deep 
purple -magenta with purple veins and soft hairs on the 
lower half. Seed capsules are elongated, glandular and 
hairy, with a long beak shaped like a stork’s or crane’s 
bill. The genus Geranium  is derived from the Greek word 
geranos , which means crane (Parish et al 1996).  
 
Sticky purple geranium has an intere sting feature of being 
protocarnivorous; it is able to dissolve protein, such as 
insects, that become trapped on its leaf surface and absorb 
the nitrogen derived from the protein (Spomer 1999). 
Many plants with sticky leaf surfaces have evolved to 
have thi s characteristic in order to thrive in nutrient -poor 
environments (Larcher 2003).