Plant Guide 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KENTUCKY 
COFFEETREE
 
Gymnocladus dioicus  (L.) K. 
Koch  
Plant Symbol = GYDI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State 
University, Research Forestry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keith Lynch, Research Forestry, Kansas State 
University 
 
Alternate Names: American coffee bean, American 
coffee berry, American mahogany, bean tree, chico 
du Canada, chicot, chicot tree, chiot, chiot tree, 
coffeebean, coffeebean-tree,  coffeenut, coffeetree, 
dead tree, geweihbaum, Kentucky coffee-tree, 
Kentucky mahogany, mahogany, mahogany-bean, 
nettle-tree, nicker tree, nicker treet, stump tree 
 
 
PARTS OF THIS PLANT ARE 
POISONOUS-See Environmental Concerns 
section of this document 
 
Uses 
Industry:  Timber, the strong, heavy wood is used in 
general construction, cabinet work, sills, interior 
finish, fine furniture, railway sleepers, bridge 
timbers, crossties, fence  posts and rails, and fuel 
wood (Table 1) and (Table2).  Fence posts may last 
for more than 50 years, although the rot resistant 
wood is soft and staples pull out easily.  Kentucky 
coffeetree lumber is availa ble but not common.  The 
fruit is high in saponins and is used as soap.  The 
leaves have been used as a fly poison.  Due to the 
tree’s toxic plant parts such as the leaves and raw 
seeds, there is little wild life usage as a source of 
food. 
 
Ornamental:  Used for ornamental purposes in large 
area landscape plantings and parks.  In the fall, 
ripening pods contrast nicely with clear yellow fall 
foliage.  Decorative clusters of the large pods rattling 
in the wind make for an exceptional winter 
ornamental.  The species was introduced into 
cultivation before 1748.  Kentucky coffeetree has 
been slighted in the landscape industry.    
 
Ethnobotanic: While native to North America, Native 
Americans introduced the tree to some parts of the 
continent as they used the pulp from the wood to treat 
insanity.   The pulp was also used in home remedies 
to combat fever and treat headaches.  The Omahas 
mixed the bark of Kentucky coffeetree and 
gayfeather ( Liatris aspera  Michx.) with a pulverized 
portion of buffalo-gourd ( Cucurbita foetidissima H. 
B. K.) and used it as an ap petizer and tonic.  A tea 
was also made from the leaves and pulp and used as a 
laxative. Certain Indian tribes reportedly roasted the 
beans (seeds) for food.  Early settlers used the beans 
of the tree as a substitute for coffee.  CAUTION! The 
seeds and pods are poisonous.   They reportedly 
contain cytisine, a quinolizidine alkaloid and 
nicotinic receptor agonist, wh ich can be dangerous.  
However, researchers at Indiana State University 
have been unable to find experimental data verifying 
the presence of cytisine.  A single major alkaloid was 
found to be present in many  coffeetree plant parts.  
The alkaloid is thought to be neutralized in the 
roasting process.  Hydrocyanic acid has also been

suggested as a possible toxin.  It can be destroyed by 
thoroughly heating the beans for at least three hours 
at 150˚C.  The beans contain saponins which are 
more toxic to fish than to other animals.  Hunting 
tribes traditionally put large quantities of the beans in 
streams and lakes to stupefy or kill fish.  
 
Pioneer settlers used the coarse-grained, light brown 
to reddish-brown wood in cabinetry.  Children used 
the beans in their games. 
 
Conservation:  Kentucky coffeetree was formerly 
planted around farmsteads. It is tolerant to a wide 
range of conditions such as drought, chalk 
(limestone), and urban conditions.  The tree has been 
planted on mine spoils  for soil reclamation and 
stabilization.  Due to its reasonably strong wood 
Kentucky coffeetree will tolerate some ice without 
losing branches.  This pest free tree is an alternative 
to ash and elm where they have been ravaged by 
insects and disease.   
 
Status 
Kentucky coffeetree’s numbers are declining rapidly 
due to over harvesting.   The species is not invasive; it 
is only found in small clusters due to root sprouting 
and makes up a rare component of any woodland.  In 
nature the seeds germinate with difficulty due to a 
hard outer shell.  Squirrels do not cache them, so the 
seeds do not spread from  the mother tree except 
along streams where the seeds may be transported by 
water down stream. Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:   Kentucky coffeetree is the only member of 
the genus  Gymnocladus  native to North America.  
The word  gymnocladus  comes from the Greek for 
naked branch, referring to the few stout twigs, which 
are conspicuous year round.  The word  dioicus relates 
to dioecious, meaning there are male and female 
trees.  The tree lies dormant for about 6 months of the 
year, thus the name Dead Tree or Stump Tree. 
 
 Although a member of the legume family 
(Fabaceae), Kentucky coffeetree is not a nitrogen 
“fixer”.  It is a medium to large, round-barked, native 
deciduous tree reaching height s of 18 to 30-m with a 
spread of 12 to 15-m.  In open areas, the tree 
produces an open, rounded crown, but in native 
woods it grows to 23-m with few branches.  Large 
specimen trees, such as Georgia’s champion tree 
stands 39.6-m tall in Pickens County, are uncommon.  (The National Registry of Big Trees reports a 
specimen Kentucky coffeetree from Lake Co., Ohio, 
standing at 25-m with a spread of 23.5-m and a 
circumference of 5.2-m at DBH).  Kentucky 
coffeetree’s short trunk, 0.3 to 0.8-m in diameter, 
divides into several large branches that end in 
contorted, stout twigs.  Its unique, thick, dark bark is 
gray to grayish-brown, often marked with deep, 
irregular furrows and plates that curl at their sides.  
 
The alternate, bipinnately compound leaves are the 
largest of any native species, measuring from 0.3 to 
0.9-m in length by 4.6 to 6.1-dm in width, arranged 
in feather-fashion in 5 to 9 pairs of pinnae, the lowest 
are reduced to simple leafle
ts.  Typically the leaves 
consist of six to 14 entire; more or less ovate (almond 
shaped) leaflets, 5 to 8-cm long, acute, rounded or 
cuneate at the base, pubescent beneath when young, 
short petioled, and swollen at the base.   Leaves 
emerge late in the spring with a striking pink-bronze 
color, turning to a dark  bluish-green above in 
summer.  Fall color is often a golden yellow, but the 
leaves drop early. 
  
Winter buds are small, reddish, and often placed 
above one another in close formation (superposed).  
Terminal buds are absent.  The buds are small, 
downy, almost entirely im bedded in twigs, and 
surrounded by a hairy ring of bark.   
   
The stout twigs are light brown to greenish-brown 
with whitish patches, somewhat zigzag or wavy, 
large heart shaped leaf scar , with a wide salmon-pink 
to brown colored pith.   
 
Flowering and Fruiting:  The greenish-white 
dioecious or polygamo-dioecious, inconspicous 
flowers appear in May and June, after the leaves, and 
are borne in terminal racemose clusters. The fruit is a 
tardily dehiscent, flat, thick, woody legume that 
ripens in September or October and usually persists 
unopened on the tree until late winter or early spring. 
The dark brown or red brown pod is 15 to 25-cm 
long, 2.5 to 5-cm wide, and usually contains 4 to 8 
olive-green or dark brow n to almost black seed 
separated by a mass of brown pulp. 
Wood Characteristics: The wood is of heavy density 
(specific gravity of 0.53 green, 0.60 dry) with a 
coarse, straight grain. Its sapwood is narrow and 
yellowish white and the heartwood is light red to red 
or reddish brown.  It is w ithout characteristic odor or 
taste.  Growth rings are conspicuously ring porous, 
resembling ash, honeylocust ( Gleditsia triacanthos  
L.) or sassafras [
Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees.].  
The wood is frequently confused with that of honey

locust. It must be dried carefully  due to a tendency to 
split. It is medium strong and has good to excellent 
working characteristics.  Occasionally, it will show 
considerable ring shake, but is an attractive wood for 
home workshops.  The wood finishes to a smooth 
surface and “polishes superbly”.  It makes beautiful 
paneling which weathers to a light chocolate brown.  
When dry, the wood is st able and machines well. 
Table 1.  Fuel wood fact s for Kentucky coffeetree. 
Weight 
(lbs/cord) Heat/Cord Fuel Oil 
Equivalent 
Green Dry  (Million  BTUs) (gallons)* 
3872 3112 21.6 154 
*140,000 BTU per gallon of fuel oil. 
 
Table 2. Kentucky coffeetree firewood quality 
ratings for five factors. 
Factor Rating 
Coals Good 
Ease of Splitting Medium 
Fragrance Good 
Smoke Low 
Sparks Few 
Overall Quality Good 
 
Distribution:  Kentucky coffeetree is uncommon in its 
native habitat.  It can only be found in small colonies 
in temperate forests.  The natural range extends from 
New York and Pennsylvania west to Minnesota, 
southward to Oklahoma, and east to Kentucky and 
Tennessee (Schopmeyer, 1974). The species is also 
found in the Dakotas, Texas, Georgia, and the 
Carolinas (PLANTS Databa se); naturalized in 
Alabama, West Virginia, Virginia, and Delaware 
(Steyermark, 1975). It is believed to have been 
introduced into some areas  by Native Americans.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  Kentucky coffeetree grows in moist soils in 
bottom-land woods or rocky open wooded hillsides 
with other hardwood trees.  It is commonly found on 
limestone soils and seldom found on unglaciated 
sites.  The tree occurs sometimes in small colonies of 
rather widely separated individuals resulting from 
root suckers.  Kentucky  coffeetree can be found 
growing in association with sweetgum, tupelo, oaks,  and hickories, also black 
walnut, basswood, elm, and 
pawpaw in temperate forests.  
 
Adaptation 
Relatively hardy in zones 3 to 8, the tree adapts well 
to urban conditions.  It prefers full sun, humus-rich, 
moist soil, and tolerates drought and occasional 
flooding.  Considering its cultural tolerances, it 
should be on the list of “tough” trees.  Kentucky 
coffeetree is a fast-growi ng tree when young with 
moderate to slow growth as the tree ages attaining 3.6 
to 4.3-m in 10 years. 
 
Establishment 
Seedlings may be planted in the field after one year.  
Transplant balled and burlapped trees into deep, rich, 
moist soil for best growth. 
 
Management 
Fertilize with formulations that promote woody 
growth rather than excessive foliar growth.  Prune in 
winter or early spring; wood may be somewhat 
brittle.  Longer, weaker branches should be pruned 
when young to promote a stronger structure.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
No serious insect or disease problems.  Messy habit, 
fallen leaf stalks and pods require some clean up. 
 
Environmental Concerns  
The leaves, seeds and pulp are poisonous and are 
toxic to livestock, humans, an d pets.  Sprouts eaten in 
the spring have produced toxicosis.  Leaves, young 
sprouts, and seeds with ge latinous mater around them 
contain the toxin.  Cattle have reportedly died after 
drinking from pools of water contaminated by fallen 
leaves and seeds from the tree.  There is at least one 
anecdotal report of a human poisoning by Kentucky 
coffeetree. 
 
Clinical Signs:   “Clinical signs include rapid onset 
(within 1 hour) of intense gastrointestinal irritation, 
profuse diarrhea and straining, vomiting, 
hypertension, bradycardia, respiratory depression, 
muscle paralysis, and convulsions.  Animals often 
display depression.  Death usually occurs within a 
day after clinical signs appear.”  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The seeds are oval, about 1.9-cm long with a thick, 
very hard, and bony coat. They have been compared 
to small jawbreakers only  2000 times as hard.  The 
seeds generally remain in the pod until it falls and is 
broken up by decay, a process which may take 2 
years or longer.  The impermeable seed coat is the 
only hindrance to germination.  A 2 to 4 hour

treatment of concentrated sulfuric acid is ideal for 
breaking down the seed coat.  Once treated the seeds 
imbibe water quickly and will germinate uniformly 
when sown.  Large, bulky, purplish-brown, leather-
hard pods are produced that abscise differentially 
from late fall into winter.  The flat pods range in size 
from 13 to 25-cm long and 4 to 5-cm wide.  Pods 
may be collected from the ground and run through 
some type of flail device to expose the seeds.  The 
hard coated seeds will not be harmed.  They can be 
dried and store indefinitely. 
 
Pretreated seeds should be sown in the spring in rows 
spaced 46 to 76-cm apart (but no closer than 15-cm) 
depending upon irrigation and cultivation methods.  
Sow 12 to 18 seeds per 0.3 linear meter of row and 
cover with about 2.5-cm of firm soil.  In general, 
about 60 to 75 percent of the seed sown will produce 
plantable seedlings. 
 
Root cuttings 4-cm long and 1-cm thick may be taken 
in December through March.  Plant the roots 
horizontally in pots with sand or peat.  This may be 
the only effective way to vegetatively propagate the 
trees as budding is reportedly unsuccessful.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Several cultivars are availa ble in the nursery trade 
including selections that are predominately male such 
as ‘Espresso’,  ‘J.C. McDaniel’ (Prairie Titan
™), and 
‘Stately Manor’, that produce no fruit. Espresso 
exhibits an upward arching branch form resulting in 
an elm-like vase shape. Prairie Titan is a very 
symmetrical, upright spreading tree 18 to 21-m tall 
with blue-green summer foliage,  from the University 
of Illinois campus near Davenport Hall.  Stately 
Manor is a narrow, upright form 10 x 6-m wide, is 
possibly best for street tree  use.  ‘Variegata’ is a little 
known, slower growing cu ltivar with streaks of 
creamy white variegation and pink-purple new 
growth.  Availability of these cultivars may be 
limited. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book 
under”United States Government.”  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under 
the subheading “Departm ent of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Animals should not be allowed to graze woodland 
areas where Kentucky coffeetree grows or where it 
has been cut and allowed to sprout, until spring 
grasses and herbage are abundant.  Sprouts can be  grubbed periodically as a preventative measure as 
only a few of these trees will be found in any 
woodland.  Fence in large fruiting trees to prevent 
livestock from eating the fallen pods.  This measure 
is desirable over removing a species that is so rare in 
the landscape. 
 
References 
Alden, H. A. 1995. 
Hardwoods of North America . 
Gen. Tech. Report FPL-GTR-83.  Madison, WI; U.S. 
Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory.  136p. 
 
Barkley, T. ed. 1986.  Flora of the Great Plains . 
1986. Univ. Press of Kansas. Lawrence. 1392p.
 
 
Brenton Arboretum. 2006.  Kentucky coffeetree. 
(http://
www.thebrentonarboretum.org/tree)  [online: 
cited 30 November 2006]. Dallas Center, IA. 
 
Canada Gardens. 2006 . The Kentucky coffee tree 
Gymnocladus dioicus . (
http://canada-
gardnes.com/2gymnocladusdioicus.html) [online: 
cited 16 November 2006].  
 
Countryman, D. W. and J. Kemperman. 2000.  
Forestry reference handbook . Iowa State Univ. Ext.  
72p. 
(http://
www.extension.iastate.edu/Publications/PM18
50.pdf)  [online: cited 18 January 2007] Iowa State 
Univ. Dept. of Forestry and Iowa DNR, ISU Univ. 
Ext. 
 
Dewald, S., S. Josiah, and B. Erdkamp. 2005. 
Heating with firewood: producing, harvesting, and 
processing firewood . Neb Guide G1554. UNL-
Lincoln Ext. Institute of Agri. and Nat. Res.  4p. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.  Manual of woody landscape plants: 
Their identification, ornamental characteristics, 
culture, propagation and uses .  Rev. 4
th Ed.Stipes 
Publishing Co. Champaign, Ill. 1187p. 
 
Dirr, M.A. and C.W. Heuser, JR. 1987.  The 
Reference manual of woody plant propagation. From 
seed to tissue culture . Varsity Press, Inc. Athens, 
Georgia. 239p. 
 
Eastern Kentucky Univ. Student Chapter of The 
Wildlife Society. 2007. Coffeetree, Kentucky, 
Gymnocladus dioicus . AWAKE Plants & Wildlife.  
(http://
www.kentuckyawake.org/ plantsWildlife/lifeHi
story.cfm?instanceID=22887) [online: cited 18 
January 2007].

Fitch, Richard W. 2006. Alkaloids of the Kentucky 
coffeetree, Gymnocladus dioicus . 
(http://
www.phcog.org/annualMtg./2006/papers/P-
115.pdf)  [online: cited 11 January 2007]. Indiana 
State Univ.  
 
Georgia Forestry Commission. 2005.  Georgia’s 
champion trees . 
(http://
www.gfc.state.ga.us/ForestManagement/docu
ments/GeorgiasChampionTrees.pdf[online: cited 11 
January 2007].  
 
Kansas Forest Service. 2006. Tree of the month . Out 
on a Limb Vol. 1 (1) Summer.  
 
KestralCreek.com. 2007.  Kentucky coffee tree. 
(http://www.kestrelcreek.com/Wood.htm)  [online: 
cited 11 January 2007]. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide . Univ. of Kansas 
Press.  Lawrence. 340p.
 
National Register of Big Trees.  
(http://
www.americanforests.org/resources/bigtrees/r
egister.php?details=171) [online: cited 10 January 
2007]. American Forests. 
 
Kuhns, M. & D. Mooter. 1992. Trees of Nebraska. 
EC92-1774-X. University of Nebraska, Nebr. Coop. 
Extension, Lincoln, Nebraska. 75p. 
 
Missouri Dept. of Conservation. 2007.  Kentucky 
coffeetree Gymnocladus dioicus (L.) K. Koch.  
(http://
www.mdc.mo.gov/documents/Forest/Woods/
K_coffee.pdf)  [online: cited 18 January 2007].  
 
Ohio Historical Society. 2006.  What tree is it? 
Kentucky coffeetree . [online: cited 16 November 
2006]. 
(
http://www.oplin.org/tree/fact%20pages/coffeetree_
sweet/coffeetree_sweet.html)   
 
Ohio State Univ. Extension Agriculture. 2006. 
Gymnocladus . Kentucky coffeetree . Ohio Trees 
Bulletin 700-00, 
(
http://ohioline.osu.edu/b700/b700_48.html)  [online: 
cited 16 November 2006].  
 
Panshin, A.J. and C. deZeeuw. 1980.  Textbook of 
wood technology, 4th Edition. McGraw-Hill Series in 
Forest Resources. McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
New York. 722p.
 
 
Phillips, G.R., F.J. Gibbs,  and W.R. Mattoon. 1959. 
Forest trees of Oklahoma . Forestry Division, State  Board of Agriculture. Pub. No. 1, Rev. Ed. No. 9.  
135p. 
 
Plants For A Future. 2007. 
Database Search Results. 
Gymnocladus dioica. 
(http://
www.ibiblio.org/pfaf/cgi-
bin/arr_html?Gymnocladus+dioica&CAN=COMIND
)  [online: cited 25 January 2007]. 
 
Reisch, K.W., P.C. Kozel, and G.A. Weinstein. 1975. 
Woody ornamentals for the Midwest . The Ohio State 
University.  293p. 
 
Schopmeyer, C.S. Tech. Cord. 1974.  Seeds of woody 
plants in the United States . USDA-FS Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450.  883p. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1969.  Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
in Kansas . Univ. of Kansas Press. Lawrence.  250p. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.  Woody plants of the North 
Central Plains . Univ. of Kansas Press. Lawrence. 
530p. 
 
Steyermark, J. 1975.  Flora of Missouri. Iowa State 
University Press, Ames, Iowa. 1728p.  
 
Stone, K.  2005. Kris’s corner. Kentucky coffeetree . 
Northern Kentucky Urban & Community Forest 
Council. Vol. 3 (3) 
(http://
www.nkyurbanforestry.org)  [online: cited 16 
November 2006]. 
 
TreeHelp.com. 2006.  Trees: Species: Kentucky coffee 
tree . (
http://www.treehelp.com/trees/coffee-
tree/gymnocladus-dioicus.asp) [online: cited 16 
November 2006]. 
 
Trees from Seeds.  2006. 
(
http://www.treesfromseed s.org/coffeetree.htm) 
[online: cited 29 November 2006]. 
 
University of Illinois. 2006.  Kentucky coffee tree 
Gymnocladus  dioicus (L.) K. Koch.  
(http://
www.library.uicuc.edu/vex/toxic/kentucky/ken
tucky.htm) [online: cited 4 December 2006]. 
 
University of Kentucky – College of Agriculture. 
2007.  Gymnocladus  dioicus (Kentucky coffeetree), 
Pea Family (Fabaceae). Cooperative Extension 
Service.  ) [online: cited 3 January 2007].  
(http://www.uky.edu/Ag/Horticulture/kytreewebsite/t
reeprofiles/text/gymnocladusinfo2.htm  
 
Univ. of Missouri Center for Agroforestry. 2007. 
Plant resource guide: Materials and management,

Appendix Section 6:   117p.  (http://www.center for 
agroforestry.org/pubs/training/appendix6.pdf)  
[online: cited 11 January 2007].  
 
 
USDA Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
Technology transfer fact sheet. Gymnocladus dioicus . 
(http://www2.fpl.fs.fed.us/TechSheets/HardwoodNA/
html/Docs/gymnoeng.html)  [online: cited 11 January 
2007].   
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Department. 2006.  Kentucky 
coffeetree. Fabaceae Gymnocladus dioicus (L.) K. 
Koch . 
(
http://www.fw.vt.edu/dendro/dendrology/syllabus/fa
ctsheet.cfm?ID=158)  [online: cited 16 November 
2006].  
 
Wcisel, K.J. 2004.  Tree topics. 2000-2004 . 
(
http://wcisel.com/plants/kentuckycoffeetree/index.ht
m)  [online: cited 16 November 2006]. 
 
White, D.A. 2006.  Kentucky coffeetree . 
(http://
www.ontarioprofessi onals.com/tree4.htm) 
[online: cited 16 November 2006]. 
 
Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America. Revised Edition.  
Dioscorides Press. Portland, Oregon. 407p. 
 
Prepared By  
John M. Row 
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Wayne Geyer, Ph.D. 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator 
John M. Row  
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 Edited: 0702 jd; 070227 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.