CURLYCUP GUMWEED
 
Grindelia squarrosa ( Pursh) Dunal 
Plant Symbol = GRSQ 
 
Common Names:  Tarweed; resinweed;  rosinweed  
  
Scientific Names:  None  
Description  
General :  Composite family (Asteraceae). Curlycup gumweed is 
a short -lived perennial, or biennial forb averaging 1 to 3 feet 
high. Numerous  branching stems bear alternately arranged  
leaves, typically 1 to 4 inches long with entire to serrate or even 
somewhat lobed margins. The flower heads are radiate with 25 
to 40 yellow rays and a yellow center. The involucural bracts are 
squarrose -reflexed , or strongly rolled back, and highly resinous. 
The fruit is a 2.5 to 3 mm long achene bearing 2 to 3 pappus 
awns (Welsh et al., 2003).  Flowering occurs in mid - to late -
summer, typically beginning in July and continuing through 
August and into September.  O ccasional plants will be seen with 
flowers persisting into November.  
 
There are currently three varieties recognized by the PLANTS 
database, including var. quasiperennis , var. serrulata, and var. 
squarrosa . Variety quasiperennis  is a true short -lived perennial 
with largely entire leaf margins. The other two varieties , both 
biennials,  can b e separated by their leaf width to length ratio, 
with var.  squarrosa  having upper stem leaves 2 to 4 times longer 
than broad, and oblong in out line, and var. serrulata having 
upper stem leaves much narrower, 5 to 8 times longer than 
broad, and narrowly oblong in outline (Welsh et al., 2003) . 
Distribution : Curlycup gumweed is native  throughout North 
Ame rica with the exception of the s outheastern states . For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Curlycup  gumweed inhabits a variety of arid plant  communities 
including sagebrush steppe, desert grasslands, prairies and mountain 
shrub chaparral (Walsh, 1993). It is very commonly found in disturbed 
roadsides, open fields and in poorly managed pastures and rangel ands. 
Adaptation  
Curlycup gumweed is adapted to disturbed sites receiving 10 to 20 inches 
mean annual precipitation. This species is most commonly found in 
rocky, gravelly soils of disturbed roadsides, but can be found in heavier 
silty clay loam soils to sandy loams. Curlycup gumweed is adapted to 
neutral to moderately saline conditio ns. It is very commonly found 
growing in sites occupied by non -native grasses such as cheatgrass 
( Bromus tectorum ) and crested wheatgrass ( Agropyron cristatum). 
 
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Figure 1. Curlycup gumweed growing in a disturbed roadside. 
Figure 2. Close-up of curlycup gumweed flower head 
showing strongly reflexed involucural bracts.

Peterson, J.G. 1970. The food habits and summer distribution of juvenile sage grouse in central Montana. Journal of Wildlife Management. 34(1): 147 -155.  
Nuzzo, V. 1978. Propagation and planting of prairie forbs and grasses in southern Wisconsin. Dane County Highway  Department. Madison, WI. In: Glenn -Lewin, D.C. and R.Q. Landers. Fifth Midwest Prairie Conference Proceedings: 
Iowa State University. Ames, IA. August 22 -24, 1976.  
Nyamusamba,  R. 2016. Controlling curlycup gumweed ( Grindelia squarrosa). South Dakota State University Extension. 
2016.  http://igrow.org/livestock/beef/controlling -curly cup-gumweed -grindelia -squarrosa/
 
Ogle, D., St. John, L. Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth. 2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species for the 
Intermountain West. USDA -NRCS, Boise, ID -Salt Lake City, UT -Spokane, WA. ID -TN 24. 57p.  
Peterson,  J.G. 1970.  The food  habits and summer distribution of juvenile sage grouse in central Montana. Journal of Wildlife 
Management. 34(1): 147 -155.  
Sîrbu, C.; Oprea, A. 2008. Two alien species in the spreading process in Romania: Reynoutria  × bohemica  Chrtek & 
Chrtková  and  Grindelia squarrosa  (Pursh) Dunal. Cercetari agronomice în moldova. 41 (2): 41 -50.  
Stubbendieck, J., G.Y. Friisoe,  and M.R. Bolick. 1994. Weeds of Nebraska and the Great Plains . Nebraska Department of 
Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry. Lincoln, Ne braska. 
Thomas, W.D. 1949. Studies on the host range of the Colorado red- node virus. Journal of the Colorado-Wyoming Academy 
of Science. 4 (1): 40 p.  
Walsh, R.A. 1993. Grindelia squarrosa. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. USDA, Forest Service , Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. Brigham Young  University, Provo, UT.  
Whitson, T.D. (ed.), Burrill, L.C., Dewey, S.A., Cudney , D.W., Nelson, B.E., Lee, R.D. and R. Parker. 1996. Weeds of the 
West . Western Society of Weed Science in cooperation with Cooperative Extension Services, University of Wyoming. 
Laramie, Wyoming.  
 
Citation  
Tilley , D. and T. Pickett. 2016.  Plant Guide for curlycup gumweed  ( Grindelia squarrosa) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen  Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen , ID. 83210.  
Published
:  December  2016   
 
Edited:
  
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.

T
e a , 
pis
a ct
f  
 
IE
  \(
of  
h.  
 
I
U
F \(h, -
9
cr
I -9410,-7442 o
pra.  
I  
p -8339 o-6 
 
Pa
o , e
po -2 
 
F  
t -5S
.  
FU f
a 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER