Plant Guide
GROUND IVY 
Glechoma hederacea L.  
Plant Symbol = GLHE2  
Contributed by:   The Pullman Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
Glechoma hederacea. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture  
 
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:  
creeping Charlie  
creeping Jenny  
gill over the ground  
field balm  
haymaids  
cat’s foot  
alehoffs  
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:  
Glecoma  hederacea  L. 
Glechoma hederacea L. var. micrantha  Moric. 
Glechoma hederacea L. var. parviflora  (Benth.) House  
Nepeta hederacea (L.) Trevis.     Uses
 
Ethnobotanical :  Ground ivy was used as a flavoring and 
clearing agent in  brewing beer before it was  replaced  by  
hops (Mitich, 1994).  Germans began using hops in the 8
th 
century, but hops were not  introduced to England until  
the 14
th century  (Hatfield, 1971) .  Many people believed 
hops were dangerous to their health until the 17th  century 
( Hatfield, 1971).   One of ground ivy’s  common names, 
alehoffs, means “ale ivy”.  I t is derived from the old 
English brewing term, hofe  (Durant, 1976).  Anothe r of 
ground ivy’s common names contains the word gill, 
which  is from the French word guiller , meaning “to 
ferment ale ” (Hatfield 1971).  
 
Ground  ivy was also used  for treating innumerable 
medical  conditions .  Graeco-Roman mythology claimed it 
cured  melancholy  (Hatfield, 1971) .  European herbalists 
used  it to treat dis orders of the bladder, kidneys, digestive 
tract  and ski n; gout, coughs, colds, and  ringing in the ears 
( Gerard, 1964).   They also used it to cure  eye disorders in 
livestock (Gerard, 1964).   Early English settlers brought 
ground ivy to the New World as part of their standard 
stock of household herbs (Hatfield, 1971).  During the 
19
th  century in the U.S., ground ivy  was used for treating 
lung and kidney diseases, asthma, jaundice,  
hypochondria ,  “monomania”  ( a condition of “ partial 
insanity” ), and it was snuffed to treat persistent headache 
( Lestrange , 1971 as cited by Mitich, 1994).  Ground ivy 
was also given to painters to treat “lead -colic”  (Durant, 
1976) .  The plant is still used in herbal medicine in 
modern times , for its astringent, diuretic and stimulant 
properties  (Hatfield, 1971 ; Waggy, 2009).  
 
Old English recipes recommended adding ground ivy to 
jams, soups, oatmeal and vegetable dishes (LeStrange, 
1977, as cited by Mitich, 1994 ).  Wreathes were once 
made with the trailing stems of ground ivy  and placed on 
the dead , and the Swiss believed when  worn with rue, 
agrimony, maiden -hair and broom straw, it could improve 
vision and indicate the presence of witches  ( Blatchley, 
1930 ).  Ground ivy is high in iron and is a valuable 
addition to  compost ( Hatfield, 1971 ). 
 
Ornamental :  Ground ivy is sold by g arden nurseries for a 
ground cover and hanging baskets.  The variegated 
cultivar ‘Variegata’ is tremendously  popular.  In Europe, 
the variegated cultivar has been found growing in natural 
habitats (Hutchings and Price, 1999).  
 
Wildlife :  Many species of in vertebrates and a few species 
of mammals utilize ground ivy for forage in Europe 
( Watts, 1968; Hutchings and Price, 1999 ).  In the U.S., it