Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HONEY LOCUST 
Gleditisia triacanthose  L. 
Plant Symbol = GLTR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate common names  
Common honey-locust, honey-shucks locust . 
honeylocust, honey locust  
 
Uses 
Honey-locust is widely pl anted as a hardy and fast-
growing ornamental.  It is often used in extreme 
urban stress areas such as parking lot islands and 
sidewalk tree squares and has been planted for 
erosion control, for windbreaks and shelterbelts, and 
as a vegetation pioneer for rehabilitation of strip-
mine spoil banks.  Because of the small leaflets and 
open crown, the trees cast a light shade that permits 
shade-tolerant turfgrass an d partial-shade perennials  to grow underneath.  Cultivars have been selected for 
crown shape and branch angles and leaf color, and 
most are both thornless and fruitless.  Over-use of 
honey-locust in cities has led to recommendations 
that its use be discouraged until adequate biodiversity 
is restored.   
 
Honey-locust wood is dense, hard, coarse-grained, 
strong, stiff, shock-resistant, takes a high polish, and 
is durable in contact with soil.  It has been used 
locally for pallets, crates, general construction, 
furniture, interior finish, turnery, firewood, railroad 
ties, and posts (fence posts may sprout to form living 
fences), but it is too scarce to be of economic 
importance.  The wood also was formerly valued for 
bows.  
 
The geographic range of honey-locust probably was 
extended by Indians who dried the legumes, ground 
the dried pulp, and used
 it as a sweetener and 
thickener, although the pulp also is reported to be 
irritating to the throat and somewhat toxic.  
Fermenting the pulp can make a potable or energy 
alcohol.  Native Americans sometimes ate cooked 
seeds, they have also been roasted and used as a 
coffee substitute.   
  
Honey-locust pods are eaten by cattle, goats, deer, 
opossum, squirrel, rabbits, quail, crows, and starling.  
White-tailed deer and rabbits eat the soft bark of 
young trees in winter, and livestock and deer eat 
young vegetative growth.  Honey-locust is planted 
around wildlife plots and into  pastures and hayfields 
to provide high-protein mast.  Cattle do not digest the 
seeds, but sheep do.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 20 meters tall, with an open crown, armed 
with thick-branched thorns to 20 cm long on the main 
trunk and lower branches.  Bark blackish to grayish-
brown, with smooth, elongate, plate-like patches 
separated by furrows.  Leaves are deciduous, 
alternate, pinnately or bipinnately compound, 10-20 
cm long, often with 3-6 pairs of side branches; 
leaflets paired, oblong, 1-3 cm long, shiny and dark

green above, turning a showy yellow in the fall, 
typically dropping early.  Flowers are greenish-
yellow, fragrant, small and numerous in hanging 
clusters 5-13 cm long, mostly either staminate (male) 
or pistillate (female), these usually borne on separate 
trees, but some perfect flowers (male plus female) on 
each tree (the species polyg amo-dioecious).  Fruits 
are flattened and strap-like pods 15-40 cm long and 
2.5-3.5 cm wide, dark brown at maturity, pendulous 
and usually twisted or spiraled, with a sticky, sweet, 
and flavorful pulp separating the seeds; seeds 
beanlike, about 1 cm long.  The common name 
"honey" is in reference to the sweet pulp of the fruits.   
 
Variation within the species : Gleditsia triacanthos  
var. inermis  (L.) Schneid. (“inermis” means 
unarmed) is occasionally found wild, apparently 
more as a populational variant than what is generally 
given formal taxonomic stat us as a variety.  Such 
trees have provided stock for selection of some the 
thornless horticultural forms, but most of the latter 
are actually derived from buds or stem cuttings taken 
from the upper, thornless portions of physiologically 
mature trees thorny in the lower portions.  Scions 
taken from this area generally remain thornless.  
Breeders also can control the sex of scions by 
selecting unisexual budwood for cuttings.  Certain 
branches bear only one type of flower, and trees from 
cuttings of those branches will bear only that type. 
 
Southern races of the species produce fruit more 
nutritious for stock feeding than northern races.   
 
Natural hybridization between honey-locust and 
water-locust ( Gleditsia aquatica ) produces Gleditsia 
X  texana  Sarg., the Texas honey-locust.   
 
Distribution 
Honey-locust is essentially Midwestern in 
distribution, from the west slope of Appalachians to 
the eastern edge of Great  Plains -- scattered in the 
east-central US from central  Pennsylvania westward 
to southeastern South Dakota, south to central and 
southeastern Texas, east to southern Alabama, then 
northeasterly through Alabama to western Maryland.  
Outlying populations occur in northwestern Florida, 
west Texas, and west central Oklahoma.  It is 
naturalized east to the Appalachians from South 
Carolina north to Pennsylvania, New York, and New 
England and Nova Scotia; sometimes a weed tree in 
India, New Zealand, and S outh Africa.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Honey-locust occurs on well-drained 
sites, upland woodlands and borders, rocky hillsides, 
old fields, fence rows, river floodplains, hammocks, 
and rich, moist bottomlands.  It is most commonly 
found on moist, fertile soils  near streams and lakes.  
It is tolerant of flooding and also is drought-resistant 
and somewhat tolerant of salinity.  On bottomlands, it 
is a pioneer tree.  On limestone uplands, it is an 
invader of rocky glades and abandoned farm fields 
and pastures.  It is generally found below 760 meters, 
but up to 1500 meters in a few places.  Flowering: 
May-June; fruiting: September-October, sometimes 
remaining on the tree through February.     
 
General : Seed production begins on honey-locust 
trees at about 10 years and continues until about age 
100, with optimum production at about 25-75 years 
of age.  Some seed usually is produced every year but 
large crops usually occur every other year.  The seeds 
are viable for long periods because of a thick, 
impermeable seed coat.  Under natural conditions, 
individual seeds become permeable at different 
periods following maturation so that germination is 
spread over several years.  The seeds are dispersed by 
birds and mammals, including cattle, which eat the 
fruits, and buffalo may have been historically 
important dispersal agents of the seeds.  
Germinability apparently is enhanced by passage 
through the digestive tract of animals.  Honey-locust 
also reproduces from stump and root sprouts.  
 
Honey-locust is generally shade-intolerant and 
reproduction is primarily in open areas, gaps, and at 
the edges of woods.  The ability of honey-locust to 
invade prairie and rangeland is thought to be related 
to its tolerance of xeric conditions.  Growth is rapid 
and trees live to a maximum  of about 125 years.   
 
Management 
The only serious disease of honey-locust is a canker, 
which is occasionally fatal, but trees in landscape 
plantings may be damaged by a number of pests and 
pathogens.  Damage to young honey-locust also may 
be caused by rabbits gnawing the bark and by 
browsing of livestock and deer.   
 
Honey-locust is easily injured by fire because of its 
thin bark, but it sprouts after top-kill by fire.  It 
appears to be excluded from prairies by frequent fire.  
Infrequent fires may create openings for reproduction 
in bottomland forests.  Honey-locust is not a nitrogen 
fixer.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  These 
plant materials are readily available from commercial 
sources. 
 
References 
Blair, R.M. 1990.   Gleditsia triacanthos .  Pp. 358-
364, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of 
North America . Volume 2.  Hardwoods .  USDA 
Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, 
D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1974.   Tolerance of honeylocust seedlings 
to soil-applied salts .  Hortscience 9:53-54.  
 
Duke, J.A. 1983.  Handbook of energy crops .  
Unpublished.  Center for New Crops & Plant 
Products, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana. 
<http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/duke_energy/
Gleditsia_triacanthos.html> 
 
Gordon, D. 1966.   A revision of the genus Gleditsia 
(Leguminosae) .  Ph.D. diss., Indiana Univ., 
Bloomington, Indiana.   
 
Halverson, H.G. & D.F. Potts 1981.   Water 
requirements of honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos f. 
inermis) in the urban forest .  USDA Forest Service, 
Res. Pap. NE-487.   
 
Michener, D.C. 1986.   Phenotypic instability in 
Gleditsia triacanthos (Fabaceae) .  Brittonia 38:360-
361.    
 
Potts, D.F. & L.P. Herrington 1982.   Drought 
resistance adaptations in urban honeylocust .  J. 
Arboric. 8:75-80.    
 
Robertson, K.R. & Y.T. Lee 1976.  The genera of 
Caesalpinioideae in the southeastern United States .  
J. Arnold Arbor. 57:1-34.  
 
Schnabel, A. & J.L. Hamrick 1995.   Understanding 
the population genetic structure of Gleditsia 
triacanthos L.: The scale and pattern of pollen gene 
flow.  Evolution 49:921-931.  
 
Smith, G.C. & E.G. Brennan 1984.   Response of 
honeylocust cultivars to air pollution stress in an 
urban environment.  J. Arboric. 10:289-293.   
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Gleditsia triacanthos .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler ). The fire effects information 
system [database] .  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
USDA, NRCS 1993.   Northeast wetland flora: Field 
office guide to plant species .  Wetland Science 
Institute, Laurel, Maryland. 
 
Wilson, A.A. 1991.   Browse agroforestry using 
honeylocust .  Forestry Chronicle. 67:232-235.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03feb03ahv 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.