Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
LICORICE  
Glycyrrhiza lepidota  Pursh. 
Plant Symbol = GLLE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
 Copyright Mike Haddock, Kans as Wildflowers and Grasses 
 
Alternate Names wild licorice, licorice-root and 
dessert root 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Rangeland:  Weaver (1954) indicated that 
licorice was greedily eaten by livestock, especially 
when young. He went on to say that despite its great 
store of food underground in roots and rhizomes, it is 
practically all dead by the time close grazing has 
resulted in fair pasture conditions. Fransen and Boe 
(1981) determined that licorice produced highly 
digestible forage. Their analysis concluded that 
American licorice is highly nutritious and compares 
favorably with alfalfa. Its bur-like seed pod can  become entangled in sheep wool and cause dockage 
when sold. 
 
Wildlife value:
 Deer and pronghorn antelope 
consume the foliage (Stubbendieck and Conard, 
1989). While birds and small rodents eat the seeds of 
licorice, plains pocket gophers consume their roots.  
 
Erosion control :  Weaver (1954)  determined that a 
licorice root system extended some 12 feet (3.6-m) 
into the prairie soil.  Allen and Allen (1981) 
recognized licorice for its soil binding capabilities 
and Duke (1981) indicated that it has wide ecological 
amplitude. Whitman, in 1979, noted that licorice 
exhibited vigorous growth on mine spoil materials 
near Dickinson, North Dakota.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  American licorice was widely used 
as medicine by Indians of the Great Plains. Kindscher 
(1992) described several uses Native American made 
of licorice. The Cheyenne ’s drank medicinal tea 
made from the peeled, dry roots of the plant for 
diarrhea and upset stomach. The Lakota’s used the 
root as a medicine for flu. The Dakota’s steeped the 
licorice leaves in boiling water to make a topical 
medicine for earache. The  root was also chewed and 
held in the mouth to relieve toothache. The Blackfeet 
made a tea from bitter tasting root to relieve coughs, 
chest pain and sore throat . Kindscher (1987) also 
detailed the Native Americans use of licorice as food. 
The Cheyenne ate the young  shoots of licorice plant 
raw in the early spring. The Indians later would roast 
the roots in their campfir e embers, and then pound 
the roots with a stick to remove the tough woody 
string from the center of  the root. When the string 
was removed it left a food that had a taste similar to 
sweet potatoes.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Legume family (Fabaceae). American 
Licorice is a native perennial legume common to 
disturbed areas, draws, woods, and depressions over 
much of temperate North America (Duke, 1981). The 
plant reproduces by seed and underground stems 
called rhizomes. Licorice grows 1.5 to 3.5 feet tall (.5 
to 1.0-m). The stems are smooth, erect and branched.

The leaves are smooth, alternately attached to the 
stem, and have many (7 to 21) leaflets (odd-pinnate) 
that are arranged opposite each other along the leaf 
stem. The flowers are on short stalks and crowded on 
terminal spikes. Its flower s are yellowish-white and 
shaped similar to alfalfa  flowers. Flowers bloom in 
June to August and seed matures from July to 
October. The seed pods are  brown, leathery, and ½ to 
1.0 inch long (1.25 to 2.54-cm). The pods are covered 
with many stout, hooked, brown spines which form a 
bur. This hooked pod assists the plant in dispersal 
since they stick to animal fur and are moved to new 
sites. Seeds are green to reddish-brown, smooth and 
bean shaped.    
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Licorice is found on sites that range from 
moist to moderately dry, usually in rich soils. This 
plant can be located along streams, in grasslands, 
along roadsides and railway right-of-ways in sites 
that have suffered mild disturbance.  
 
Adaptation 
Glycyrrhiza lepidota  is adapted to prairie settings that 
might be moister than the norm. An information 
paper highlighting the adaptability of 31 native 
species to salinity, sodicity, pH, and flooding 
tolerance was reported by  Montana State University 
researchers. The paper indicated that American 
licorice was moderately tolerant to salinity, was very 
tolerant to sodium, was tolerant of short term 
flooding and could live in pH ranges from 4.8 to 7.2. 
This information makes licorice a species that can 
stand a lot of negative environmental influences and 
still produce forage or cover on land affected by salt 
or sodium. These tolerant species are rare and can be 
utilized on a number of problem sites.  
 
Establishment 
Seed used by Boe and Wynia (1985) in their 
greenhouse and field experiments were all scarified 
for 5 seconds in a Forsberg laboratory scarifier prior 
to planting. The process of  scarification of the seed 
produced a higher rate of germination and more 
uniform stands in the field. Since it is a legume 
licorice should be inoculated with rhizobium 
Glycyrrhiza  Spec. 1 inoculant. This characteristic of 
the plant would have potential for utilization as a soil 
stabilizer on disturbed sites, particularly those that 
are low in available nitrogen.   
  Management 
The management of American licorice is determined 
by the intended use of the species. If erosion control 
is the intended use then management for maximum 
ground cover would be expected. If used for forage 
then management would be to incorporate the plant 
into a warm-season grass mix for foliage and 
nitrogen production.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The loss of seeds as a result of insect predation is a 
potential threat to the maintenance and expansion of 
plant populations. Boe etal. 
(1988) indicated that the 
bruchid beetle  Acanthoscelides aureolus  (Horn) was 
a major seed predator on  American licorice. They 
found that frequency of seed predation varied 
significantly between years. In an earlier study Boe 
and Wynia (1985) found that bruchid beetles were 
present in 37 populations of  licorice pods collected in 
North and South Dakota. The overall mean 
infestation of 74, 50-seed samples was 41%. The data 
indicated that seed beetles have the ability to 
drastically reduce the nu mber of viable seed 
produced by  G. lepidota.  Mankin (1969) reported that 
a rust fungus  Uromyces glycyrrhizae  was found on 
licorice specimens in South Dakota.   Seed predation, 
reduced flowering in monoculture settings and 
chlorophyll deficient seedlings within populations are 
some of the potential problems that  G. lepidota faces 
before being considered for forage or conservation 
use in a domestic situation.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Glycyrrhiza lepidota  has a tremendous capacity for 
vegetative reproduction via rhizomes. This might 
lead to the case for suspected weediness of this 
species. The state of Wyoming has declared it a 
restricted noxious weed  seed.  In fact, Whitson 
(1992) produced a research report that dealt with 
control of wild licorice at two growth stages with 
various herbicides. This may have come about 
because of the bur-like seed  pod that attaches to the 
wool of sheep and the fur of other domestic animals.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Whitman (1979) found the germinability of field 
collected  G. lepidota  seeds to be among the highest 
of 30 native forb species from North Dakota, but he 
also cautioned that germination varied considerably 
between years of collectio n. Boe and Wynia (1985) 
found that considerable variation was found among 
licorice populations for greenhouse and field 
emergence. Percent emergence in the greenhouse 
ranged from 0 to 97%, while field emergence ranged 
from 0 to 73% with an overall mean of 41%. Two 
populations that Boe and Wynia (1985) worked with

exhibited rapid and uniform germination and field 
establishment after scarification, but exhibited 
chlorophyll deficient seedling in both greenhouse and 
field plantings. Seedlings with chlorotic cotyledons 
did not produce leaves above the cotyledons and 
were generally dead within 10 days of emergence. 
Total chlorophyll (chlorophyll a and b) of the 
deficient seedlings were highly significantly (P<0.01) 
less than those of normal seedlings from the same 
population (Wynia et al. 1981). Vigor ratings of 
meter row plots after a year of establishment 
indicated that plants could  be successfully established 
from seed. Stem lengths of up to 30 inches tall (75-
cm.) were measured the second year, but very little 
flowering and seed pod set were observed. Rhizome 
production on the populations studied by Boe and 
Wynia (1985) was prolific. Their data indicated that  
G. lepidota  ecotypes from South Dakota have 
tremendous vegetative reproductive potential.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
 At the present time there are no cultivar releases or 
any type of plant materials release of American 
licorice. 
 
References 
Allen, O.N., and E.K. Allen. 1981. The 
Leguminosae: A source book of characteristics, uses, 
and nodulation. University of Wisconsin Press. 
Madison, Wisconsin. 
 
Boe, A., B. McDaniel, and K. Robbins. 1988. 
Patterns of American licorice seed predation by 
Acanthoscelides aureolus  (Horn) (Coleoptera: 
Bruchidae) in South Dakota. J. of Range Man. 41: 
342-345. 
 
Boe, A. and R. Wynia.  1985. Seed predation, 
seedling emergence, and rh izome characteristics of 
American licorice. J. of Range Man. 38:400-402. 
 
Duke, J.A. 1981. Handbook of legumes of world 
economic importance. Plenum Press, New York. 
 
Fransen, S.C. and A. Boe.  1981. Laboratory quality 
determination of American Licorice ( Glycyrrhiza 
lepidota  Pursh). Proc. S. D. Acad. of Sci. Volume 60: 
171. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987 and 1992. Edible wild plants of 
the prairie: An ethnobotan ical guide. University of 
Kansas Press. Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Mankin, C.J. 1969. Fungus Diseases on Non-grass 
Plants in South Dakota: a check list. Tech. Bull. 36.  South Dakota State University, Brookings, South 
Dakota.  
 
Stubbendieck, J. and E.C. Conard. 1989. Common 
Legumes of the Great Plains
. University of Nebraska 
Press. Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1954. North American Prairie. Johnsen 
Publishing Company. Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Whitman, W.C. 1979. Selection and increase of 
perennial forbs for mine spoil reclamation in the 
Northern Great Plains. Final report on cooperative 
project between N. Dak. Agr. Exp. Sta. and U.S. 
Forest Service.  
 
Whitson, T.D. and W.R. Tatman. 1992. Control of 
wild licorice ( Glycyrriza lepidota)  at two growth 
stages with various herbicides. Research Progress 
Report – Western Society of Weed Science (USA). 
Meeting held March 9-12, 1992, Salt Lake City,Utah. 
 
Wynia, R., A. Boe, and W. Gardner. 1981. Initial 
investigation of chlorophyll deficient cotyledons of 
American Licorice ( Glycyrrhiza lepidota  Pursh). 
Proc. S.D. Acad. Sci. Volume 60:173. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 070820 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.