Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GINKGO 
Ginkgo species 
Plant Symbol = GINKG
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Wikipedia ® the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.  
 
Alternative Names 
Ginkgo biloba L., maidenhair tree 
 
Uses 
NOTE: Ingesting seeds may be toxic. 
 
Commercial use: The Ginkgo wood is of little value 
due to its scarcity. It is lightweight, brittle, yellow 
and in China and Japan, is used for chess sets, 
chopping blocks and firewood. The leaves are 
harvested for uses as a blood thinner and to treat 
circulatory illnesses. 
 
Medical use: T he extract from the Ginkgo leaves 
contains 
flavonoid glycosides, and ginkgolides. The 
extract is said to be a 
memory enhancer, and anti-
vertigo agent. There are three effects on the human 
body: (1) it improves blood flow (including 
microcirculation in small capillaries) to most tissues 
and organs; (2) it protects against oxidative cell 
damage from free radicals (
antioxidant); and (3) it 
blocks many of the effects of PAF (platelet 
aggregation, blood clotting) that have been related to 
the development of a number of cardiovascular, 
renal, respiratory and CNS (Central Nervous System) 
disorders. 
 
Ginkgo is also added in small amounts to energy 
drinks
, but it does not produce  a noticeable effect, 
except as a placebo, or ma rketing tool from Ginkgo 
being listed on the label. 
 
Side Effects: There are some undesirable effects of 
Ginkgo for individuals with blood circulation 
disorders, and those taking 
anti-coagulants (i.e., 
aspirin, warfarin). Recent studies have found that 
ginkgo has little or no effect on the anticoagulant 
properties or pharmacodynamics of warfarin. Ginkgo 
should not be used by people who are taking the 
anti-
depressant
 drugs,  monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOI) or by 
pregnant women. Ginkgo side effects 
include possible increased risk of bleeding, 
gastrointestinal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, headaches, dizziness, and restlessness. If 
any side effects are experienced, stop immediately 
taking Ginkgo supplements and consult your doctor. 
 
Culinary use:  The Ginkgo nut-like gametophytes 
inside the seeds are a traditional Chinese food often 
served at weddings. They are believed to have health 
benefits or have 
aphrodisiac qualities. Japanese cooks 
add Ginkgo seeds to dishes such as 
chawammushi, 
and cooked seeds are ofte n eaten along with other 
dishes.. 
 
When eaten by children, in large quantities over a 
long period of time, the raw gametophyte (meat) of 
the seed can cause poisoning by MPN (4-
methoxypyridoxine), which is heat-stable. Studies 
have demonstrated that convulsions caused by MPN 
can be prevented or terminated with pyridoxine. 
Some people are sensitive to the chemicals in the 
sarcotesta, the outer fleshy coating. These people 
should handle the seeds with care by wearing 
disposable gloves when  preparing the seeds for 
consumption. The symptoms are 
dermatitis or blisters 
similar to that caused by contact with 
poison ivy. 
Seeds with the fleshy coating removed are perfectly 
safe to handle. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  The Ginkgo is a medium to large tree that 
reaches 20–35m tall, altho ugh some specimens in

China are over 50m tall. Ginkgo trees often have 
angular crown and long, somewhat erratic branches. 
They are usually deep rooted and resistant to wind 
and snow damage. Young trees are often tall and 
slender, and sparsely branched, and  the crown 
becomes broader as the tree ages. Some old Ginkgos 
produce aerial roots, known as  chichi (Japanese; 
"
nipples") or  zhong-ru  (Chinese), which form on the 
undersides of large branches and grow downwards. 
Chichi growth is very slow, and may take hundreds 
of years to occur. The function, if any, of these thick 
aerial roots is unknown. 
 
Ginkgo branches grow in length by growth of shoots 
with regularly spaced leaves. From the 
axils of these 
leaves, "spur shoots" (also known as short shoots) 
develop on second-year growth. Short shoots have 
very short internodes (so that several years' growth 
may only extend them by a centimeter or two) and 
their leaves are ordinarily  unlobed. They are short 
and knobby, and are arranged regularly on the 
branches except on first-year growth. Because of the 
short internodes, leaves appear to be clustered at the 
tips of short shoots, and reproductive structures are 
formed only on them.  
 
The leaves are unique among seed plants, being fan-
shaped with veins radiating out into the leaf blade, 
sometimes bifurcating (splitting), but never 
anastomosing to form a network. Two veins enter the 
leaf blade at the base and fo rk repeatedy in two.  This 
is known as dichotomous venation. The leaves are 5-
10 cm (rarely to 15 cm) long. The old popular name 
"Maidenhair tree" is because the leaves resemble 
some of the pinnae of the 
Maidenhair fern  Adiantum 
capillus-veneris . 
 
Leaves of long shoots are usually notched or lobed, 
but only from the outer surface between the veins. 
They are borne both on the more rapidly growing 
branch tips, where they are alternate and spaced out, 
and also on the short, stubby spur shoots, where they 
are clustered at the tips.  During summer, the leaves 
are a deep green, turning to brilliant yellow in the 
fall. They generally remain yellow for a time, then 
suddenly drop most of thei r leaves in what can seem 
like overnight. 
 
Distribution :  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  The ginkgo is a drought-resistant, adaptable 
species, and is very cold hardy thriving.  It is also 
very pH adaptable, tolerates air pollution and soil salt  pollution, making it an ideal candidate for adverse 
urban conditions. It will grow in almost any 
conditions, it prefers deep, sandy, moist soil and 
requires full sun.  
 
Adaptation 
Ginkgo is a slow-grower adaptable, hardy tree for use 
as a specimen or grown in groups for commercial 
production. It transplants well, establishes easily and 
is often planted in parks, arboreta and botanical 
gardens as a point of interest. Male cultivars are 
preferable, as not only is the odor of the fallen seeds 
unpleasant, but the abundant crops can also be very 
messy. Cultivars include 'Fastigiata,' a male form 
with an upright, columnar habit; 'Fairmont,' a narrow, 
pyramidal male form; and 'Shangri-la,' a fast-growing 
form with a compact crown and good fall color. 
 
Establishment 
Ginkgos are dioecious with separate female and male 
sexes. Male plants produce small 
pollen cones with 
sporophylls, each bearing two microsporangia 
spirally arranged around a central axis.  Female 
plants do not produce cones. Two 
ovules are formed 
at the end of a stalk, and after 
pollination, one or both 
develop into seeds. 
 
 The seed is 1.5-2 cm long. Its outer layer, the 
sarcotesta is light yellow-brown, soft, and fruit-like. 
It is plum like and attractive, but the seedcoat 
contains 
butanoic acid, and smells like rancid butter  
when fallen on the ground. Beneath the sarcotesta is 
the hard 
sclerotesta, and a papery endotesta and 
nucellus. 
 
The fertilization of ginkgo seeds is unusual in that it 
utilizes motile sperm; 
cycads are the only other seed 
plants with this feature. It was first discovered by the 
Japanese botanist 
Sakugoro Hirase in the early 1900s. 
When the pollen reaches the pollen chamber, two 
sperm are produced, one of which goes on to fertilize 
the ovule.  The fertilization of ginkgo seeds is 
complete by the time they fall in autumn. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The Ginkgo is disease resistance, insect-resistant 
wood and has the ability to form aerial roots and 
sprouts.  This  means the Ginkgo lives long, with 
some specimens claimed to  be more than 2,500 years 
old; a 3,000 year-old.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Ginkgos were once native throughout the Northern 
Hemisphere, but were rendered extinct in North 
America and Europe during  the Pleistocene Ice Age.

They survived in the Yangste River valley in eastern 
China where they still grow today. The ginkgo has 
been cultivated for centuries in China and Japan and 
it is a sacred tree in the Far East. It grows well in 
Minnesota, Georgia, and Florida and in zones 8 and 9 
of the southeast. It is a common urban planting in 
many Iowa cities. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bartram, T. 1995 Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine , 
Grace Publishers, Bournemouth. 
 
Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckman J, Eds. 
Herbal Medicine: Expanded Commission E 
Monographs
. Newton, MA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2000:359-366 pp. 
 
Bremness, L. 1994. Herbs, Dorling Kindersley 
Eyewitness Handbook, London. 
 
Chevallier, A. 1996. The Encyclopaedia of Medicinal 
Plants , Dorling Kindersley, London. 
 
Coates P, Blackman M, Cragg G, et al., Eds. 
Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. New York, 
NY: Marcel Dekker. 2005. Accessed at Dekker 
Encyclopedias on September 9, 2005. 249-257pp. 
 
Corrigan, D. 1993 Ancient Medicine: Ginkgo biloba , 
Amberwood Publishing, Christchurch 
 
De Smet PA.2002.  Herbal remedies. New England 
Journal of Medicine
. 2002. 347(25): 2046-2056 pp..  
 
Ernest, E, Canter PH, Coon JT. 2005.  Does ginkgo 
biloba increase the risk of bleeding? A systematic 
review of case reports. Perfusion . 
 
Kleijen, J. & Knipschild, P. 1992 Ginkgo biloba, in 
The Lancet,  1992, Vol.340, 1136-1139 pp.
 
Lewington, A., & Parker, E. 1999.  Ancient Trees. 
London: Collins & Brown Ltd.  
 
Newall, C.A., Anderson, L.A., & Phillipson, J.D. 
1996 Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-care 
Professionals , The Pharmaceutical Press, London 
 
Ody, P. 1993  The Herb Society's Complete Medicinal 
Herbal , Dorling Kindersley, London. 
 
Rogers, S.K. 1995 British and Chinese Herbal 
Pharmacopoeia , Healthlink Software Systems, 
Queensland, Australia 
 
Solomon PR, Adams F, Silver A, et al. 2002. Ginkgo 
for memory enhancement: a randomized controlled 
trial
. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
2002; 288(7): 835-840 pp. 
 
Weiss, R.F. 1991 Herbal Medicine , Beaconsfield 
Arcanum, Beaconsfield. 
 
Witkam, L. and I. Ramzan. 2004.  "Ginkgo biloba in 
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: A miracle 
cure?" . From Cell to Society.
  
 
Wren, R.C. 1988 Potter's New Cyclopaedia of 
Botanical Drugs and Preparations , C.W.Daniel, 
Saffron Walden. 
 
Xuemin Jiang  et al. 2005. Effect of ginkgo and ginger 
on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
warfarin in healthy subjects
. British Journal of 
Clinical Pharmacology.
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson 
Earth team volunteer 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.