Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HALOGETON 
Halogeton glomeratus  (M. 
Bieb.) C. Meyer  
Plant Symbol = HAGL  
 
Contributed by: Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and Idaho NRCS State Office 
 Mature halogeton. (Whitson 1987). 
 
Alternate Names 
Anabasis glomeratus Bieb. Barilla 
 
Caution: Poisonous plant. 
 
Uses 
Halogeton is a poisonous noxious weed introduced 
from Eurasia into the United States early in the 20
th 
century. Since that time it has spread to cover 
millions of acres in the western valleys. It is highly 
toxic to both sheep and cattle. It has caused the death 
of countless sheep in the Intermountain West and 
Great Basin.  Salt from the soil accumulates in the plant tissues and 
leaches from dead plants an
d roots back onto the soil 
surface increasing salinity and favoring establishment 
of halogeton over other species. Soil nutrient levels 
change significantly under halogeton cover. NO
3, P, 
K, and Na increased under halogeton compared to 
under winterfat dominated soils (Duda et al. 2003). 
 
Soluble oxalates also accumulate in the foliage 
causing toxicity to grazing  animals. The toxicity and 
potential for harm depend on animal health, site 
conditions and plant maturity. Consumption of less 
than 1.5 pounds of halogeton can result in death. 
Animals will commonly avoid the bitter taste of 
halogeton if other forage is available. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. st ate noxious status). 
 
Weediness  
Halogeton was introduced in Nevada in the early 
1930’s and subsequently throughout Nevada and 
other Intermountain West and Great Basin states 
(Welsh et al. 2003). It was first collected in the US 
near Wells, NV in 1934 (Young et al. 1999). 
 
This plant is included on noxious weed lists in 
Arizona, California, Colora do, Hawaii, New Mexico 
and Oregon. It will displace desirable vegetation if 
not properly managed.  Additional weed information 
is available from the PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov.  Consult related Web Sites on the 
Plant Profile for this species for further information. 
 
Description 
General : Goosefoot family (Chenopodiaceae). 
Halogeton is a winter to summer annual with an erect 
growth habit reaching 12 inches in height, much 
branching from a long taproot. The taproot can reach 
depths of 20 inches with lateral roots spreading 18 
inches in all directions. Leaves are cylindrical and 
fleshy, resembling sausages. Leaves are typically 
bluish green, 3 to 20 mm (0.12 to 0.79 in) long and 1 
to 2 mm (0.04 to 0.08 in) thick ending in a slender 
hair-like spine. Stems can be reddish to purple. The 
flower is membranous and fan-like with wings 2 to 3 
mm long and 3 to 4 mm wide. The fruit is a utricle 
hidden by the sepals and contains brown-black seeds. 
Halogeton looks similar to Russian thistle during

early growing stages. Halogeton seedlings can be 
identified by cottony hairs in the leaf axils. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat: This species inhabits disturbed sites, road 
sides and arid lands in poor ecological condition in 
all western states. It is often found in large stands in 
cheatgrass, salt desert shrub, shadscale, saltbush, 
saltgrass, juniper and pinyon/juniper plant 
communities. 
 
Adaptation 
Halogeton is very well adapted to alluvial valleys 
with basic (pH > 7) and saline soils in the Great 
Basin and Intermountain West deserts. It is best 
adapted to sites receiving less than 12 inches mean 
annual precipitation. The plants grow well in high 
saline soils with at least 5800 ppm sodium chloride 
(roughly 8 mmho/cm or greater) (Cronin and 
Williams 1965). Halogeton occurs on clays to clay 
loams to loamy sands at el evations from 2,500 to 
7,000 feet. 
 
Management  
Halogeton thrives on disturbed sites. Proper grazing 
management and management of site disturbance are 
critical to reduce halogeton invasion. Early detection 
and control via mechanical  and chemical methods are 
required to prevent major infestations. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Halogeton in flower. California Department of Food and Agriculture 
 
Halogeton plants are very prolific seed producers. As 
many as 75 seeds are produced per inch of stem or 
upwards of 400 pounds of seed/ac (Cronin and 
Williams 1965). Seed develops during the summer 
and is dispersed by wind, water, animal and human 
activities, especially road grading. Seed can survive 
ingestion by sheep and rabbits. Halogeton forms two  types of seed. Seed developed before mid-August 
generally has a short after ripening period and 
remains viable for about 1 year. Seed developed after 
mid-August is generally dormant and can remain 
viable for up to 10 years (Whitson 1987). 
 
 Halogeton fruit and seed. Steve Hurst @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database  
 
Control  
The best control method for halogeton is prevention. 
This can be achieved by not disturbing the soil in 
potential infestation sites. If disturbance is required, 
follow disturbance by planting site to species adapted 
to the harsh environment. Halogeton can be 
controlled by mechanical tillage, but for long term 
control this must be followed by reseeding. Since 
revegetating droughty, low rainfall ecological sites is 
difficult, early detection and response to infestations 
is imperative for adequate control (CDFA 2008). 
 
For chemical treatment, apply metsulfuron at 0.45 oz 
active ingredient (ai)/acre (0.75 oz product/ac) to 
actively growing plants with a surfactant. 2,4-D LV 
ester at 1 to 2 lb acid equivalent (ae)/acre is also 
effective when plants ar
e actively growing before 
bloom stage in mid summer (William and Dailey 
2003). Chemical application may damage native and 
desired plants. Chemical control must be followed by 
actively altering the plant community with desirable 
plants to have a lasting affect.  
 
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Because halogeton typically  occupies droughty low 
rainfall ecological sites, there are few options for 
reclamation species. These include: crested 
wheatgrass, Siberian wheat grass, Russian wildrye,

tall wheatgrass and forage kochia, Native species 
options include thickspike and streambank 
wheatgrass, Sandberg bluegrass, slender wheatgrass, 
western wheatgrass, bottlebrush squirreltail, sand 
dropseed, saltbush and globemallow species. 
 
References 
California Department of Food and Agriculture. 
Encycloweedia website. Accessed 27 Feb 2008.
 
http://www.cdfa.ca.gov/phpps/ipc/weedinfo/winfo_ta
ble-commname.htm  
 
Cronin, E.H., and W.M. W illiams. 1965. Principles 
for managing ranges infested with halogeton. Journal 
of Range Management 19: 286-287. 
 
Duda, J.J. Freeman, D.C., Emlen, J.M.Belnap, J., 
Kitchen, S. G. Zak, J.C., Sobek, E., Tracy, M. and J. 
Montante. 2003. Differences in native soil ecology 
associated with invasion  of the exotic annual 
chenopod,  Halogeton glomeratus . Biol Fertil Soils 
38: 72-77. 
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press. Provo, Utah. 912 p. 
 
Whitson, T.D. 1987. Weeds and poisonous plants of 
Wyoming and Utah. University of Wyoming, College 
of Agriculture, Cooperative Extension Service. 
Laramie, WY. 
 
William, R.D. and A.G. Dailey, compilers. 2003. 
Pacific Northwest Weed Management Handbook. 
Oregon State University, Corvallis. 422p. 
 
Young, J.A., Martinelli, P. C., Eckert, R.E. Jr. and 
R.A. Evans. 1999. Halogeton: a history of mid-20
th 
century range conservation in  the Intermountain area. 
USDA Agricultural Research  Service. Misc. Pub. 
1553. 60p. 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 032008 djt; 030508 dgo; 030408 lsj; 032408 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.