Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWEETGRASS 
Hierochloe hirta (Schrank) 
var.  arctica  (J. Presl) G. 
Weim.  
Plant Symbol = HIHIA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Montana Plant Materials Center  
Alternate Names 
The plant “sweetgrass” consists of two different taxa:  
Hierochloe odorata (L.) Beauv. HIOD and 
Hierochloe hirta  (Schrank) var. arctica (J.Presl) 
G.Weim. HIHIA; Vanilla gr ass, holy grass, Seneca 
grass, alpine sweetgrass 
 
Uses 
Caution : Coumarin, a natural anticoagulant, gives 
sweetgrass its characteristic sweet smell (Lewis 
1977).  It has potentially toxic properties and can 
cause liver injury and hemorrhages.  Research has 
shown coumarin and related compounds to be 
effective in reducing high-p rotein edemas, especially 
lymphodema (Leung 1980). 
 
Ethnobotanic : Sweetgrass was and still is used 
ceremonially through burning the dried and braided 
grass stems for an incense or smudge.  The fragrant 
smoke is used for purificati on and to carry prayers to 
the Great Spirit.   Hierochloë literally translates from 
Greek as sacred (hieros) and grass (chloë) or “holy 
grass” (Hitchcock et al. 1973).  Indian people call 
sweetgrass the “grass that never dies.”  Even when it 
is cut, it retains its fragrance and spirit (Youngbuck 
pers. comm. 1999).  Today, sweetgrass is used inter-
tribally throughout the coun try.  Sweetgrass was used 
ceremonially by many trib es, including the Omaha, 
Ponca, Kiowa, Dakota, La kota, Blackfeet, Cheyenne, 
Pawnee, and Winnebago (Jordan 1965, Moerman 
1986).  The Cheyenne, Blackfeet, and Lakota use 
sweetgrass in the Sun Dance (Kindscher 1992, Hart 
1976).  Sweetgrass symboli zes life’s growth for the 
Cheyenne ( Ibid.).  
 Arne Anderberg Used with permission from the “Den Virtuella Floran” © Swedish Museum of Natural History 
 
Sweetgrass was the most popular perfumery of the 
Blackfeet, who braided it and kept it with their 
clothes like a sachet or carried it in small bags 
(M
cClintock 1909).  The Cheyenne mixed sweetgrass 
with pineapple weed ( Matricaria matricarioides ) to 
use as a perfume (Hart 1976).  The Thompson 
Indians used an infusion of  the plant as a wash for the 
hair and body (Moerman 1986).  The Blackfeet and 
the Gros Ventre used sweetgrass as a hair rinse to 
achieve a lustrous shine (Hart 1976).  
 
Blackfeet women made a tea from sweetgrass that 
was drunk to stop vaginal bleeding after birth and to 
expel the placenta (Hellson 1974).  Women burned 
sweetgrass braids after their moon time to finish the 
cleansing.  Blackfeet men  drank sweetgrass tea to 
treat venereal infections.  Both sexes drank a tea from 
this plant to treat coughs and sore throats.  Windburn 
and chapping were treated  through an infusion of 
sweetgrass stems soaked in water or a salve of 
sweetgrass water and grease.  The sweetgrass water 
was also used as an eyewash.  Sweetgrass was mixed 
with seeds of meadow rue  (Thalictrum occidentale ) 
to make a tea to clear congested nasal passages 
(Kindscher 1992).  The Karok of northern California 
used an infusion of sweetgrass to treat women who 
had suffered a miscarriage (Strike 1994).  Pregnant 
women drank this infusion to arrest fetus growth.  
The Karok also fed sweetgrass to sick dogs. 
 
Among the Chippewa, sweetgrass was used as an 
incense or smudge in ceremony, as a spiritual 
medicine, and in basketweaving (Densmore 1974).

The use of incense is more characteristic of the Plains 
Indians than of the Algonquian tribes (Ibid.).  
According to Densmore, “Men would smudge before 
hunting to purify body and spirit.  Medicine men kept 
sweetgrass in the bag with their medicinal roots and 
herbs.  Strands of sweetgrass were made into coiled 
basketry by means of cotton thread.  This took the 
form of bowls, oval and round, and of flat mats.  
Birch bark was sometimes used as the center of these 
baskets, with the coils of  sweetgrass being sewed 
around it.”  
 
Sweetgrass was used in coiled baskets, primarily in 
the northeast.  The Paiute used sweetgrass woven 
with willow bark in the h oods of cradleboards.  The 
Central-Northern Algonkians, Iroquoians, and 
Hurons edged woodsplint basketry and vessel borders 
with sweetgrass (Turnbaugh et al. 1986).  Central-
Northern Algonkian peoples are known for their 
production of flexible weft-twined bags, and some 
created bundle-coiled ba skets of sweetgrass.  
Northern New England basketry intermixed wood 
splints with twisted or braided sweetgrass in one 
basket (Pelletier 1982, Turnbaugh et al. 1986).  In the 
northeast, the Ojibwe, Potawatomi, Winnebago, 
Menominee, Mohawk, Penobscot, Passamaquoddy, 
and Abenaki (Turnbaugh et al. 1986) made coiled 
baskets of sweetgrass.  In the Plains cultural area, 
rawhide containers enjoye d much greater popularity 
than did woven or stitched basketry.  The Arapaho 
and Mandan may have also used sweetgrass in their 
coiled baskets ( Ibid.).   
 
Wildlife : Rodents and small mammals (such as pika) 
browse on sweetgrass (Martin 1951). 
 
Restoration: Sweetgrass is a useful plant for wetland 
and riparian restoration and mitigation and spring 
protection/renovation.  Sweetgrass has potential for 
conservation use for erosion control on moderately 
sloping, hillside seeps.  Seeps are sometimes erosive 
because the soil stays liquid and the saturated 
conditions inhibit the growth of many plants.  The 
sod-forming and moisture tolerant characteristics of 
sweetgrass will stabilize the seep (Ivan Dozier pers. 
comm. 1999). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Sweetgrass is a 
fragrant, rhizomatous, perennial grass that reaches a 
height of 7 dm. (30 in.).  The stems are hollow and  hairless with open sheaths.  The leaf blades are flat at 
maturity, usually glabrous, 10-30 cm. (3.9-11.8 in.) 
long.  The sweetgrass inflorescence is an open 
panicle 4-9 cm. (1.6-3.5 in.) long; the lower branches 
are drooping to spreading.
  The spikelets are three-
flowered, the two lowest fl orets staminate (male) and 
the uppermost is perfect (both female and male).  
Sweetgrass is an early blooming plant and flowers 
from May to July.  
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The two sweetgrasses grow in wet meadows, 
low prairies, and the edges of sloughs and marshes in 
Minnesota, North Dakota, Montana, South Dakota, 
northwest Iowa, and western  and central Montana.  It 
grows from Labrador to Alaska, south to New Jersey, 
Indiana, Iowa, New Mexico, and Arizona.  It is also 
native to Eurasia.  Sweetgrass grows below 1830 m 
in California and is rare in the state, occurring in the 
north High Cascade Ranges and extending north 
(M
cGregor 1991). 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Sweetgrass is a rhizomatous perennial 
that is native to cooler regions of North America and 
Europe.  It is found in moist, cool meadows, shaded 
stream banks, and cool mountain canyons (Dorn 
1984). 
Caution : Due to prolific rhizome production, it can 
be moderately invasive. 
 
In its native habitat, sweet grass grows primarily in 
wetlands and riparian areas.  Due to the loss of 
wetland habitat throughout the United States, it is 
rarely appropriate to harvest wild plants.  Wild 
harvests should be restricted to salvage sites with 
appropriate approvals or permits.  Sweetgrass 
populations are declining due to harvesting for both 
personal and commercial use.  The species is subject 
to over-collecting and is sensitive to grazing.  Indian 
elders are quoted as sayi ng  “Today sweetgrass has 
become scarce and is hard  to find” (Hart 1976).  
 
The following information on the propagation of 
sweetgrass is obtained from the Bridger Plant 
Materials Center (1996 and 1999) and Susan 
Winslow (1999). 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Sweetgrass can be 
propagated easily from container or bare rootstock, as 
it produces many rhizomes.  It can also be propagated 
from seed.  However, in nature, sweetgrass is a 
sporadic seed producer, and germination rates are 
fairly low (25-30%), so propagation from seed is

more difficult than from cuttings or division of 
plants.  
 
Handling and care requires commitment and attention 
to detail to maximize survival.  Initially, the plants 
should remain in the pots for an additional 2-3 weeks 
after you receive them, and watering must occur 
every day while in the pots.  This is because of the 
possibility of lingering transplant shock and because 
the soil in the pots dries out fairly quickly.  The 
plants will continue to grow and thrive in the original 
containers for quite a period of time while site 
location and preparation  efforts are finalized. 
 
Pick the sites where sweetgrass is to be transplanted 
carefully, and prepare the  site properly before 
planting.  It is advisable to keep the immediate 
planting area clear of competing vegetation, which 
may simply mean hand weeding around individual 
plants, or a mechanical  means may be required.  
Sweetgrass grows in wette r areas in its natural 
habitat, and during the establishment period irrigation 
is likely to be required.  Soil should be kept very wet 
to moist. 
 
For plants grown in greenhouse flats or collected 
from the wild, it is best to dig up and separate plants 
in late fall or winter (Hartm an et al. 1990).  This is 
the “quiescent” period that  follows seed maturation, 
and leaves are senescent (dried up and brown 
colored).  When separating plants, ensure that each 
“plantlet” has a rhizome or rhizome bud.  Each plant 
should be planted in full sun in a light, loose soil.  
Plants should be planted on 3-foot centers; they will 
fill in and make solid stands of sweetgrass in one to 
two years.  Plants need to be kept moist, and need 
frequent watering.  Plants may need to be protected 
from herbivores, such as rabbits or gophers.  Dogs 
love sweetgrass and will selectively eat the shoots 
and roll in the grass. 
 
Management 
After the plants have established and grown to a 
minimum height of 4 to 6 inches (to avoid damaging 
small seedlings), routinely weed and remove 
unwanted vegetation.  This will reduce competition 
for light, nutrients, and water, and encourage 
vigorous plant growth and development.  Sweetgrass 
prefers a moist environment, so regularly water the 
site.  The rhizomes (underground, horizontal stems) 
develop early and will emerge during the first 
growing season.  The grass will continue to spread if 
left unattended.  The leav es will reach a length of 
approximately 12-15 inches and can be harvested 
once or twice a year.  The foliage is very relaxed and 
it will be necessary to carefu lly lift the leaves and cut  the stems close to the ground
 (leave 1 to 2 inches of 
plant stem).  The actual number of harvests per year 
will depend on climatic conditions, seasonal timing, 
and the traditional environmental knowledge of the 
particular indigenous group tending the grass.  Plan 
the final harvest (late summer in northern climes) so 
that there will be adequate time for the plants to 
prepare for the onset of cold temperatures and winter 
conditions.  If this natural hardening-off process does 
not occur, it will eventually have a detrimental effect 
on the long-term persistent and survival of the stand.  
Fertilizing is not recommended in the first year of 
establishment, as weeds would reap the most benefit 
during that time.  The use of a balanced, all-around, 
granular fertilizer is recomm ended after the first year. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: The following 
information on sweetgrass was provided by Lynn 
Youngbuck, who is Cherokee, Chiracahua, and Fox: 
1) take only what you need, leaving the best to 
reproduce; 2) speak to the plant, leave an offering of 
tobacco or sage before harvesting; the plant will grow 
back two stems for every  one cut; 3) we humans are 
another strand in life; plants sustain us and should be 
treated as another living being; 4) plants were taken 
care of by extended family groups of women; they 
were taken care of and watched each year for 
generations; and 5) materials harvested were shared 
and traded with the whole tribe. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Sweetgrass is widely available through native plant 
nurseries and seed companies within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Seed Propagation 
Site Preparation: The site should be prepared well in 
advance of planting, either late in the fall or very 
early in the spring.  Preparation includes the 
following: removal of all weeds; rototilling or hand-
digging so that the soil is loose and friable; raking or 
smoothing to a level, clump-free grade; packing or 
rolling to firm the surface (aft erwards, only light foot 
imprints should be visible when walked across); and 
moistening the soil evenly to a depth of 2 to 3 inches 
(or when surface puddling is evident) with a sprinkler 
or hand-held spray nozzle.   
 
Seeding:  Sweetgrass is a cool-season species that 
requires a period of cold temperatures before it will

germinate from seed.  Late fall, late winter, or early 
spring is the best time to plant the sweetgrass seed.  
At the time of seeding, the soil should be moistened 
to a depth of 1 inch.  The seed should be fully ripened 
(very firm when squeezed between fingernails or 
when clipped with a fingernail clipper) and free of 
debris.  Sweetgrass seed is very small at 
approximately 1.1 million seeds per pound.  
Depending on the amount of seed available and the 
plant density desired, the seed can be dribbled in 
rows at a rate of up to 25 seeds per linear foot, or 
broadcast at 50 seeds per square foot.  This may 
optimally result in 6 plants per row and/or 13 plants 
per square foot (seed germination tests have averaged 
25-30%).  Planting depth should not exceed 0.25 to 
0.5 inches.  It is very important after seed placement 
that the area be re-rolled or packed to ensure 
satisfactory seed-to-soil contact.  The tiny seed can 
be easily washed away, so follow planting 
immediately with a light watering.  Keep the area 
moist until seedling emergence, in about 10-14 days.  
In soils (clayey) that are prone to crusting, 
subsequent periodic, short-duration watering may be 
necessary.   
 
References 
Densmore, F. 1974 (1928).  How Indians use wild 
plants for food medicine, and crafts .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Dorn, R.D. 1984.   Vascular plants of Montana .  
Mountain West Publishing. Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
 
Dozier, I. 1999.  Personal communication.  District 
Conservationist and Illinois NRCS Native American 
Liaison. 
 
Hart, J. 1976.   Montana native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society Press, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, & F. T. Davies, Jr. 
1990 .   Plant propagation principles and practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hellson, J.C. 1974.   Ethnobotany of the Blackfoot 
Indians.   National Museum of Man, Mercury Series, 
Canadian Ethnology Service Paper No. 19. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist (eds.) 1973 .   Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest. An illustrated manual .  
University of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington.  
730 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R.   Indian herbalogy of North America .  
Shambhala, Boston and London.  Pp. 113-117. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural 
library's source list of plants and seeds .  Anderson 
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Jordan, J.A. 1965.   Ethnobotany of the Kiowa-
Apache .  Master’s Thesis, University of Oklahoma. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.   An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press 
of Kansas.  Pp. 84-94. 
 
Lewis, W.H. & M.P.F. Elvin-Lewis 1977 .  Medical 
botany : Plants affecting man’s health .  John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Leung, A.Y. 1980.   Encyclopedia of common natural 
ingredients used in food, drugs, and cosmetics.   John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, New York. 
 
Martin, A.C., H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.   A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L. T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1991.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
University Press of Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2. Technical Reports, Number 19, 
University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.  Pp. 156-158. 
 
Pelletier, G. 1982.   Abenaki basketry.  Mercury 
Series, No. 85.  National Museum of Man, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California’s 
indigenous plant s.  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany. 
 
Swedish Museum of Natural History 2000.  Den 
virtuella floran: Hierochloe odorata.  Arne 
Anderberg-photo.  Version: 000228.  
<http://linnaeus.nrm.se/flora /mono/poa/hiero/hierodo.
html>  Stockholm, Sweden.

Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.  Indian 
baskets .  Schiffer Publishing Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania.  260 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1996.   Cultural and establishment 
trials of culturally significant plants.   1993-1995 
Technical Report, Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   Cultural and establishment 
trials of culturally significant plants .  1996-1997 
Technical Report, Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana. 
 
Winslow, S. 1999.   Sweetgrass and cottonwood 
production in Bridger, Montana .  IN Plants: A 
Growing Alternative.  A National Publication of the 
Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant 
Materials Program.  Volume 4.  Beltsville, Maryland. 
 
Prepared By: 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Susan Winslow 
USDA NRCS, Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana 
 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 07feb02 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.