Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIA HELIOTROPE 
Heliotropium indicum Michx. 
Plant Symbol = HEIN  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
 © Virginia Ducey University of South Florid a Herbarium Slide Collection @ Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants 
 
Alternate Names 
Indian heliotrope, turnsole, alacrancillo 
 
Uses 
Heliotropium from helios (sun) and trope (turn) -- 
flowers turn toward the  sun.  Some species are 
considered poisonous ( Heliotropium indicum), while 
others ( Heliotropium torreyi ) are considered fair 
browse for sheep and goats.  Although apparently not 
preferred by waterfowl, some incidental use has been 
documented. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Borage Family (Boraginaceae). 
Heliotropium indicum, one of the largest heliotropes 
found in Texas, is introduced, and is one of the few 
annuals within this genus (in Texas).  India heliotrope 
grows upright (2-3 feet in height) and is very leafy, 
when compared to other heliotropes.  The leaves are 
dark green, alternate, entire,  and hispid (hairy).  The 
stems are also hispid.  Fl owers are blue or violet 
(rarely white), and like all heliotropes, the younger 
flowers are located towards the tip of the 
inflorescence (flower cluster), while mature seed are 
lower on the flower stalk. 
 
There are approximately 14 species of  Heliotropium 
in Texas.  Most are upland species found in the 
western portions of the state.  Six are commonly 
found in wetlands.  Most have white flowers, 
although blue or violet is not uncommon.  
Vegetatively, most heliotropes have smallish and 
narrow leaves and the growth habit is prostrate, or 
generally so.  The seed head, and the way that the 
flowers are restricted to the  tips, is very characteristic 
of the entire genus. 
 
Distribution 
Introduced from Texas and Florida to New York.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : This species is found throughout the 
eastern half of Texas and as far west as the Edwards 
Plateau.  It is often found as individual plants 
scattered within the plant community.  It is 
commonly found in wetlands, and like other annuals 
is opportunistic of bare soils and disturbed sites.  
Although this species of  Heliotropium is considered a 
wetland plant, it is seldom found growing on ponded 
sites, but does commonly invade bare soil once water 
recedes from an area.  Indi a heliotrope is particularly 
fond of clayey bottomland sites.  Commonly 
associated with  Heliotropium indicum are species 
from the  Ludwigia  (water primrose ), Polygonum 
(smartweed) , Echinochloa  (millet) and Cyperus (flat 
sedge) genera.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”   
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources. 
 
References 
University of South Florida 2001.   Atlas of Florida 
vascular plants .  Institute of Systematic Botany, 
Tampa, Florida.  Accessed: 21May2001.  
<http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu/images.asp?plantID=
1753#> 
 
Davis, L. 2000.   Texas plant fact sheet: Heliotropium 
indicum .  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical 
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited 09jan01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.