Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH OXEYE 
Heliopsis helianthoides  (L.) 
Sweet  
Plant Symbol = HEHE5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 R. Alan Shadow USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names Oxeye Daisy, False Sunflower, 
Oxeye,  Heliopsis  Sunflower, sunflower  Heliopsis 
 
Uses   
Forage: Livestock and deer sometimes graze smooth 
oxeye (Haddock, 2005). Its importance as a forage 
ranges from poor to good for cattle and sheep.  
 
Landscape: Smooth oxeye is considered one of the 
best hardy plants for a wildflower garden border 
(Runkel and Roosa, 1989). It is considered especially 
suited and valuable for planting in dry locations. The 
flowering period can be extended by removing spent 
flowers. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : The name  Heliopsis is Greek in origin and 
means “sun-eye” and  helianthoides is also Greek for  “like a sunflower” (Denison, 1989). Smooth oxeye is 
a member of the sunflower family (Asteraceae). It is 
a vigorous, upright, native, perennial forb growing .5 
to 1.5 meters (m) in height. The smooth, unbranched 
stem arises from a fibrous rooted caudex that 
develops stout rhizomes. The leaves are oppositely 
attached to the stem and have coarsely serrated 
margins. The leaves are triple nerved, petiolate (have 
short leaf petioles) and are broadly lance shaped 
tapering to a sharp point at the tip and are abruptly 
rounded at the base. The leaves are dark green above 
and lighter green below with siliceous based hairs 
that provide a rough text
ure on both surfaces. The 
stem apex may contain a sing le flower head or branch 
into multiple stems with many yellow flowers 
(Owensby, 1989). The flowers of  Heliopsis have both 
orange-yellow center disk and yellow ray flowers. 
Individual flowers have 10 or more ray flowers. The 
ray flowers are fertile with  a forked pistil (female 
flower parts) at their base,  but contain no male flower 
parts (Lommasson, 1973). The central disk flowers 
are perfect in that they contain both male and female 
flower parts (Runkel and Roosa, 1989). The fruit is a 
smooth three or four angled achene, usually without a 
pappus or crown of  hairs that aids in wind 
dissemination (Runkel and Roosa, 1989). Ray 
flowers produce the three angled achene and disk 
flower produce the more common 4 angled achene. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat:  It is located in dry areas, edges of woods, 
roadsides, open woods, edges of fields and thickets. It 
can be found growing in the eastern half of Kansas 
and Nebraska and statewide in Missouri. It is found 
growing in association with warm season grasses of 
the tallgrass prairie. Although seldom abundant it is 
widely scattered among prairie grasses in glades and 
along stream and creek banks.  
 
Adaptation 
Smooth oxeye is adapted to full sunlight and dry to 
moderately moist soil conditions. It can be found 
growing in waste areas, roadsides, open woods, and 
edge of fields and thickets. It can be found on most 
tallgrass prairie sites and other open spaces, 
especially on dry soils (Runkel and Roosa, 1989).  
This species tolerates some drought and also a wide 
range of soil types, including nutrient poor soils.

Establishment 
Plantings of Heliopsis seed should be made on a well 
prepared, weed free, firm seed bed. Fallowing fields 
prior to planting can have advantages in control of 
undesirable weeds and to ensure that no herbicide 
residues remain in the soil  of the field. Smooth oxeye 
fields planted for seed production should be in rows 
(0.8 to 1.0 m) apart. A fiel d with rows that are spaced 
approximately 0.9 m apart should have about 45 Pure 
Live Seeds (PLS) per 0.3 m of row. Seed planted in 
the spring between March and April should produce 
vigorous seedlings and can be expected to produce a 
seed crop the first growing season.    
 
Management 
Heliopsis  will produce seed during its establishment 
year if environmental and management conditions are 
ideal. Seed maturity can  be expected from mid-
August to early September. Seed shatter can be a 
problem when the majority of seed heads have turned 
brown and seed maturity is reached. Harvest of 
smooth oxeye can be performed with a conventional 
combine with the proper settings and adjustments. 
The equipment settings offered here should be 
considered a starting point  and modified as harvest 
demands change. Combine settings: 1) concave 
clearance 12 mm, 2) Cylinde r speed 1000 RPMs, and 
3) air intake at 15 percent. These settings are based 
on years of harvest experience at the PMC in 
Manhattan, KS. Freshly combined material should be 
dried carefully at no great er temperature than 43 
degrees Centigrade (ºC) with a forced air system. 
Seed yield of native plant  species can be variable, 
with production yields of 65 to 244 kg/ha. Under 
good growing conditions and proper management, 
smooth oxeye can be maintained in seed production 
stands for up to five years. Thus it may be considered 
a short lived perennial plant. 
       
Pests and Potential Problems 
Smooth oxeye has no serious insect or disease 
problems, but has been observed to have some 
susceptibility to aphid attack. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns or probability 
of this plant becoming a weed problem in cultivated 
agricultural systems or past ure lands. Rock (1981) 
however, indicates that  Heliopsis may spread widely 
and has the tendency to b ecome weedy in landscapes.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The normal method of propag ation of this species is 
through seed (achenes). Spring planting of this 
species is recommended. A cold, moist stratification 
period of 30 days at 4ºC can improve germination.  Zlesak (2007) found that although the responses to 
germination cues were variable, improved 
germination of 
H. helianthoides  can be generally 
achieved by imbibing ethephon (1 to 5 mM), 
exposure to red light (1.5 h), and providing at least 
one week of cold stratif ication (4ºC). There are 
approximately 277,200 achenes per kilogram. 
According to the Prairi e Propagation Handbook 
(Rock, 1981)  Heliopsis is easily seeded and divided, 
with division commonly being done in the fall. Rock 
(1981) also indicates that this species is easily 
transplanted and can be propagated using stem 
cuttings in the spring.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture”.  
 
‘Midas’  a cultivar release from Kansas in 1984. It is 
adapted to the eastern half of Nebraska, Kansas, and 
Oklahoma and extends into  western Iowa, Missouri 
and Arkansas. The germ plasm that was eventually 
selected and became Midas was originally collected 
in Greenwood County, Kansas in 1970. Midas is 
readily available through commercial seed producers. 
 
Central Iowa Germplasm  is source identified 
material released in 1996,  by Missouri. It is source 
material especially adapte d to central Iowa. It is 
commercially available. 
 
Northern and Southern Iowa Germplasms  were 
released in 1997, by  Missouri and are source 
identified materials. They are materials selected for 
adaptability to those regions in Iowa and are 
commercially available.  
 
References 
Denison, E. 1989. Missouri Wildflowers. Missouri 
Department of Conservation. Jefferson City, MO. 
 
Farrar, J. 1990. Wildflowers of Nebraska and the 
Great Plains. NEBRASKAland Magazine. Lincoln, 
NE. 
 
Haddock, M.J. 2005. Wildflowers and Grasses of 
Kansas. University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS. 
 
Lommasson, R.C. 1973. Nebraska Wild Flowers. 
University of Nebraska Press. Lincoln, NE.

Owensby, C.E. 1989. Kansas Prairie Wildflowers. 
Iowa State University Press. Ames, IA. 
 
Rock, H.W. 1981. Prairie Propagation Handbook. 
Wehr Nature Center. Milwaukee County Dept. of 
Parks, Recreation and Culture. 
 
Runkel, S.T. and D.M. Roosa. 1989. Wildflowers of 
the Tallgrass Prairie: The Upper Midwest. Iowa State 
University Press. Ames, IA. 
 
Zlesak, D.C. 2007. Factors affecting seed 
germination of  Heliopsis helianthoides  (L) Sweet. 
Seed Sci. and Technol. 35:577-594. 
 
Prepared By 
Richard Wynia , USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center. 
 
Species Coordinator 
R. Alan Shadow,  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center. 
 
Edited: 090105 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.