Plant Guide
ASHY SUNFLOWER 
Helianthus mollis Lam. 
Plant Symbo l = HEMO2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Golden Meadow and East 
Texas Plant Materials Centers   
 
 A shy sunflower.   Photo taken by Gary Fine ,  Bayou Land RC&D  
Alternate Names 
Down y sunflower, Hairy wild  sunflower 
Uses 
Conservation/ Restoration:  Ashy sunflower can be used 
to increase  forb diversity in conservation and restoration 
plantings.   It has potenti al for use in soil erosion 
prevention with its perennial root crowns and r hizomatous 
root system.  Annual stems are produced from 
underground rhizomes , allowing ashy sunflower to spread 
and form dense p lant clusters, reinforcing soil  and 
preventing erosion.  
 
Livestock :  Similar to other sunflower species, a sh y 
sunflower  is palatable  and nutritious  to all classes of 
livestock , and is readily utilized.  
 
Wildlife :  Ashy sunflower is attractive to a wide array of 
pollinating insects.  B umblebees, Miner bees, large Leaf -
Cutting bees, Cuckoo bees, Green Metallic bees, and 
other Halictid bees  visit the flowers along with s everal 
species of b utterflies and  bee flies .  The foliage is an 
important food source for the caterpillars of the butterflies 
Chlosyne nycteis  (Silvery Checkerspot) and  Chlosyne 
gorgone  (Gorgone Checkerspot) .  The seed is utilized by 
many species of game a nd non game bird species, 
including but not limited to  mourning dove, greater  prairie chicken, ringed-
neck pheasant, bobwhite, 
goldfinch, horne d lark, eastern meadowlark, lark sparrow, 
sav annah sparrow and cardinal .  Seeds and young foliage  
is consumed by s mall rodents, deer ,  rabbits,  and livestock 
(Hilty, 2012) .  Habitat and cover are provided to birds and 
small mammals by individual plant clusters and dense 
colonies formed with other shrub like plants.  
 
Ornamental :  The bright yellow flowers and unique 
grayish -green, neatly shaped, densely hairy leaves of a sh y 
sunflower make it an excellent candid ate for use in native 
gardens.  
Status  
Please  consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s status  
(e.g.,  threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description 
Ashy sunflower is a native, warm -season; per enn ial  forb 
typically  found growing in well -drained soils and full sun.  
Stems are erect, solitary or clustered, densely pubescent 
gray, growing from rhizomes to 1.2 m tall.  Leaves are 
opposite, stiff, ascending, sessile and clasping with a 
rough -hairy grayish -green surface t o 12 cm long and 8 cm 
wide.  Leaf margins are entire to shallowly toothed with a 
pointed tip.  Inflorescence consists of single flower heads 
positioned on termin al stems.  Flowers exhibit 15 -30 
yellow petals (sterile ray florets), 2.5 -3 cm long 
encompassin g fertile yellow disk florets compressed to 
2.5 cm in diameter.  Each disk floret has a glabrous 
corolla tube to 6 mm long, and five  stamens with whitish 
filaments and dark -brown anthers.  Fruits are achenes that 
are wedge shaped, dark -brown or black, and tipped by 
two scales with pointed tips each enclosing a small sin gle 
seed 3 -6 mm in length.  
Ethnobotany  
It is reported that this species was used as  a  fever reducer.  
Strong teas were made from the leaves to reduce fever.  
Honey was added to teas  to  loosen  phlegm, and the stems 
were used as a treatment for malaria ( Styles, 2000). 
Distribution :   
Ashy sunflower is found throughout the eastern  half the 
United States , as far west as Nebraska and northward into 
Canada.    It has not been reported in  Florida, which ma y 
be the extent of its southern range.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.

Habitat:   
Ashy sunflower is historically a species  of the prairies and 
open grasslands.  It may also occur on dry, sandy soils 
along roadsides, savannas, woodland edges and openings, 
and old fields ( Taylor, 2012).  
Adaptation  
Ashy sunflower  prefers full sun and mesic to dry 
conditions.   It will tolerate p oor soil conditions and low 
pH, and will grow aggressively in fertile soils with good 
moisture.    It will tolerate harsh winter conditions growing 
as far  north as  Maine, Wisconsin, and Michigan.  Ash y 
sunflower  was  introduced  into Ontario, Canada where it 
continues to persist  along roadside s and protect areas  
(e Flora s, 2008).    
Establishment  
Begin seedbed preparation in advance of spring planting. 
Prepare a clean, weed free seedbed by either tillage o r 
herbicides.  The use of herbicide and a no -till drill is an 
effective way to obtain stands with minimal weed 
pressure.  Tillage often increases weed pressure and 
should be avoided unless there are no other means to 
plant.  Broadcast seeding onto a prepared seedbed m a y be 
used, but additional coverage such as cultipacking or light 
dragging should  used to  ensure good seed to soil contact.  
Number of seed/lb is reported to  range from  112,000  - 
2.5 million (USDA -NRCS, 2011, Steffen ,  1997)  resulting 
in   an  average seeding rate of 1.0 to 8.0 pounds of pure 
live seed (PLS) per acre when based on planting 20 live 
seed per square foot.  
Seed s hould be planted  approximately ¼-inch  deep. 
Timing plantings to rainfall events will help to insure 
good stands.   In planting mixtures, reduce the rate 
according to the percent of ashy sunflower desired.   
Management  
Ashy sunflower, once established, requires little 
maintenance.  Irrigation should be used, if available to 
help plants establish until they are mature.  W eeds may be 
controlled via selective herbicide or cultivation as 
necessary.  Allow ashy sunflower c olonies to occasi onally 
produce seed to aid in stand  renewal and l on gevi t y.  
Mowin g  may also be used to control annual weeds until 
the sunflower seedlings can compete or out compete weed 
species.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Ashy sunflower is easy to grow and not subject to serious 
problems with foliar disease.    Longhorn  b eetle  (Dectes 
texanus ), a stem boring insect can damage  plants  in some 
areas  of the country but has not drastically affected seed 
production  (Patrick, 1998) .   Other insects known to bore 
stems and feed on foliage include ; Rigid Sunflower Borer 
Moth ( Papaipoma rigida) , Sunflower Borer Moth 
(Papaipoma necopina), Burdock Borer Moth ( Papaipoma 
cataphracta), Blackberry Looper Moth (Chlorochlamys  chloroencaria), Common Looper Moth (
Autographa 
precautionis ), Sunflower Gall Moth ( Gnorimoschema 
sp. ), Frothy Moth ( Stibadium spumosum ), Spur-Throated 
Grasshopper (Melanoplus angustipennis ), Leaf Beetle 
(Trirhabda and Ophraella  spp.), Leaf Miner Beetle 
(Microorhapala cyanea ), and Four-Lined Plant Bug 
(Poecilocapsus lineatus ) (Hilty, 2012).       
Environmental Concerns 
In  a study by Anderson et. al (1978), ashy sunflower 
seemed to have an allel opathic affect on radish and wheat 
root and shoot devel opment, and inhibited  radical 
development of little bluestem.   It can become aggressive 
under ideal conditions forming dense stands.  
Seeds and Plant Production   
At th e E ast Texas  Plant  Materials  Cen ter (ETPMC) , seed 
production fields are  drilled in early  spring  after the last 
freeze date on 40” rows.   Baskin (2002) noted that ashy 
sunflower seeds exhibited physiological dormancy and 
recommended cold moist stratification for 60 days be for e 
germination te sting.   Ger m ination tes ts at the ETPMC 
comparing stratified to non -stratified seed revealed that 
stratification
 did not appear to improve seed germination  
with all samples averaging between 61% to  86%  
germination.    Planting in early spring when soil 
tempe ratures are still cool will help with the stratification 
if seed dormancy is suspected . 
F ields  should be irrigated to aid  seedling establishment.   
Fertilization is  not recommended  during establishment 
years as it promotes competition from warm season , 
annual weed species.  Irrigation should be used sparingly 
on mature stands as it can lead to lodging due to excess ive 
and rapid growth.  Fertilization of established stands 
should follow soil test recommendations and should be 
applied in  late spring .  S ee d is h a rvested by direct 
combine in late October .  Seed from the combine is 
scalped to remove excess vegetative matter ,  and  air-dried  
in a forced  air-drying  bin with no heat.  Seed may also be 
dried by spreading on a concrete floor in a thin layer  and  
allo wing a fan to circulate air over the seed.  Turn the 
seed daily  or  until sufficiently dried . This will prevent 
molding and mildew.  Seed may then be cleaned using a 
multi-screen s eed cleaner and bagged for storage.  
Cleaned seed yields at the ETPMC average  approximately 
100 pounds per acre.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Cajun Sunrise Germplasm ashy sunflower was released 
cooperatively in 2012 by the USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS) Golden Meadow Plant 
Mat erials Center , the USDA-NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center , and the Louisiana Native Plant Initiative 
partners .  This plant release is a composite selection of ten 
seed collections  from  Jefferson Davis Parish  near  th e 
town of  Fenton in  southwestern Louisiana.   Cajun Sunrise

Germplasm ashy sunflower was selected based on 
superior  plant vigor, seed germination, and seed 
production.   The primary uses for this release ar e  coastal 
prairie revegetation /restoration, wildlife habitat 
improvemen t, and enhancing pollinator habitat.    Breeder 
seed  (G0)  is maintained at the USDA -NRCS East Texas 
Plant Materials Center , Nicholls State University Farm, 
University of Louisiana Lafayette -Center for Ecology and 
Environmental Technology , and McNeese State 
U niversity Agriculture Farm.    S eed  for commercial 
production  will be distributed through the Louisiana 
Native Plant Initiative partnership s by contacting the 
Golden Meadow Plant materials Center.   
References  
Anderson, R.C., Katz, A.J., and Anderson, M.R. 19 78. 
Allelopathy as a factor in the success of Helianthus 
mollis Lam. J. Chem. Ecol., vol.4, No.1, pp. 9 -16. 
Baskin, C.C. and J.M. 2002. Propagation protocol for  production of container Helianthus mollis  Lam. 
plants; University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentu cky.  
In: native Plant Network. URL: http://www.native  
plant network.org  (accessed 3 July 2012). Moscow 
(ID): University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Research Nursery.  
Taylor, D. 2012. Celebrating Wildflowers. 2012.  Accessed 23 July 2012. USDA Forest Service,   
Rangeland Management  Botany Program , Washington 
D.C.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/plant-of-the -
week/helianthus_mollis.shtml  
eFloras. 2008.  Accessed 22 July 2012. Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University 
Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. 
http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&ta
xon_id=242416635   
Hilty, J. 2012.  Illinois Wildflowers. Accessed 23 July 
2012 
http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/prairie/plantx/dwn
_sunflowerx.htm   
Patrick, C.  D.  1998. Managing Insect Pest of Texas 
Sunflowers, Texas Agricultural Extension Service 
Bulletin No. 1488, p3.  
Styles, B. 2000. Prairie Plants Field Guides. Illinois State  Museum . Accessed 23 July 2012. 
http://www.museum.state.il.us/muslink/prairie/htmls/p
lants/H -mollis.html  
Steffen, J.F. 1997 . Seed treatment and propagation 
methods, in Packard,  S., and Mutel, C.F., eds., The 
Tallgrass Restoration Handbook for prairies, 
Savannas, and Woodlands: Washington, D.C., Island 
Press, 463 pages.  
USDA-NRCS. 2011. Illinois Conservation Practice  Standard, CP 327 Conservation Cover. Accessed 20  June 2012. 
http://efotg.sc.ego
v.usda.gov/references/public/IL/IL3
27.pdf.  
 
Prepared By :   
Garret  Thomassie, Manager  
  USDA -NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, 
Galliano, Louisiana  
Alan Shadow, Manager  
  USDA -NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center , 
  Nacogdoches, Texas  
Melinda Bra kie, Soil Conservationist  
  USDA -NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacogdoches, Texas  
Citation  
Thomassie, G. , Shadow, A., and Brakie, M.  2012 . Plant 
G uide for ashy sunflower  (Helianthus mollis  Lam.) . 
USDA-Natural Resources C onservation Service, Golden 
Meadow Plant Materials Center. Galliano, LA 70354.  
Published  August,  2012  
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Progr am Web site 
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER