Plant Guide

NEEDLE-AND
-
THREAD

Hesperostipa comata 
(Trin. & Rupr.) Barkworth 
Plant Symbol = HECO26 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
©W.L. Wagner. Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution, Dept. of Systematic Biology, Botany. 
Alternate Names 
Stipa comata; spear-grass 
Uses 
Grazing/Livestock- Needle-and-Thread begins 
growth early in the spring, goes dormant in early to 
mid-summer and may green-up in fall if soil moisture 
is adequate. It is considered good forage in spring 
prior to awn development and again in fall after seed 
is dropped. When grazed while awned seeds are 
present, the sharp-pointed seed may injure livestock 
by working into tongue, throat, eyes and ears. 
Wildlife- It is desirable forage for elk in winter and 
spring and considered desirable forage for deer in 
spring. 
Erosion Control/Reclamation- It is a very effective 
grass in preventing wind erosion on sandy soils. It is 
one of the first grasses to naturally establish in 
disturbed sandy sites. It can be used in seeding 
mixtures for revegetation of sandy sites and sites 
disturbed by mining activities.   
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species). 
Description 
General: Needle-and-Thread is a native, tufted, cool-
season grass common to the prairies, plains and 
foothills of the western United States. It is a perennial 
bunchgrass, 1- 4 feet tall with erect, smooth culms 
and long, flat leaves 8- 12 inches long. The 
inflorescence is a contracted panicle that remains 
partially in the sheath. The source of its name is the 
4- 5 inch long twisted awn which arises from the 
lemma. It detaches from the inflorescence with the 
seed and gives the appearance of a short needle and 
long thread. The ligule, an identifying characteristic, 
is membranous and split. 
Distribution: This grass is found from British 
Columbia and the Yukon to Ontario, south to 
California, New Mexico and Texas. 
Habitat: Needle-and-Thread is an important plant in a 
wide variety of plant communities throughout 
western Canada and the United States. It can be 
found in the Palouse region of Idaho, Oregon and 
Washington and mountain foothills of British 
Columbia, Alberta, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and 
Washington associated with bluebunch wheatgrass, 
Idaho fescue, and bluegrass plant communities. In the 
northern Great Plains it is found in association with 
western wheatgrass, blue grama and bluebunch 
wheatgrass plant communities. In the central Great 
Plains it can be found in bluestem, gramagrass and 
prairie sandreed plant communities. In the arid 
regions of Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and 
Wyoming it is found in association with sagebrush, 
saltbush, horsebrush, bitterbrush, winterfat, Sandberg 
bluegrass, Indian ricegrass, and thickspike 
wheatgrass plant communities. This species is a fairly 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

early vegetative component on sand dunes in the 
intermountain region. On sand dune soils in southern 
Idaho, it follows the establishment of yellow wildrye 
and scurf pea and establishes before Indian ricegrass 
and thickspike wheatgrass.  
Intermountain Flora - drawn by Jeanne R. Janish.
University of Washington Press. 

Adaptation 
Needle-and-Thread is very drought tolerant and 
prefers excessively drained sands to fine sandy loams 
to coarse gravelly loam soils, but is also found on 
loam to clay loam soils in some habitats. It is most 
commonly found in 7- 16 inch precipitation zones, 
but occasionally is found in areas receiving as low as 
5- inches to as much as 24- inches mean annual 
precipitation.  
Its elevation range is most common from 3500 to 
8500 feet, but it has been found at elevations as low 
as 1000 feet. 
Establishment 
This species has fairly high levels of seed dormancy. 
If seed is less than 2- years old, it should be planted 
in late fall as a dormant planting to assist with 
breaking the seed dormancy. Older seed can be 
planted in early spring. Seed should be planted about 
¾- inch deep on loamy soils, about ½- inch deep on 
clay soils and up to 1- inch deep on sandy soils.  
Short prechill treatments (30 to 60 days) can induce a 
secondary dormancy, reducing seed germination 
(Scianna 2005). Tests show that seed with no prechill 
or 120 days prechill readily germinate, but seed 
prechilled 30 to 60 days had reduced germination of 
37 and 68% respectively. Based on this study 
dormant fall planting or late spring planting will 
produce the best stands. 
Because of its broad range of adaptation, native seed 
mixtures should specify &#34;Source Identified&#34; seed 
from locations within 500 miles of the planting site. 
Great Plains collections and Intermountain West 
collections do best within their own ecoregions. 
There is an average of 115,000 seeds per pound.  The 
recommend full seeding rate is 6 pounds PLS per 
acre. Seeding mixtures should specify a percentage of 
this rate. 
Management 
Needle-and-Thread begins growth in early spring, 
flowers in June and matures seed in July, goes 
dormant in early to mid-summer and may green-up in 
fall if soil moisture is adequate.  
It is considered good forage in spring prior to awn 
development and again in fall after seed is dropped. 
When grazed while awned seeds are present, the 
sharp-pointed seed may injure livestock by working 
into tongue, throat, eyes, ears and hide. It cures well 
and provides fair to good winter forage. 
It generally increases under grazing except in sandy 
soils and the central Great Plains where it decreases 
under grazing pressure. It needs to set seed in order to 
establish new plants, thus deferred rotation grazing 
systems are recommended.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
It is not known to be vulnerable to insects or other 
pests. 
Environmental Concerns 
Needle-and-Thread is a native species which spreads 
via seed.  It is not considered to be &#34;weedy&#34; or an 
invasive species, but it can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  Its rate of spread is slow.  
Needle-and-Thread is known to hybridize with 
closely related species, Indian ricegrass. These 
hybrids are sterile.

Seed Production 
Seed production of Needle-and-Thread has been 
somewhat successful under cultivated conditions.   
Row spacing of 24- 36 inches under irrigation or high 
precipitation (>16 inches annual precipitation) to 36- 
48 inches under dryland conditions are 
recommended.  Seeding rates for seed production 
range from 2.9-4.3 (48- 36 inch rows) pound PLS 
per acre on dryland to 4.3- 5.7 (36-24 inch rows) 
pound PLS per acre under irrigated conditions.  
It should be seeded in locations where weeds are well 
controlled. Needle-and-Thread seedlings are slow to 
establish and are therefore vulnerable to mechanical 
(wheel and foot traffic) and chemical damage. Wait 
until the 3- 5 leaf stage before applying herbicides at 
a low rate (bromoxynil according to label) or clipping 
for weed control. Cultivation between rows will be 
needed for weed control and to maintain row culture.  
Seed fields are productive for about 3- 4 years. Field 
moisture during the fall, soil fertility, and plant re­
growth determine the yield the succeeding year.  
Average production of 100 pounds per acre can be 
expected under dryland conditions in 16- inch plus 
rainfall areas. Average production of 150 pounds per 
acre can be expected under irrigated conditions.   
Harvesting can be completed by direct combining in 
the hard-dough stage (seed turning brown) or by 
windrowing followed by combining. Windrowing 
may help ensure a more complete threshing. 
Windrowing also reduces the risk of loss of seed 
from wind. Seed is generally harvested from late 
July to late August. Seed must be dried immediately 
after combining (moisture content should be 12 
percent in bins/15 percent in sacks). Brush-type seed 
strippers work well in harvesting seed of this species, 
as the long twisted awns of the mature seed are 
readily pulled into the hopper, leaving the immature 
straight awned seed in the inflorescence. Stripping 
seed must be immediately dried.  
Seed should be stored in plastic woven sacks – not 
cotton or burlap sacks. Sharp seeds will become 
caught in cotton and burlap fabric. Awn should be 
removed as soon after harvest as possible or it 
becomes intertwined with other seed making seed 
processing very difficult. 
Because of the difficulty in harvesting and 
conditioning, the forage can be harvested at time of 
seed maturity and the baled forage used as mulch on 
planting sites. Shattered seed will naturally plant 
itself when changes in relative humidity cause the 
awn to twist, driving the seed into the soil surface. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
No releases are presently available. Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Alderson, J. and W. C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties 
in the United States. Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977. Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
Hitchcock, A.S. (rev. A. Chase). 1950. Manual of the 
grasses of the United States. USDA Misc. Publ. No. 
200. Washington, DC. 1950. 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2006. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legume, and woody species for the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. 42p. 
Scianna, J.S. 2005. Needlegrass Dormancy Study. In 
USDA-NRCS Bridger PMC Annual Technical report 
2004-2005. Bridger, MT. 
Smith, R., S. Smith, R. Haas, and L. Holzworth. 
1998. Native Grass Seed Production Manual, USDA­
NRCS, Bismarck, ND and Ducks Unlimited Canada. 
155 p. 
USDA, NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 061010. (http://plants.usda.gov). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA.  
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
Mark Majerus 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Bridger, MT 
Loren St. John 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
Derek Tilley

USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
Dr. Thomas A. Jones 
USDA-ARS, Forage & Range Research Laboratory, 
Logan, UT 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
Edited:  05oct06dgo; 09maydjt; 11may06ls; 05june06mm; 05june06taj; 10oct06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.