Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAXIMILIAN SUNFLOWER  
Helianthus maximiliani  
Schrad.  
Plant Symbol = HEMA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 D.D. Horn. 2004.  TENN—University of Tennessee 
 
Alternate Names  
Helianthus dalyi, Helianthus maximilianii , 
Maximillian sunflower, Maximilian’s sunflower, 
Michaelmas-daisy.  
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Maximilian sunflower has a 
perennial root crown and rhizomatous root system.  
Annual stems are produced from underground stems.  
This growth pattern allows Maximilian sunflower to 
spread and form dense plant clusters, reinforcing soil 
and preventing erosion. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used parts of this 
plant as sources of food, oil, dye, and thread.  
Pioneers planted Maximilian sunflowers near their  homes to repel mosquitoes and used the blossoms in 
bathwater to relieve arthritis pain.  Sunflower seeds 
are eaten as snack items and sprinkled on salads and 
other foods. 
 
Industrial products: 
The natural rubber present in 
Maximilian sunflower qualifies the plant as a 
potential source of industrial raw materials.  
 
Livestock:  Although the protein value of Maximilian 
sunflower is poor, it is a palatable livestock forage 
species.  It remains green late into the fall and is 
consumed until the first frost makes it less flavorful.  
It is plentiful on ranges that are not closely grazed.   
 
Moderate grazing can increase the presence of 
Maximilian sunflower. 
 
Ornamental:  The bright yellow flowers of 
Maximilian sunflower make it a popular choice for 
use in native gardens.  It can be utilized as a hedge or 
natural screen because of its height. 
 
Restoration:  Maximilian sunflower is used as a 
conservation planting for habitat development, prairie 
restoration and landscaping, and range and pasture 
maintenance.  It can be used in filterstrip plantings.  
It has been used with native grasses in Kansas to 
revegetate coalmine spoils. 
 
Wildlife:  Butterflies, beetles, and long- and short-
tongued bees consume the nectar or pollen produced 
the flowers of Maximilian sunflower.  Butterfly 
caterpillars feed on the foliage while moth 
caterpillars bore through the stems.  Upland game 
birds, small non-game birds, and some waterfowl 
consume its seeds.  Rabbits and groundhogs feed on 
young plants while elk, mule deer, white-tailed deer, 
and pronghorn antelope browse and graze older 
plants.  It has poor nutriti onal value for these species.  
Habitat and cover are provided to birds and small 
mammals by individual plant clusters and dense 
colonies formed with other shrub-like plants. 
 
Description 
General : Aster Family (Asteraceae).  This native 
perennial has a stout, rhizomatous root system.  It 
grows from 0.9 m to 2.5 m tall with stems occurring 
singly or in clusters.  The central stem is stout, light 
green to light red, and covered with short, dense 
white hairs.  Leaves are alte rnate, up to 30 cm long 
and 5 cm wide, sessile, narrowly lance-shaped, and

folded upward from the central vein.  Leaf surfaces 
are covered with white hairs; margins are smooth or 
loosely toothed.  Short inflorescence stalks emerge 
from the leaf axils, bearing one composite flower 
head and one to two leaves.  Each inflorescence has 
two pale green bracts at its base, is 5 to 7 cm in 
diameter, and has 20 to 40 yellow ray flowers and 
many yellow disc flowers.  Flowering occurs in 
September and early October.  Fruits are achenes that 
ripen in October and November and are wind or 
animal dispersed. 
The characteristic that distinguishes Maximilian 
sunflower from other Helianthus species is the 
grayish appearance given off by dense white hairs on 
the plant. 
 
Distribution : Maximilian sunflower is native to the 
central United States, from  Ontario, Michigan, and 
Ohio, west to Alberta, Montana, Wyoming, and 
Colorado and south to Texas.  It may be sparsely 
introduced east and west of its native range.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Maximilian sunflower occurs on rocky 
upland and loess hill prairies, rocky ledges, and along 
railways, roadsides, fences, and other disturbed areas.  
In drier regions, it is found along streams and near 
wetter areas. 
 
In mixed-grass prairies,  it is associated with 
bluestem, switchgrass, Russian thistle, silverberry, 
milkweed, and snowberry species.  In tallgrass 
prairies, it is associated with big bluestem, 
switchgrass, Indian grass, heath aster, ironweed, and 
Canada goldenrod.  In floodplain tallgrass prairies, it 
is associated with prairi e cordgrass, spikesedge, 
Indian grass, big bluestem, switchgrass, compass 
plant, milkweed, and annual sunflower. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for Maximilian 
sunflower are 3 to 9.  Although it can grow in a 
variety of conditions, it prefers moist clay-like soils, 
soil depths of 50 cm or more, 250 to 1,270 mm 
annual precipitation, gentle slopes, and full sun.  Soil, 
moisture, and topography can be variable, but 
Maximilian sunflower will not tolerate shade.  It 
tends to grow very tall in moist rich soil and may 
become top-heavy when in bloom.  Growth is poor 
on gravel, dense clay, or saline soils.   
 
Maximilian sunflower plants are allelopathic.  They 
produce chemicals that hinder the growth of  neighboring plants.  These chemicals are not harmful 
to livestock and wildlife. 
 
Establishment 
In early winter, rake Maximilian sunflower seeds into 
loose topsoil and cover with 0.25 to 0.5 inch of soil 
or mulch.  A long cold period is required before 
germination.  The average number of seeds per pound 
varies by location.  The South Dakota Plant Materials 
Center has listed 250,000 seeds per pound while both 
the North Carolina Department of Transportation and 
Texas A&M University report 182,000 seeds per 
pound.  The appropriate seeding rate for pure 
Maximilian sunflower stands is 5 pounds per acre, 
allowing space between germinated plants. 
 
If used as part of a prairie seed mixture, Maximilian 
sunflower seeds should be included at a rate of 0.1 to 
0.25 pound per acre.  Op
timal seeding times are 
November to May in the central Great Plains and 
January to March in the southern Great Plains.  In 
Nebraska, Maximilian sunflower established best 
when weeds were controlled mechanically.  Seedling 
vigor is good. 
 
Growth occurs in late spring and summer with some 
flowering by the end of the first season.  Most 
Maximilian sunflower plants are not fully developed 
until the second season.  Plants primarily spread by 
rhizomes after establishment. 
 
Management  
Maximilian sunflower plants growing on rich, fertile 
sites will grow tall and sp indly.  Weak stems will 
cause the plants to fall and can be staked to remain 
upright.  Older stems can be mechanically cut back at 
the end of the season to make room for new sprouts. 
 
Maximilian sunflower exhibits  fire tolerance in its 
dormant stage.  Seedlings will emerge on open, post-
burned sites from the underground seedbank and 
rhizomes.  Following fire in North Dakota, 
Maximilian sunflower grew taller, stiffer, and seeded 
more vigorously.  Research suggests that plant 
performance increases following fire in disturbed, 
invaded areas but not on undisturbed areas.  Fire 
removes competition and opens up the canopy for 
Maximilian sunflower in the disturbed areas. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are ready for collection in late October and 
November.  They are moist stratified for 56 days.  
Germination occurs at an  alternating cycle of 30
oC 
daytime and 15oC nighttime temperatures.  The 
optimum soil temperature for germination is 20oC to

30oC.  Seventy percent of seeds will germinate in 7 to 
25 days. 
 
One-year-old plants sprout new shoots that can be 
dug up and cut from the parent plant.  Division and 
transplantation should take place in February or 
March. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant  Materials Center has 
released Maximilian sunflower cultivars ‘Aztec’ and 
‘Prairie Gold’ for conservation use.  ‘Aztec’ was 
released for the purposes of wildlife food, livestock 
forage cover, natural hedges, screens, filterstrips, and 
as ornamental landscape plants.  ‘Prairie Gold’ was 
released for critical area reseeding and wildlife food 
plantings.  These plant mate rials are readily available 
from commercial sources. 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 14 
June 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Baskin, C.C. and J.M. Baskin. 2002.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container Helianthus 
maximiliani Schrad. plants.  (http://www.native 
plantnetwork.org, 14 June 2004). College of Natural 
Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow. 
 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center and Bridger Plant 
Materials Center. 2001.  Planting guide for five native 
forbs/legumes released for conservation use 
(http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/ 
ndpmcpg2000rel.pdf, 14 June 2004). USDA NRCS 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center, Bismarck. 
 
Dillard, J. 1999.  Sunflowers for wildlife in the cross 
timbers  (http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/publications/ 
wildlife_habitat/pdf_docs/s unflowers_for_wl.pdf, 14 
June 2004). Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, 
Austin. 
 
Faucon, P. 2003.  Maximillian sunflower 
( http://www.desert-tropicals. com). Desert Tropicals, 
Phoenix. 
 
Haddock, M. 2004.  Kansas wildflowers and grasses 
(http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wildfl ower/, 14 June 2004). 
Kansas State University, Manhattan. 
 
Harrington, M. 2004.  Wildflowers on North Carolina 
Roadsides,  (http://www.doh.dot.state.nc.us/ 
operations/dp_chief_eng/roadside/wildflowerbook/,  14 June 2004). North Carolina Department of 
Transportation, Raleigh. 
 
Hilty, J. 2004. 
Helianthus maximiliani  
(http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/prairie/plantx/m
x_sunflowerx.htm, 14 Jun 2004). Prairie Wildflowers 
of Illinois Project, Urbana.  
 
Horn, D.D. 2004. Helianthus maximiliani. 
(http://tenn.bio.utk.edu/ vascular/vascular.html, 14 
June 2004). University of Tennessee, Knoxville. 
 
National Plant Materials Center. 2004.  Helianthus 
maximiliani.  (http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/release index.html, 14 June 
2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Native Plant Information Network. 2001. 
Propagation datasheets  (http://www.wildflower2. 
org/NPIN/Clearinghouse/Propagation/propsheets. 
html, 14 June 2004). Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower 
Center, Austin. 
 
Stevens, R. and C. Coffey. 2004.  Plant Image 
Gallery  (http://www.noble.org/imagegallery/ 
index.html, 14 June 2004). Samuel Roberts Noble 
Foundation, Ardmore. 
 
Tober, D.A. 2000.  Notice of release: Medicine Creek 
Maximilian sunflower (Helianthus maximiliani) 
(http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/ 
ndpmcrnhema2medi.pdf, 14 June 2004). USDA-
NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials Center, Bismarck. 
 
Tveter, D. 2004. How to grow Maximiliani sunflower 
(http://www.dontveter.com/howtogrow/helimaxi. 
html, 14 June 2004). The How to Grow it Project, 
Chicago. 
 
Walsh, R.A. 1993.  Helianthus maximiliani.  In: Fire 
Sciences Laboratory. Fire Effects Information 
System (http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 14 June 
2004). Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA 
Forest Service, Missoula. 
 
Wildseed Farms. 2004.  Helianthus maximiliani.  In: 
Aggie Horticulture. Wildflowers in bloom 
(http://aggie-horticulture.tamu.edu/wildseed/, 14 June 
2004). Texas A&M University, College Station.  
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg,  formerly USDA NRCS National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:

Mark Skinner, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 23June2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.