Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TOYON 
Heteromeles arbutifolia (Lind.) 
M. Roemer  
Plant Symbol = HEAR5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Many tribes in California gathered the 
fruit for food including the Salinan, Maidu, Karok, 
Sierra Miwok, Pomo, Luiseno, Hupa, Wappo, and 
Yuki.  It is important to wait until the red fruits are 
very ripe before picking and eating them.  They are 
boiled or roasted before consuming or sometimes 
they are eaten raw.  Among the Sierra Miwok, the 
fruits were boiled and baked in a deep narrow earth 
oven.  Another preparation technique was to store the 
fruits in a basket for two months until they had 
softened and then they were parched with coals in a 
basket and eaten.  The fruits were reputed to be 
slightly puckery.  The Yuki  made the leaves and bark 
into a decoction for medicinal use in treating 
stomachache and various body aches and pains. 
 
Wildlife : Upland game birds such as band-tailed 
pigeons and songbirds including northern red-
breasted sapsuckers, thrasher s, and wren-tits consume 
the fruits.  Small mammals such as the large-eared 
wood rat and the portola wo od rat also feed on the 
fruits.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  This evergreen 
shrub reaches up to 10 meters in height.  It has a 
grayish trunk and puberulent branches.  The elliptic 
to oblong leaves are simple and short petioled.  They 
have spines along the margins and are thick and 
leathery.  The small, white flowers are arranged in 
large terminal clusters and each flower has 5 petals, 5 
sepals, and 10 stamens.  The fruits are bright red or 
yellow drupe-like pomes with dry pulp and contain 3 
to 6 seeds.  They persist through winter. 
J.E. & Bonnie McClellan ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The shrub is found in chaparral, oak woodland, 
and mixed evergreen forest below 1300 m. 
throughout the California floristic province and into 
Baja California. 
 
Establishment  
Seeds: Clean off as much of the pulp as possible and 
then put the fresh seeds in water and let them rot for 
one week.  This is a good technique for getting the 
seed separated from the fleshy part of the fruit. If the 
seeds have been stored, they need three months 
stratification before planting.  Plant the seeds directly 
in the ground in the fall and water them.  Plant them 
in full sun in almost any soil type.  If the seedlings 
come up too thick, thin them.  This shrub makes a 
magnificent hedge plant and birds love the fruits.  
Seeds may also be planted in containers for the first 
year and then planted out in the second fall. 
 
Cuttings : Cut 4-5 inch tips of the semi ripe wood in 
early summer and strip of f the lower half of the 
leaves and dip each cutting into a rooting hormone.  
Put the cuttings into a rooting medium such as 
perlite-sand in four-inch pots spaced about one-half 
inch apart.  Keep the pots  watered and sheltered from 
wind and direct sun.  The cuttings take about two to 
three months to root.  New growth on the tops of the 
plants signifies root development.  After rooting, 
transplant each plant into individual pots, one plant 
per pot.  Plant each plant  in a light, loose soil in 
partial shade, and water it, keeping it moist and 
protecting it from hot sun, winds, and animals.  The

following fall if the plant is growing vigorously, plant 
it out in full sun.  If the plant is small and grows 
slowly, wait a second year and plant it outdoors the 
following fall. 
 
Management 
Toyon can be pruned in winter, when the branches 
with fruits are cut for decorations.  The shrub may be 
trained into a small tree by gradual removal of lower 
branches, or pruned into a large shrub of multiple 
boles and rounded crown.  Trimming may increase 
the abundance of berries by increasing the amount of 
year-old wood. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
HEAR5 is widely available from native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh:  
Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of plants .  
Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford. 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Chesnut, V.K. 1902 .  Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, Calif ornia.  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII.  Reprinted by 
the Mendocino County Historical Society in 1974. 
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.   Tribes of California .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley , California.  p. 480. 
 
Schenck, S.M. & E.W. Gifford 1952.   Karok 
ethnobotany .  Anthropological Records 13(6):377-
392. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Sparkman, P.S. 1908.   The culture of the Luiseno 
Indians .  University of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology 8(4). 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
Version: 990513. 
 
Wilken, D.H. 1993.  Heteromeles .  Page 953, IN: The 
Jepson manual:  Higher plants of California .  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California. 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California. 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.