Plant Guide
COMMON ST. 
JOHNSWORT 
Hypericum perforatum 
 L. 
Plant Symbol = HYPE 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May  Plant 
Materials Center    
 
Common St. Johnswor t (Hypericum perforatum)  Photo by, Jolie 
Dollar , USDA NRCS.  
Caution: This plant may becom e invasive. 
 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:   
Klamathweed  
St. Johnswort  
Klamath weed  
goatweed  
perforate St. John’s -wort  
Tipton weed  
rosin -rose  
 
Uses  
Wildlife Use :  
Common St. Johnswort provides a nectar source for  
pollinators and is well -suited  for use in pollinator 
restoration habitat. Preliminary observation found 
that  common  St. Johnswort attracted 7 different 
species of Hymenoptera in Cape May, New Jersey. 
Brown -belted bumble bee, ( Bombus griseocollis), 
common eastern bumble  bee (Bombus impatiens ), 
and  sweat bee  (Lasioglossum tegulare ) were most 
frequent ly observed visiting the flower.  Field 
observations suggest that pollinators exhibit a range 
of responses to this plant. There is not enough 
conclusive data to determine if the plant is highly 
pre ferred or less preferred among pollinators.   
E
rosion Control : 
With lateral root growth extending .4 –3in (1 –8cm) 
below the surfa ce, and taproots extending 2– 5 ft 
deep, St. Johnswort could make a good erosion 
control plant. However, the benefits of erosion 
c ontrol should be weighed against the plant’s overall 
aggressive, invasive characteristics.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g.,  state noxious status, and wetland 
i ndicator values).  
 
Weediness  
St. Johnswort is an introduced species that is 
considered a noxious weed in 7 states in the U.S. 
Although the plant invades disturbed areas it does not 
easily invade natural areas. It tends to form dense 
colonies that crowd -out  native plants.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department  regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for 
this species for further information.  
 
Description  
General : Common St. Johnswort is an  erect, multi -
stemmed,  perennial  forb that grows to  1 –3 f t. It has 
long slender “runners” or stems growing at the soil 
sur face or just below the ground. It  also has 
aggressive rhizomes. St. Johnswort is part of the 
f amily Hypericaceae which  includes trees, shubs, and 
herbs with re sinous sap. 
 
The numerous f lowers (roughly 25 –100 per stem) are 
symmetrical  around a central point , determinate,  in 
flat -top clusters. T he main and branch stems  end in a 
flower, and open before the flowers below. The 
short -stalked flowers are about 1  in  (2 .5 cm across ), 
with five yellow to  bright yellow-orange  flowers.  The 
petals are peppered with black dots  around the edges . 
The yellow tipped stamens join in clusters  at their 
bases ,  which may also be spotted.  There are three 
stigmas and styles.   
 
Stems are  often reddish and woody at the base. There 
may be  several stems (up to 30) from the base of the 
plant.  St. Johnswort has a tap root and v ertical roots 
extending to 5 f t.

The 1–2  in  long, stalk -less leaves are oblong or 
linear, opposite, round- tipped, and roughly ¼  in  
wide.  The pale green or yellow -green  leaves have 
scattered translucent dots  that make the leaf look 
perforated  when held up to the light. The species 
name for this plant, perforatum , denotes this 
characteristic.  The branches are sharply ridg ed below 
the base of each leaf.  
 
The  sticky  seed pod is a 3- sectioned capsule that 
turns deep reddish brown as it matures. It d ehisces by 
splitting along the partitions of the seed capsule. The 
outermost floral whorl is persistent below the 
capsule.  The plant produces both persistent and 
abundant seed.  The small round, darkly colored seeds 
have  a resinous smell like turpentine. The seed is 
about 1 mm  long.   
 
Ethnobotany  
St Johnswort was recommended in the first century 
by Greek physicians as a diuretic, wou nd-healer, and 
treatment fo r menstrual disorders. It has been  used as 
an anti -inflammatory, anti -bacterial, disinfectant, and 
a  remedy  for disorders of the respiratory tract and 
gall b la dder.  
 
It is a well -investigated medicinal herb.  The 
translucent dots on the leaves and peppered spots on 
the petals ar e sacs of essential plant oils. When 
crushed, the black glands on the petals exude dark -
red oil.  These essential oils make common St. 
Johnswort a popular homeopathic supplement for a 
variety of conditions. T he most important risk of 
taking St. Johnswort products medicinally are their 
interactions with other drugs. Homeopathic tinctures, 
pressed juices, or oils can be prepared from the fresh 
plant material. Dried plant material can also be used 
in teas.  
 
St. J ohnswort tea is used as a folk remedy for bladder 
ailments, depression, anxiety, nervous tension, 
dysentery, diarrhea, and worms. The tea is also 
commonly used to treat tuberculosis; as a mild 
sedative for disturbed sleep; and as a treatment of 
stomach can cer, herpes, and he morrhoids. 
 
St. Johnswort contains the biologically active 
compounds choline, pectin, rutin, sitosterol, 
hypericin, pseudohypericin, and hyperforin. It also 
contains compounds that regulate brain levels such as 
dopamine, interleukins, me latonin, monoamine-
oxidases, and serotonin.   
 
The Cherokee used a compound de coction as an 
abortifacient;  and the leaves in an infusion to reduce 
diarrhea, fever, and gastrointestinal pain. They used a 
milky compound  to rub on sores;  sniffed the crushed 
pl ant for nosebleed; and the root was used in poultice  for snake bite. Iroquois 
used the plant as a fever 
medicine, and the roots  to prevent sterility .  
 
St. Johnswort plays  an important role in the 
traditional knowledge (TK) systems in Spain. In this 
contex t, the  flowers  are macerated in olive oil and 
applied  externally as a treatment  for wounds, burns, 
or chapped skin . 
 
St. Johnswort blooms early, ne ar the summer solstice; 
th us derives its common name by blooming near June 
24
th,  the birthday of  St. John the  Baptist. 
Traditionally, during this day the plants would be 
hung over religious icons in the house to ward off 
evil. In the middle ages it was called  “Fuga 
Daemonium”  or “devil ’s flight”  to denote this 
tendency  to ward off evil spirits.  
 
Distribution :  
St  Johnswort is native to Europe, western Asia, and 
North Africa, and is widely distributed through 
temperate areas o f the world. It is considered a  weed 
in many  countries in its native range.  In the United 
States,  St. Johnswort is found from Minnesota to 
central Texas, stretching to the Atlantic and Pacific 
oceans.   
 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Habitat :  
St Johnswort is most commonly found in grasslands, 
pastures, meadows, and rang elands. But it also occurs 
in  forested areas in natural clearings, openings, or 
areas  that have been disturbed by fire, logging, or 
road construction. Because the seeds of Hypericum  
species can remain viable in the soil  for several years , 
they can be found  in the seed bank of forested areas.  
 
Little information is available regarding elevation 
limits, yet observations have found that populations 
tend to occur below 5,000 feet . 
 
Common St. Johnswort grows in  well-drained, 
coarse- textured soils , and does not  grow well under 
wet conditions. Generally, the plants require  more 
water (35 –40  in) in areas with winter rains , and less 
(10 –12  in) in areas with winter snow.  St Johnswort 
has been found to perform equally well in acid and 
calcareous soils.  The roots of t he plant are colonized 
with vesicular -arbuscular mycorrhizal (VAM) fungi, 
making the plant tolerant of harsher environmental 
conditions.  
 
Establishment  
Common St. Johnswort is an early -flowing forb (June 
or July) that requires full sun or part shade. It can be 
propagated by seed, division, or by softwood 
cuttings. It grows well in moist, well -drained soils.

Wet summers are beneficial to establishment. When 
soil moisture increases during fall or winter, the 
densely leaved, non-flowering stems will grow along  
the ground . 
 
First -year seedlings do not produce flowers or seeds. 
Seedlings are small and tend to grow slowly and are 
improved when inoculated with arbuscular 
mycorrhiza l fungi. When favorable growing 
conditions are met, there may be a sud den increase in 
plant density and new sprouts  will create dense mats 
around the base of parent plant. Interspecies 
competition will restrict seedling survival. Poor site 
quality appears to be associated with increased 
vegetative propagation.  
 
It has been observed that seedlings  grown from seed 
develop a strong tap root, while vegetative 
propagation produces  taproots not aligned with  
crowns. The taproot grows 2– 5 ft deep, depending on 
soil type and moisture content. When injured the 
plant’s lateral roots will produce buds f rom which 
new root crowns develop.  
 
Although seeds are not equipped for wind dispersal, 
new colonies have been observed in the direction of 
prevailing winds. This  would suggest that the seed, to 
some extent, is  wind dispersed.  
 
Animal transport is another  known vector. The seed 
capsules exude a sticky substance that adheres to the 
bodies of birds and mammals. Because of this, thick 
colonies of St. Johnswort are found  along livestock 
driveways and animal trails.  
 
Management  
Common St. Johnswort does not exhi bit invasive 
tendencies in undisturbed areas, but in disturbed 
areas it is much more dominant. St. Johnswort can be 
potentially invasive in prairie, mountain grassland, 
western hard woods, maple -beech -birch , oak-hickory , 
and oak -pine complexes . 
 
Repeated cu ltivation has been found to destroy the 
weed. Colonies can also be controlled by mowing 
several times before maturation. Additionally, a 
covering of grass litter may be used to reduce 
germination and shoot extension of St. Johnswort.   
Vegetative propagatio n is encouraged by grazing or 
fire.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Although St. Johnswort has been reported in the 
United States since the 1800s, it did not spread to the 
western United States until the early 1900s. Since the 
1940s , biological control effor ts have used Klamath 
weed beetles ( Chrysolina quadrigemina) , and 
( Chrysolina hyperici ), St. Johnwort root borer 
( Agrilus hyperici ), and the St. Johnwo rt midge  (
Zeuxidiplosis giardi ) to control populations. These 
beetle populations are limited by climate.   
 
Winter warming and summer droughts increase 
herbivory.  Insect herbivory has a strong negative 
effect on populations and when treated with 
insecticide, treated plots have twice the seedling 
survival rates as untreated plots. There is a high 
degree of pheno typic and genotypic variation 
between St. Johnswort populations, and herbivore 
resistance is also variable.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Due to  its ability to produce large amounts of 
persistent seed, sites that have had plants for only one 
or two years may sti ll have large amounts of seed in 
its seed bank even after mature plants are removed.  
In mature forests where  aboveground vegetation of 
St. Johnswort has been crowded out, seeds have still 
been found in  the soil bank. Therefore, it is possible  
that forests  and plantation sites of various ages will 
contain seeds of St. Johnswort, even if St. Johnswort 
was not previously established on site.  Similarly, 
populations of St. Johnswort can increase from clear 
cutting or variable -density thinning of forest stands, 
e ven if aboveground vegetation is absent. In short, 
there is a high likelihood of St Johnswort 
establishment from buried seed in areas of 
disturbance (logging, thinning, burning, and 
construction) . 
 
Common St. Johnswort has small black glands that 
contain t he photodynamic pigment hypericin. 
Hypericins are found in the flowers, leaves, and buds 
of the plant. If digested by livestock, hypericin can 
cause photosensitization, blisters, and lesions; 
especially in light -skinned animals. More severe 
symptoms includ e loss of appetite, diarrhea, 
blindness, convulsions, coma and deat h. Symptoms 
are often delayed. Light -colored animals are most 
affected by photodynamic properties. The exposed 
skin of horses may also be affected when the plant 
comes  in contact with the  skin.  No hybrids are known 
to occur in North America . 
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
St. Johnswort reproduce s both sexually and 
asexually, and f lowers are both pollinated and self -
pollinated. Field studies have indicated a large 
amount of variability in seed p roduction per plant. 
This variation could be the result of variations in 
environmental or site conditions. Each plant produces 
roughly 15,000- 33,000 seeds and the seeds numbered 
580,000 per ounce.  Seeds remain viable in the  soil for 
long periods of time; a s much as 50 years by some 
accounts.   
 
St Johnswort seed require s a period of dormancy 
before germination. This dormancy may be broken 
by washing, heat treatment, light, or a n after-ripening

period of 3–4 months. St Johnswort see d is reported 
to have 94%  g ermination after 5 year s of dry storage, 
and 50%  germination after 16 years of storage. It has 
been observed that after 5 year s of storage in water, 
7%  of seeds were still  able to germinate.  Other 
observations  suggest that germination rates increased 
with  length of time the seed was immersed. If seed 
exudates are not removed through washing or wear, 
seed dormancy is increased. This would indicate that 
at least one mechanism of seed dispersal is through 
water.   
 
Seed germination of both new (1 –6 month old) a nd 
old (9 years) seed has been shown to increase from 
seed washing. Heat treatments of the seed, exposed 
from  5 –60 minutes to temperatures of 212° F and 
260° F showed germination percentages of up to 
81%. Subjecting seed to hot water immersion 
decreased th e germination rates.  
 
Conditions for germination are very specific and 
temperature requirements for optimal germination are 
still unknown.  
 
References  
Chayka, K. 2006. Minnesota wildflowers. Hypericum 
perforatum  
http://www.minnesotawildflowers.info/searc h?k
w=Hypericum+perforatum  ( accessed  2 Feb . 
2012)  
Comes, R. D., V.F. Bruns, and A.D. Kelley. 1978.  Longevity of certain weed and crop seeds in 
fresh water. Weed Sci . 26(4): 336-344.  
Crompton, C. W., I.V. Hall, K.I.N. Jensen,, and  P.D. 
Hilderbrand.  1988. The biology of Canadian 
weeds. Can. J. Plant Sci . 68(1): 149-162.  
Foster,S. , and J.A.Du ke. 2000. Medicinal plants and 
herbs, of eastern and central North America. 
Peterson Field Guide. 2
nd  E dition. Houghton 
Mifflin. NY. p . 128-129. 
Gleason, H.A., and A. Cro nquist. 1963. Manual of  
v ascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company. New York, N.Y.  
Gonzalez, J.A., M.Garcia- Barriuso, and F. Amich. 
2010. Ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants 
traditionally used in the Arrib es del Duero, 
western Spain. J. Ethn.  131: 343-355. 
Moerman, D.E. 2003. Native American ethnobotany:  
A database of foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of 
Native American peoples, derived from plants  
University of Michigan, Dearborn. 
http://herb.umd.umic h.edu/ (accessed  2 Feb. 
2012)   Pierce Conservation District. Common poisonous 
plants of western Was hington which affect 
livestock. 
http://www.piercecountycd.org/tip_toxicplnts_p.
html  ( accessed  2 Feb. 2012)  
Stone, W. 1973.T he plants of southern New Jersey. 
Q uarterman P ublications, Inc. Boston, Mass.  
US Forest Service. Publication: noxious w eeds. Blue 
Mountains National Resources Institute.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/mdr/past/bmnri/public
ations/weeds/stjohnswort.shtml  (accessed 2 Feb. 
2012)  
Zouhar, Kris. 2004. H ypericum perforatum. In: Fire 
effect s information system. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(Producer).  http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ 
(accessed 6 Jan.  2012)  
 
Prepared By:  Christo pher M. Sheahan. USDA -
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center , Cape May, 
NJ . 
 
Citation:  Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Plant guide for  
common St. Johnswort ( Hypericum perforatum). 
USDA -NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center. 
Cape May, NJ.  
 
Published July 2012 
 
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site a t http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site http://plant -materi als.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER