Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ST. ANDREW’S CROSS  
Hypericum hypericoides  (L.) 
Crantz ssp.  hypericoides 
Plant Symbol = HYHYH  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate names 
St. Andrew’s wort, St. Peter’s wort, Peterwort 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Alabama, Choctaw, Houma, 
Koasat, Natchez, and other Native American tribes 
used St. Andrew’s cross for medicinal purposes.  It 
was thought that infants would learn to walk at an 
earlier age if they were bathed in a cold or warm tea 
made from the roots of the plants.  Children who 
were too weak to walk were bathed with a decoction 
mixture made from the mashed roots.  Infusions of 
the plant were administered to children who had 
trouble urinating.  Dysent ery was treated with an 
infusion made from the whole plant.  An infusion of 
the roots and branches was used to treat ulcerations 
and swollen glands.  The leaves were used to make 
an infusion to wash sore eyes.  Roots were gathered, 
at any time of year, and made into a decoction used 
to treat severe pain, especially in childbirth.  A 
decoction of the roots was also used to treat colic.  
Rheumatism was treated with a decoction or infusion 
of the leaves.  The scraped roots and bark were used 
to treat fevers.  To treat toothaches, some bark was 
scraped from the stem and packed into the offending  tooth.  The plant was used to treat horses that were 
bitten by snakes.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : St. Johnswort Family (Clusiaceae).  St. 
Andrew’s cross is a native, perennial shrub or sub-
shrub.  The common name refers to the petals, which 
make an oblique cross similar to the cross of Saint 
Andrew the Apostle, patron saint of Scotland, Russia, 
and Greece.  The shrub has a single to several erect 
stems with several axillary branches at the top (3 to 
15 dm tall).  Older stems are reddish-brown, with 
sloughing or shredding bark.  The linear leaf blades 
are variable, ranging in shape from narrow to 
elliptical (5 to 25 mm long, 1.5 to 6 mm wide).  The 
solitary flowers are at the terminal ends of the 
branches, just above the last pair of leaves.  The two 
large and two small sepals are arranged in unequal 
pairs.  The four flower peta ls are pale yellow (8 to 10 
mm long) with numerous stamens.  The oval to 
elliptical seed capsules (4 to 9 mm long) enclose 
black, oblong seeds (1mm long).  The plants may 
flower from spring through fall, or all year depending 
on the climate.   
 USDA, NRCS @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: St. Andrew’s cross occurs in a wide variety 
of habitats.  It may be found in dry woods, pine flat-
woods, pine barrens, moist to wet thickets, 
hammocks, flood plains, wet woodlands, depressions, 
and bogs.   
 
Establishment 
These plants are easy to cultivate and may be 
propagated by seed and greenwood cuttings.  The 
plants are useful in ornamental borders and rock 
gardens.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil

Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.  Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp.   
 
Coffey, T. 1993.   The history & folklore of North 
American wildflowers.   Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 
MA.  356 pp.   
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol 2.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  933 
pp.   
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and Exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.   
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. Small, J.K. 1933.    
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana.  Primitive 
Man Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference 14(4): Pp. 49-75.   
 
Taylor, L.A. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes .  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.