Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE WATERLEAF 
Hydrolea ovata Nutt. ex 
Choisy  
Plant Symbol = HYOV  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Hairy hydrolea, false fiddle leaf, ovate falsefiddleleaf 
 
Uses 
This plant is utilized for wetland restoration. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Waterleaf Family (Hydrophyllaceae). 
Hydrolea ovata,  a native, rhizomatous perennial, 
which rarely reaches a height of more than 2 feet, is a 
very distinctive plant due to  its spiny stems and deep 
blue flowers.  Leaves are  entire, alternate, somewhat 
oval in shape and deep green in color.  A single spine 
(usually 0.5-inch long) arises from each leaf node. 
 
No similar genera are found in wet sites in Texas.  
There are three (some argue 4) species of  Hydrolea in 
Texas.   Hydrolea spinosa  is more common in south 
Texas and is very similar to  Hydrolea ovata.   
Hydrolea uniflora  is more common in east Texas, 
eastern Oklahoma, and the so utheastern US and does  not have very showy flowers.  Other species of 
Hydrolea
 are found in southeastern U.S. without 
spines, or only a few spines.  All  Hydrolea species 
are found in wet areas and have the deep blue 
flowers. 
 
Distribution 
Found from Texas and Missouri to Florida.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Hydrolea ovata  is an obligate wetland 
plant (found in wetlands 99% of the time) and likes 
full sun.  It is found most commonly in depressions, 
roadside ditches that pond water for long periods, and 
ponded areas in pastures of  the Gulf Coast Prairie, 
Pineywoods, and Post-Oak Savanna regions of 
Texas.  It is also very  common along livestock pond 
edges, often forming monoculture stands. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of  Agriculture.”  These 
plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources. 
 
References 
Davis, L. 2000.   Texas plant fact sheet: Hydrolea 
ovata.  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical 
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 Edited 09jan01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060801 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.