Plant Guide       
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
UTAH SWEETVETCH
Hedysarum boreale Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = HEBO  
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center 
 UCEPC, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Alternate Names 
Northern sweetvetch, chain-pod, northern sweet 
broom 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Rangeland/Wildlife:  Utah sweetvetch can be 
used as a complimentar y species in rangeland 
seedings.  It is considered succulent and its foliage is 
highly nutritional and palatable to livestock and big 
game, including bison, deer, elk, and moose.  It 
remains succulent throughout the growing season and 
some basal leaves can remain green through the 
winter. Utah Sweetvetch also provides important 
habitat attributes for sage grouse.  It has been rated as 
medium for cover value and excellent for food value. 
The colorful flowers of Utah sweetvetch are utilized 
by honeybees, which are essential for setting seed. 
 
Erosion Control:  Utah sweetvetch is a good soil 
stabilizer.  It provides good roadside stabilization as 
well as beautification. 
 
Reclamation : Utah sweetvetch is a legume capable of 
fixing nitrogen from the atmosphere (Nitrogen 
fixation is a process whereby inorganic nitrogen-N
2  found in the atmosphere is converted into organic 
compounds usable by the plant with the aid of 
Rhizobia bacteria). Eventually, this nitrogen is 
released into the soil, thereby, improving soil quality.  
There are a limited number 
of native legumes to use 
in land reclamation and ra nge improvement.  Utah 
sweetvetch can be used to help fulfill this need. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping:  Utah sweetvetch can be 
used for beautification and diversity in areas of low 
maintenance and low precipitation.  It is especially 
suitable for xeriscaping and roadside beautification.   
 
Ethnobotany :   The roots of Utah sweetvetch and 
other sweetvetches have been documented to be used 
as food by northern tribes, and also as a substitute for 
licorice. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae)
.  Utah sweetvetch is 
a native perennial, cool season, herbaceous legume 
with deep taproots and several lateral roots, 
sometimes rhizomatous.  Its deep taproots allow the 
plant to extract deep soil moisture and nutrients 
resulting in significant drought resistance and winter 
hardiness.  The main st ems arise from a woody 
crown and may grow 1 to 2 feet tall.  The leaves are 
compound (two or more leaflets) and hairless.  
Flowers can be pink, purple, or white arranged in a 
loose raceme.  Seeds develop in a long constricted 
pod, with several sections.  Each section contains one 
brown kidney-shaped seed.   
 
Distribution : Utah sweetvetch is common and widely 
distributed in the Intermountain West, Montana, 
south to Colorado and Utah.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Utah sweetvetch can be found in the 
mountain brush, ponderosa pine, pinyon-juniper and 
big sage brush vegetative zones. 
 
Adaptation 
Utah sweetvetch can grow on clayey or sandy soils, 
however, is more adaptable to well-drained loamy 
soils. It is most often found on moderately saline or 
alkaline soils, but will grow on moderately acidic to

neutral soils.  Utah sweetvetch is usually found at 
elevations between 4000 to 8000 feet, in 
precipitations zones receiving 10 to 18 inches of 
moisture annually.  It grows best with 15 inches or 
more of precipitation and minimum competition. 
 
Establishment 
Utah sweetvetch can be grown from seed.  Planting 
should be done in early spring or late fall.  Fall 
planting is preferable to take advantage of natural 
weather conditions during winter to get proper 
germination.  Seed scarification will ensure water up-
take by the seeds and provide better germination. 
Drill seed at about ¼ to ½ inch deep.  Inoculation 
with the proper rhizobium will enhance nitrogen 
fixation.  Germination occurs within 6 to 30 days.  It 
is recommended that Utah sweetvetch be either 
seeded with less competitive species when used in 
mixtures or seeded separately in alternating rows. 
 
Management  
Reduce or withhold stocking during establishment 
and avoid overuse after establishment to maintain a 
healthy stand.  Utah sweetvetch is moderately to 
fairly tolerant of grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Utah sweetvetch is subject to root-rots, seed pod 
insects and some rust.  Ch emical insect control may 
be necessary in seed production fields to prevent 
infestation of bruchid weevil larvae in developing 
seed.  Rabbits, grasshoppers, and crickets can also 
become problems by reducing plant stand. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Some plant sources of Utah sweetvetch have been 
reported to spread rhizomatously.  However, Utah 
sweetvetch, as a native plant, has moderate 
competiveness. 
 
Seed Production 
Spacing:  For seed production, 10 pure live seeds per 
linear foot of row, or 3 to 4 pure live seeds planted in 
hills 2 to 4 feet apart is recommended.  
 
Fertilization:  About 30 pounds of available 
phosphate per acre every other year might be needed, 
depending on soil test. 
 
Irrigation : Irrigate to get plants established, and 
thereafter as needed depending upon soil moisture.  
Fifteen to eighteen inches of precipitation and 
irrigation is recommended.  Avoid sprinkler irrigation 
during flowering and pollination.  A minimum of two 
irrigations is
 recommended prior to flowering and 
during seed fill.   
Weed Control:
  Mechanical or chemical control is 
needed to keep fields as weed free as possible. 
 
Pollination:   Bees and bumblebees are needed for 
pollination . 
 
Harvesting:  Seeds can be harvested with a combine. 
 
Yields : No seed is produced the first season. 
However, 10 to 35 percent can be expected the 
second year and full production on the third year. 
Properly managed fields can produce up to 250 
pounds of cleaned seed per acre.  A production field 
can be expected to remain in production for eight 
years or more.  Optimum seed yields occur every 
other year. 
 
Seeds per Pound : Seed counts are variable ranging 
from 34,000 to 100,000 depending on seed source. 
 
Seed After-ripening:   Maximum germination is not 
reached for one to two months following seed 
harvest. 
 
Seed Longevity:  Seeds can be viable for six years or 
more, when stored in a cool dry place. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Timp’ Utah Sweetvetch ( Hedysarum boreale Nutt.) 
is a seed-propagated cultivar.  The genetic material 
originated from two sources: (1) a site at the base of 
the Wasatch Mountains and east of Orem County in 
Utah, and (2) a single-plant selection made by Dr. 
Robin Cuany.  ‘Timp’ was selected based on its 
seedling vigor, site adaptability, persistence, seed 
production, dinitrogen fixation, and stability.  It was 
released in 1994 by Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, 
Colorado State University Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Utah State University Agricultural 
Experiment Station, and USDA-Soil Conservation 
Service. 
 
‘Timp’ Utah sweetvetch is adapted to a wide range of 
soil types, however, performs better in well-drained 
loamy soils.  It has prov en acceptable performance 
where the annual precipitation ranges from 12 to 18 
inches. 
 
‘Timp’ certified seed is available commercially and 
breeder seed is maintained at Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center.

Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under”United States Government”.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 References 
Anderson B. A and  A. H. Holmgren. 1985.  
Mountain Plants of Northeastern Utah. 
 Utah State 
University Extension Services Logan.  Circular 319 
 
Harrington, H. D. 1979.   Manual of the plants of 
Colorado.  2
nd ED. Swallow Press, Inc., Chicago, IL 
Chicago, IL. 666 pp. 
 
Institute for Land Rehabilitation. 1979.   Selection, 
Propagation, & Field Establishment of Native Plant 
Species on Disturbed Arid Lands.  Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station. Bull. 500. 
 
Kingery J., A. Cotter, and K. Moseley. 2003.   Idaho 
Roadside Revegetation Handbook.   Department of 
Rangeland Ecology and Management University of 
Idaho. 
 
Larson G. E. and J.R. Johnson. 1999.   Plants of the 
Black Hills and Bear Lodge Mountains.   South 
Dakota State University College of Agricultural & 
Biological Sciences, South Dakota Agricultural 
Experiment Station. 608 pp 
 
Metcalf S., C. Jones, and L. Holzworth. 2006.  
Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation and Establishment of Six 
Montana Native Legume Species.   USDA-NRCS 
Plant Materials Technical Note No. MT-54. 
 
Monsen S.B. 2005.   Restoration Manual for 
Colorado Sagebrush and Associated Shrubland 
Communities .  Colorado Division of Wildlife 
Department of Natural Resources. 
 
Plummer, A.P., D.R. Christensen, and S.B. Monsen.  
1968.   Restoring Big Game Range in Utah.   Utah 
Division of Fish and Game. Publication No. 68-3. 
 
Redente E.F. 1982.   Sweetvetch Seed Germination.  
Journal of Range Management 35(4). 
 
Stevens R., K. R. Jorgense n, S.A. Young, and S.B. 
Monsen. 1996.   Forb and Shrub Seed Production 
Guide for Utah.   Utah State University Extension. 
AG 501 
 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center. 1994.  
Notice of Naming and Release of ‘Timp’ Utah 
Sweetvetch (Hedysarum  boreale Nutt.) for Soil 
Improvement and Early Spring Forage for both 
Wildlife and Livestock.   
 
USDA-NRCS, 2006.  The PLANTS Database  
( http://plants.usda.gov
)  National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA.

Wasser, C. H. 1982.  Ecology and Culture of Selected 
Species Useful in Revegetating Disturbed Lands in 
the West.   U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Fish and 
Wildlife Service. FWS/OBS-82/56. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Manuel Rosales,  USDA NRCS Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Edited: 070814 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.