BUSH MORNING-
GLORY  
Ipomoea leptophylla  Torr.  
Plant Symbol =  IPLE 
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Figure 1 Bush morning -glory in peak bloom  
Photo  Courtesy  NEBRASKAland Magazine/Nebraska Game and Parks 
Commission  
Alternate Names  
Common Names:  bigroot morning- glory, bigroot  bush 
morning -glory , man  root, man- of-the -earth, bush 
moonflower, wild potato vine  
Description  
General :  Bush morning- glory, Ipomoea leptophylla,  is a 
member of the Convolvulaceae Family.  It is a  large, 
long -lived  perennial , herbaceous plant 1 to 4 feet t all.  
Bushy in appearance, a  single plant with smooth, 
branched,  decumbent to  erect stems, the  former can 
extend  to as much as 2.5 feet from the base to make a 5 
f oot wide  plant .  The simple leaves  smooth,  short-
petioled, and linear -lanceolate to linear , 1 to 6 inches 
long,  and up to 0.3 inches wide , acute, entire.  Typically 1 
to 3 f lowers in axillary cymes, corolla pink to purplish or 
purplish -red to lavender -pink  with a darker throat, 
funnelform 0.2 to 0.4 inches long ; sepals unequal,  broadly 
ovate to nearly round, 0.2 to 0.4 inches long, the inner 
most longer than the outer ones  (Austin 1986; Bare 1979) .  
Distribution :  Found on plains and prairies at elevations 
of 3,500 to 5,500 feet (Borland 1987) from South Dakota 
to Colorado, to Oklahoma and New Me xico, restricted to 
the Great Plains Region (Austin 1986)  and Texas to 
central Montana (Barr 1983) .   For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.    
Habitat
:  Open mixed grass prairies  of the Great Plains, 
particularly in sandy or gravelly soils  (Montana Natural 
Heritage Program 2014) ; also waste ground, roadsides, 
and streambanks (Kindscher 1992).  
 
 Figure 2 Bush morning-glory and associated plant species growing on 
native rangeland i n northeastern Colorado.  Photo courtesy, Julie 
Elliott,  USDA NRCS, Rangeland Management Specialist  
Adaptation 
Bush morning- glory is a drought tolerant, long -lived 
plant .  Keeler (1991) estimated that life expectancies of 
established plants could be 50 years or more.  In an 
investigation of sandhill forbs, Weaver (1968) found bush 
morning -glory to have one of the most extensive root 
systems of any of the forbs in his field investigations.   
Weaver  described the  massive taproot  of one individual 
plant  as being  6 to 24 inches thick, taper ing to an inch or 
two in width at a depth of 4 feet or more .  Beyond 4 feet 
the taproot broke off into “numerous cordlike roots,” 
which were tr aced to a depth of 10 feet or more.  Lateral 
branches spreading from the taproot were found 15 to 25 
feet ou t in the upper 4 feet of soil. The taproot serves as  a 
reservoir for food and water  to sustain the plant through 
long periods of drought (Barr 1983) .  Bush morning- glory 
survives harsh winters on the plains where temperatures 
can dip below  -25° F (Borland 1987) .  It is not at all frost 
tolerant, all green parts of the plant succumb to the first 
frost in fall and new growth in spring emerges well after 
the last frost (Barr 1983).  It prefers well aerated, sandy 
soils with a pH of 7.5 or above but can tolerate contai ner 
soils of pH 5.8 (Borland 1987).   
Uses  
Suitable for  xeriscaping (Dave’s Garden 2014), this plant 
is attractive to pollinators such as butterflies, moths, and 
long -tongued bees (Bare 1979).  Melitoma grisella  is a 
major pollinator of bush morning- glory collecting pollen 
early in the day.  It is the only Ipomoea specialist 
pollinator in the northern part of the range for I . 
leptophylla .  Three other genera of bees visit the flowers 
for nectar only and do not collect pollen (Austin 1978).    
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Ethnobotany 
Medicinal uses by Native Americans included:  as a 
Gastrointestinal Aid  – an infusion of staminate cones used 
as a stomach tonic, the root was scraped and eaten raw to 
alleviate stomach troubles;   as an Analgesic –  the root 
was pulverized and dusted on the body for pain; as a 
Sedative  – the root was used in smoke treatment for 
nervousness and bad dreams.  The pulverized root was 
also used as a stimulant to revive one from fainting.  As a 
Veterinary Aid  – the root, dried and ground could be 
added to water and given to colts to make them become 
large horses or pulverized to use as an infusion to promote 
fertility of mares and growth in  colts.   
 
Early doctors perhaps learned of the medicinal properties 
of bush morning- glory from Native Americans.  “The 
tuberou s root of the big- root morning glory was officially 
listed in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia  from 1820 to 1863 
(Kindscher 1992).”  
Other Uses:  Food –  as a starvation food source the root 
was roasted by the Arapahoe, Cheyenne, and Kiowa.  The 
root was also used in ceremonies and the Lakota used the 
root to carry fire, which lasted for months (Moerman 
1998).   
 
Status  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regardin g its 
status and use.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines  
Nick the  seed coat  and soak seeds  overnight, plant in a 
soilless mix; first emergence in 3 to 5 days (NRCS 2013) .  
Sow outdoors after the last frost date, ¼ inch  deep. Or 
sow indoors 4 weeks early. Set out plants on 3 foot 
s pacing  in f ull sun  (Diane’s Flower Seeds 2014) to part 
shade (Lady Bird Wildflower Center 2014) in a 
permanent location as transplanting is difficult and if 
attempted, only when the plants are small and dormant.   
 
For conservation plantings use a  wider spacing tailored to 
lower precipitation zones.   
Management  
Bush morning- glory can dominate over -grazed rangeland 
in some environments/conditions as the latex containing 
leaves deter grazing by cattle (Keeler 1980).
  
   
Figure 3 A good example of why it’s often referred to as Man Root, this 
massive 
>5 foot tall taproot of bush morning -glory was excavated from 
a Washington County, Colorado range site.  Note lateral branch to the 
left.  Photo courtesy, Julie  Elliott, USDA NRCS, Rangeland Management 
Specialist  
 Figure 4 Seed propagated 1 -2 container stock lacks the development of 
a lot of fine roots to hold the potting media together, require careful 
handling or perhaps plant them in the spring when dormant.  Photo by 
John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials  Specialist

Pests and Potential Problems 
Beetles  Chelymorpha cassidea  and Metriona  sp. 
(Chrysomelidae) attack stems and leaves of bush 
morning -glory, especially in June.  Grasshoppers have 
been observed to consume up to 100% of corollas by mid-
day.  Beetles and walking sticks occasionally destroy 
flowers.  Flower robbing by grasshoppers  is greatly 
reduced in the presence of ants which are attracted by 
foliar nectaries which are found on the undersides of the 
first  leaves  of the growing season and one on the sepals .  
Sepal nectaries are extrafloral and do not attract 
pollinators.   Seed set was observed to be greater on “ant -
visited plants” versus “non- visited plants”.  Ant-visited 
plants also had greater biomass than non -visited plants; 
suggests  parallels with greater seed production.   Bruchid 
beetles pr ey on the seeds, often greatly reducing seed 
production  by as much as 77% ( Keeler and Kaul 1979; 
Keeler 1980).      
 
Environmental Concerns  
None known  
Seeds and Plant Production  
One to 4 densely hairy  seeds, brown in color , are 
produced in an ovoid, capsular fruit  (Austin 1986; Bare 
1979) .  The larger, established plants are the  most 
consistent in flowering and successful seed producers.   
 
 Figure 5 Large, brown, densely hairy seeds of bush morning -glo ry. 
Photo by Steve Hurst, hosted by the USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
 
The plants will not flower until they have sequestered 
enough resources for survival and will drop their buds, 
flowers and fruit during very dry conditions (Keeler 1980; 
Keeler 1991).  Stems carrying opening capsules abscise at 
the end of the growing season,  tumble in the wind, and 
dispers e the seeds across the landscape (Keeler 1991).  
Typically hand harvested, t here are approximately 4000 
seeds per pound  (Prairie Moon Nursery 2014) .  S eeds 
stored at cool temperatures and low humidity for 25 years 
or more still proved viable with numerous seedlings being 
produced.  The seeds d o not germinate all at once , but 
rather over a period of weeks and months  (NRCS 2013).   
Two -year old seeds  of bush morning -glory that failed to 
germinate promptly were held over in a cool, moist 
environment until the following spring  at which time they  germinated
.  These observations suggest that some 
dormancy is involved with the seeds of bush morning-
glory  (NRCS 2014).    
 
 Figure  6 Plug grown seedlings  being transferred to larger cells , note 
developing taproot; shoot over towered by large deep lobed cotyledons.  
Photo by John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Specialist  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known  cultivars.  However, commercially 
available sources , sources  should be selected based on the 
local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. 
Consult with your local land -grant Univ. , local extension 
or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on 
adapted  sources for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited  
Austin, D. F. 1978. Morning glory bees and the Ipomoea 
pandurata  complex (Hymenoptera: Anthrophoridae).  
Proc. Entomol. Soc. Wash. 80(3):  397 -402.   
Austin, D. F. 1986. Convolvulaceae . p. 652- 659. In T. M. 
Barkley  (ed.)  Flora of the Great Plains . Great Plains 
Flora Association , Univ. Press of Kansas. Lawrence.  
Bare, J. E. 1979.  Wildflowers and  weeds of Kansas. The 
Regents Press of Kansas,  Lawrence. 
Barr, C. A. 1983. Ipomoea.  Jewels of the p lains, 
Wildflowers of the Great Plains  grasslands and h ills.  
Univ.  of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.   
Borland, J. 1987.  Western native perennials provide 
drought -tolerant options. Am . Nurseryman. 165 (2): 
91- 97. 
Dave’s Garden . 2014.  Plant Files : Man root, bush 
m or ning  glory  Ipomoea leptophylla.  
http://davesgarden.com/guides/pf/go/32008/  [Online ] 
accessed  24 June 2014.  
Diane’s Flower Seeds . 2014.  Ipomoea leptophylla . 
http://www.dianeseeds.com/ipomoea -
leptophylla. html [Online ] accessed  24 June  2014.  
Ke eler, K. H. 1980. The extrafloral nectaries of Ipomoea 
leptophylla (Convolvulaceae). Am . J. of Bot. 67: 
216- 222.

Keeler, K. H. 1991. Survival and recruitment in a long-
lived prairie perennial, Ipomoea leptophylla 
(Convolvulaceae). Am. Midl. Nat. 126: 44 -60.  
Keeler, K. H. and R. B. Kaul. 1979. Morphology and 
distribution of petiolar nectaries in Ipomoea 
(Convolvulaceae). Am. J. of Bot. 6 6: 946-952. 
Kindscher, K. 1992. Medicinal wild plants of the prairie.  Univ. of Kansas Press,  Lawrence 
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center . 2014.  Ipomoea 
leptophylla . 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant
= IPLE  [Online ] accessed June 2014 .  
Moerman, D. E. 1998. Native American e thnobotany.  
Timber Press. Portland · London.   
Montana Natural Heritage Program . 2014. Bush morning-
glory  — Ipomoea leptophylla. Montana Field Guide. 
http://FieldGuide.mt.gov/detail_PDCON0A0P0.aspx  
[Online ] accessed  18  June 2014.  
NEBRASKAland Magazine. 2014. Nebraska Game and 
Parks Commission, Lincoln.  
NRCS. 2013. Laboratory evaluation of plant materials to  determine seed analysis, germination, and 
propagation techniques –  Bush morning-glory, 
Ipomoea leptophylla. p
. 33. In 2013 Annual 
Technical Report. Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, Kansas . 
NRCS. 2014. Laboratory evaluation of plant materials to  determine seed analysis, germination, and 
propagation techniques –  Bush morning-glory, 
Ipomoea leptophylla.  In 2014 Annual Technical 
Report (unpublished). Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center. Manhattan, Kansas.  
Prairie Moon Nursery. 2014. Ipomoea leptophylla (Bush  Morning Glory)  
https://www.prairiemoon.com/seeds/wildflowers -
forbs/ipomoea -leptophylla -bush- morning -glory .html 
[ Online ] accessed June 2014. 
USDA, NRCS. 2014. The PLANTS Database  (http://plants.usda.gov, 11 July 20140. National Plant 
Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401- 4901 USA. 
Weaver, J. E. 1968.  Prairie plants and t heir environment.  
Univ.  of Nebraska Press,  Lincoln·London. 
 
Citation  
Row , J.  M. 2014. Plant Guide for bush morning- glory 
( Ipomoea leptophylla) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service . Manhattan , Kansas 66502. 
Published : July 2014   
 
Edited: RL W, JLD
 
 
  For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 
and visit the 
PLANTS  Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site:  
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER