Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURDY’S IRIS 
Iris purdyi Eastw. 
Plant Symbol = IRPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Warning: Fresh iris roots may be toxic.
 
Ethnobotanic : Iris makes some of the finest cordage.  
The fibers are particularly strong, flexible, and fine 
like silk.  Only two fibers can be taken from each iris 
leaf margin.  Huge bunches of leaves were harvested 
in the fall and stored until needed.  Iris cordage was 
used for fishing nets, string, rope, snares, hairnets, 
and regalia. 
 
The men knotted the fishing nets from iris fibers.  
Animals were captured with iris rope.  A deer rope is 
nearly 20 feet long with a  lasso at one end, and about 
half an inch in diameter.  A loop was set over a deer 
trail to catch the head or antlers.  Within the loop 
positioned over a trail a delicate network of the same 
material was spread to draw in the loop.  One Indian 
stated that "it takes nearly six weeks to make a rope 
twelve feet long." 
 
In spite of the tremendous labor of preparing this 
material, the iris fiber was one of the most generally 
employed in northwestern California.  The threads 
and cords of this fiber were used to make fishing 
nets, camping bags and snares for catching game.  
Since iris is fine and can be bent at sharp angles, it 
makes an excellent starting knot in coiled baskets. 
 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
The Pomo placed acorn meal in a shallow pit and 
covered the meal with iris leaves before pouring 
water over the meal to l each out tannic acid.  The 
Monache and the Southern Yokuts in California 
make flour from iris seed.   
 
A poultice of the raw rhizom e is especially effective 
against staph sores.  Used externally, iris is 
successfully used for infected wounds, ulcers, 
fistulas, and to take away freckles.  Only the dry root 
should be used internally.  Iris is active as a cathartic; 
has a stimulating effect on the production of both 
pancreatic enzymes and bile; is a strong diuretic; and 
will stimulate both saliva and sweat.  This is a useful 
drug plant, but in general, should be used with care 
and preferably in combina tions where less energetic 
plants form the bulk of a medicinal formula. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The blossoms lend 
themselves to landscapin g, where they require 
minimal maintenance.   Native irises are free 
flowering, most are long lived, require very little 
attention, and provide an abundance of seeds.  Iris 
flowers attract insects and bi rds.  Irises provide both 
nectar and insects to hummingbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Iris Family (Iridaceae).  Purdy’s iris has 
leaves that are shiny gree n on top, gray-green and 
glaucous underneath.  Stem s and leaves are stained a 
brilliant mahogany red or cerise pink.  There are two 
flowers on the tall (12") stem.  It has pale cream-
yellow flowers with promin ent, brownish purple 
veins or whitish with lavender tinges.  Flowers bloom 
in May and June.  The rhizomes are 4-6 mm in 
diameter.

Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Purdy’s iris is comm on is open to shady places, 
in redwood, north coastal coniferous and mixed 
evergreen forest communities, and grows at 
elevations below 1200m.  It  occurs in the north coast 
of California in the Klamath Ranges and outer North 
Coast Ranges, from Sonoma to Humboldt and Trinity 
Counties. 
 
Establishment 
This iris does not form clumps, must be grown from 
seed, and is a sparse grower.  The native irises are 
excellent in shade situatio ns, even dense shade of 
walls and fences (Schmidt 1980).  They will tolerate 
sun for most of the day in mild areas, and should 
have afternoon shade and ample water in the interior 
regions.  These plants are intolerant of frequent 
summer water; they should not be planted near lawns 
or other moisture-loving plants.  These plants require 
excellent drainage; theref ore, compacted or other 
water-holding soils may need to be modified.  
Fertilization increases biomass and seed production. 
 
Irises start growing with the first cool weather and 
rains in fall, reaching the height of their growth in 
spring and early summer.  
 
Propagation by Plant Division : Purdy’s iris is not 
densely rhizomatous, and it is recommended that the 
plants be started from seed.  However, this iris is still 
clonal, radiating in growth outward from the center of 
the plant.  This iris can be propagated from plant 
division, in fall or winter after the first new roots are 
established but before the flowers form.  
 
Native irises in the wild tend to produce only a small, 
dry rhizome with stringy roots which is difficult to 
dig.  Vigorous garden or greenhouse plants produce 
firm, white, growing roots es pecially in winter and 
spring growing seasons, and clumps are easily 
divided at those time.  Remove a new fan with fleshy 
roots set in a prepared site, water it, and provide 
shade for a few days if the plant is placed in full sun.  
Frequent division appears to keep the plants 
vigorous, as well as being the best method of 
increasing the supply of superior forms. 
 
Propagation by Seed : Iris seed is easily collected 
from the large capsules.   The seedpods from Purdy’s 
iris are sometimes right on  the ground, almost like a 
peanut.  The capsules turn from green to brown and 
open at the top when they are ripe.  You have to 
watch them carefully, because  they split very rapidly 
and two days later the seed is dispersed.  Collect  capsules carefully to avoid spilling seeds; each 
capsule has from 20 to 80 seeds.  Store seeds in paper 
envelopes at room temperature until they are planted.  
Seeds will keep up to 10 years at room temperature. 
 
Plant seeds in 6-inch pots, using a combination of 
leaf mold and peat moss.  Cover seeds with 1/2 inch 
of same material.  Any good potting soil that's acidic 
is good for seed germination. 
After planting, over-winter the pots outdoors in 
November or December.  They will come up in 2-3 
months, depending on the weather.  Germination 
increases the second year, because there's always a 
percentage of hard seeds that won't germinate the 
first year.  Part of the seed won’t germinate until the 
second year, to increase the probability for good 
weather conditions and optimize germination 
success. 
 
Plant the seedlings in May,
 when the young plants 
are usually 3 to 6 inches tall or even taller.  Plants are 
likely to require watering the first year while roots 
are being established.  Plant from 6 inches to one-
foot spacing.  If a natural look is desired, scatter and 
clump the plantings.  Plants will begin to bloom by 
their second year if growth has been continuous.  
 
Direct seeding is possible in places that can be left 
undisturbed, as among shrubs, or among low 
perennials where the seedlings can be sheltered.  If 
planting seeds in the ground, autumn is the best time 
for seeding; germination begins in two or three 
months and often continues beyond that time.  A 
friable seed mixture of sand , loam, and either peat or 
screened leaf mold is best, covering the seed with 
sphagnum moss to aid in preventing damping-off of 
seedlings. 
 
Management 
In autumn, old leaves should be removed from the 
center of large clumps, th e foliage cut back, and a 
mulch applied, especially if the irises are being 
naturalized in a semi-dry area. Traditional resource 
management included harvesting huge bunches of iris 
leaves in the fall, and storing these leaves until 
needed.  The fibers are then harvested from the 
leaves. This naturally accomplished the pruning and 
mulching that modern horticulturists practice to 
maintain iris beds. 
 
The PCI borer (Amphipoea americana   var. 
pacifica  ) 
and iris borer are serious pest s of iris.  The iris borer 
stays in the rhizome th rough the winter, then 
metamorphose, coming out sometime in the spring as 
a nocturnal moth.  Controlling the moth when its 
flying, to prevent it from laying its eggs on the iris,

would control the borer.  At this time, it is 
recommended to dig the infected plant out entirely, 
put it a plastic bag, and put them in the garbage can 
to avoid contamination of other plants. 
 
Milkweed (Asclepias species) and dogbane 
( Apocynum cannibinum  ) were traditionally burned 
by native people in the fall to maintain vigorous plant 
production, to stimulate plant growth, to optimize 
long and abundant fiber production from leaves and 
stalks, and to stimulate seed production.  It is 
probable that iris was burned for the same reasons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
IRPU is readily available from native plant nurseries 
and seed companies within its range.  Seeds and 
plants of selected iris cultivars are available from 
many nurseries.  It is best to plant species from your 
local area, adapted to the specific site conditions 
where the plants are to be grown.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
American Iris Society.  SPCNI.  4333 Oak Hill Road. 
Oakland, CA 94605. 
 
Archer, W.A. 1957 .  Abstract of pharmacological 
research .  pp 108-131 IN: "Medicinal Uses of Plants" 
by Indian Tribes of Nevada, by Percy Train, James R. 
Henrichs and W. Andrew Archer.  Contributions 
Toward a Flora of Nevada, No. 45. Beltsville, MD: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Plant Industry 
Station. [Facsimile Reprint: Quarterman Publications, 
Lawrence, MA, 1978.] 
 
Balls, E.K. 1962 .  Early uses of California plants . 
University of California Press.  103 pp. 
 
Cohen, V.A. 1967.   Guide to the Pacific Coast irises .  
A monograph with drawings and photos.  British Iris 
Society.  This monograph has been reprinted by the 
Society for Pacific Coast  Native Iris (SPCNI).  4333 
Oak Hill Road, Oakland, California. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of Western Washington and 
Northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society. 414 pp. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
people of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5. U.S. Department of the Interior. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Region 1. Stillwater National 
Wildlife Refuge. 264 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1). University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.   The Jepson manual:  Higher 
plants of California .  University of California Press. 
1399 pp. 
 
Hunn, E. & J. Selam and family 1990.   Nch'i-Wana 
"The Big River."   Mid-Columbia Indians and Their 
Land.  University of Washington Press, Seattle and 
London. 378 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston & London. 382 pp. 
 
Lawyer, A. & L. Lawyer. January/February 1996.  
Growing and hybridizing your own iris .  Growing 
Native. The Newsletter of the Growing Native 
Research Institute. 15 pp. 
 
Lenz, L.W.A. 1958.   Revision of the Pacific Coast 
irises.   A monograph with drawings and site maps for 
both species and naturally occurring hybrids.  
Originally published in RSABG's publication.  Also 
in 1958, it has been reprinted by the Society for 
Pacific Coast Native Iris (SPCNI).  4333 Oak Hill 
Road. Oakland CA 94605. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 500 pp. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California.  878 pp.  
 
Moore, M. 1979 .   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press. 200 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society. 81 pp.

Schmidt, M.G. 1980.  Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press. 366 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Koeltz Scientific Books, USA\Germany.  
210 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Warburton, B. date unknown.   The world of irises.  
American Iris Society.  718  West 67th Street.  Tulsa, 
Oklahoma. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.