Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INKBERRY 
Ilex glabra (L.) Gray  
Plant Symbol = ILGL 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names  
Gallberry, bitter gallberry, winterberry, Canadian 
winterberry, evergreen winterberry, Appalachian tea 
 
Uses 
Inkberry leaves are brow sed by marsh rabbit and 
white tailed-deer, the fruits are important food for 
raccoon, coyote, and opossum when other sources are 
scarce.  The fruit is also eaten by at least 15 species 
of birds, including bobwhite quail and wild turkey.  
Inkberry provides cover for white-tailed deer, small 
rodents, and several species of birds.  Nectar of the 
flowers is an important source for honey production.   
 
Inkberry is coming to be recommended and used for 
ornament as one of the few evergreen shrubs that  
 
thrives in continually moist to wet sites and adapts to 
a wide range of light availability.  It provides a larger 
and faster growing alternative to boxwood hybrids, 
although it tends to be leggier, prone to stem 
breakage, and the rhizomatous plants tend to form 
large, expanding colonies.  Numerous cultivars of 
inkberry have been select ed and are commercially 
available.  Compared to  the wild types, these 
generally have a more compact, taller, and/or broader 
habit, smaller and darker leaves, greater cold 
hardiness, and/or more abundant fruit production.  
Selections are sometimes restricted to one or the 
other sex, and because the staminate and pistillate 
flowers are on different plants, both sexes must be 
present for fruit production.    
 ©  William S. Justice Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
  
Inkberry can be used for erosion control, watershed 
protection, and phosphate mine reclamation.  It is 
included in listings of potential new crops for 
Australia as a source of beverage -- presumably 
desirable for its caffeine.     
 
The fruit and leaves of various species of holly, 
presumably including inkberry, contain a mixture of 
the caffeine-like alkaloid theobromine, caffeine itself, 
and glycosides.  The Indian s of the southeastern US 
made a caffeinated tea fro m the leaves of yaupon 
holly ( Ilex vomitoria ).  Mate, or Paraguay tea, is 
made from the leaves of  Ilex paraguariensis, a holly 
tree indigenous to Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay.  
Mate contains caffeine and a natural alkaloid called 
mateine, a mildly stimulating relative of caffeine that 
tends not to produce side effects such as nervousness 
or sleeplessness.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Holly family (Aquifoliaceae).  Native, open 
evergreen shrubs, commonly growing 1.5-2(-3) 
meters tall, with numerous sprouts from thick, heavy, 
tuberous rhizomes, forming clusters and extensive, 
dense, colonial thickets.  Leaves are alternate, simple, 
entire or finely toothed toward the tip, obovate to 
oblong or elliptic, 2.5-6.5 cm long, evergreen,

leathery, shiny and dark green above, lighter and dull 
beneath.  Flowers are either staminate (male) or 
pistillate (female), borne on separate plants (the 
species dioecious); indi vidual flowers small, 
greenish-white and inconspicuous, the staminate 3-7 
in short-stalked clusters, the pistillate solitary in leaf 
axils.  Fruit is 5-7 mm in diameter, nearly black, 
shiny; seeds (pyrenes) 5-7, smooth.  The common 
name is in reference to the dark blue-black fruits.   
 
Distribution 
Inkberry occurs on the coastal plain of all US states 
along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, from Texas to 
Florida and northward to southern New Jersey, 
Maryland, and Delaware, including more inland 
localities in Pennsylvania and Arkansas.  It continues 
northward sporadically and uncommonly through 
New England into Nova Scotia, Canada.      
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Inkberry occurs primarily in pocosins, 
savannas, low woods, and pine barrens and 
woodlands.  It is a common understory species of 
several fire-climax communities and an invader of 
frequently burned areas.  On well-drained sites of 
bayland and pocosin communities, it is a dominant 
species.  It is a common shrub in loblolly-shortleaf 
pine communities, and with Wiregrass ( Aristida 
stricta ), it may be one of the most conspicuous 
members of the understory of longleaf pine forests in 
Florida.  Inkberry is shade tolerant and grows in both 
sunny and shaded habitats, on dry to wet sites, and on 
sandy to heavier peaty soils.  Flowering: March-June; 
fruiting: September-October, the fruits persisting into 
the following spring.  
 
General : Wildlife use of inkberry and the 
colonization of a variety of habitats suggest that the 
seeds are animal dispersed.  Germination may not 
occur for 2-3 years, and seedling growth and early 
development are slow.  Seedlings apparently grow 
best in partial shade.    
 
Management 
Fire top-kills inkberry but the species is adapted to a 
regime of recurrent fires.  Typically, the entire aerial 
portion of the stem dies, although light fires may only 
kill the most recent growth.  Re-growth occurs by 
resprouting from root crowns and rhizomes, most 
vigorously in the first post-fire year. 
 
Control : Successive annual fires will effectively kill 
inkberry, when management for cattle and 
commercial tree production call for complete control.  
Summer fires are most damaging but frequent winter 
fires also are effective for control.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of  Agriculture.”  These 
plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources. 
 
References 
Brizicky, G.K. 1964.   The genera of Celastrales in 
the southeastern United States .  J. Arnold Arb. 
45:206-234.    
 
Coladonato, M. 1991.   Ilex glabra. IN: W.C. Fischer 
(compiler).   The fire effects information system  [Data 
base]. U.S. Dept. of Agric., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1986.   Ilex glabra.  American Nurseryman 
164 (10):134 (with illust.).  
 
Dirr M.A. & J.H. Alexander 1991.   Ilex glabra, the 
inkberry holly .  Arnoldia (Jamaica Plain) 51:16-22.   
 
Florida Water Resource Management 1999.  
Florida’s hollies .  Florida Dept. of Environmental 
Protection, Internet site: 
<http://www.dep.state.fl.us/water/slerp/wetlands/Ilex.
htm> 
 
Perry, F.B. 1983.   Propagation of Ilex glabra and 
Rhododendron nudiflorum from softwood cuttings .  
Research report series - Alabama Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Auburn University, Auburn, 
Alabama. 
 
Woods, F.W. 1956.   Ilex glabra forma leucocarpa: A 
white-fruited holly.  Rhodora 58:25-26.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana

Edited 05dec00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.