Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BOWLTUBE IRIS 
Iris macrosiphon Torr. 
Plant Symbol = IRMA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Warning:  Fresh iris roots may be toxic. 
 
Ethnobotanic : Iris makes some of the finest cordage 
with fibers that are particularly strong and flexible. 
The fibers are fine like silk.  Only two fibers can be 
taken from each iris leaf margin with the remainder 
discarded.  Significant numbers of leaves were 
harvested in the fall and stored until needed.  Iris 
cordage was used for fishing nets, string, rope, 
snares, hairnets, and regalia. 
 
The men knotted the fishing nets from this material.  
Iris rope was used to catch  animals.  A deer rope is 
near 20 feet long with a  lasso at one end, and about 
half an inch in diameter.  This loop was set over a 
deer trail to catch the head or antlers.  Within the set 
loop over the trail was spread a delicate network of 
the same material to draw in the loop.  One Indian 
stated that "it takes nearly six weeks to make a rope 
twelve feet long." 
 
In spite of the tremendous labor of preparing this 
material, the iris fiber was one of the most generally 
employed in northwestern California.  The threads 
and cords of this fiber were used to make fishing 
nets, camping bags and snares for catching deer,  birds, and other game.  Since iris is fine and can be 
bent at sharp angles, it makes an excellent starting 
knot in coiled baskets. 
 
The Pomo placed acorn meal in a shallow pit and 
covered the meal with iris leaves before pouring 
water over the meal to l
each out tannic acid.  The 
Monache and the Southern Yokuts in California 
make flour from iris seed.   
 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
A poultice of the raw rhizom e is especially effective 
against staph sores.  Externally iris is successfully 
used in infected wounds, ulcers, fistulas and to take 
away freckles.  Only the  dry root should be used 
internally.  Iris is active as an cathartic, has a 
stimulating effect on the production of both 
pancreatic enzymes and bile, is a strong diuretic, and 
will stimulate both saliva and sweat.  This is a useful 
drug plant but in general should be used with care 
and preferably in combina tions where less energetic 
plants form the bulk of  a medicinal formula.  
 
Tea from iris roots was used for kidney trouble by 
several California Indian peoples (Murphy 1959).  
The Yana chewed iris roots to cure coughs.  The 
Modoc used an iris root decoction to soothe sore 
eyes.  A piece of iris root  was inserted in a tooth 
cavity to kill the nerve, so the tooth will come out.  
Roots were burned and the smoke inhaled to alleviate 
dizziness.  A root decoction was used as a cathartic 
and emetic, but large doses could cause severe 
digestive problems. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The beautiful and variable 
blossoms lend themselves to landscaping, where they 
naturalize and require minimal maintenance.  Native 
irises are free flowering, most are long lived, require 
very little attention, and provide an abundance of 
seeds.  Iris flowers attract  insects and birds.  Irises 
provide both nectar and insects to hummingbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description  
General : Iris Family (Iridaceae).  The native bowl-
tube iris  has green or blue-green leaves from 2-5 mm 
wide, generally colorless at  the bases that are longer 
than the stems.  It has golden yellow to apricot to

cream to deep blue-purple to violet flowers with 
rounded sepals.  It blooms from April to May.  This 
perennial, evergreen iris has one to two flowers close 
to the ground.  The rhiz omes average 8 mm in 
diameter. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  In California, bowl-tube iris does not occur on 
the west slopes of the outer Coast Ranges, but is 
found over a very large area throughout the rest of 
those ranges from Santa Cruz County northward. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : The plant grows in sun to broken shade 
with moderate moisture and porous soil.  This iris 
occurs in open to partly shaded slopes, in the foothill 
and north oak woodland, mixed evergreen, and mixed 
conifer communities, generally less than 1000 m in 
elevation.  Horticulturally, it is used for cover, 
edging, rock gardens, and variation in flower color.  
This species is more of an upland species than  Iris 
douglasiana .  This iris does not form clumps and 
must be started from seed.  It does not grow 
vigorously in the garden.   Iris fernaldii hybridizes 
with  Iris macrosiphon and the hybrid populations 
threaten the pure strains. 
 
General : The native irises are excellent in shade 
situations, even dense shade of walls and fences 
(Schmidt 1980).  They will tolerate sun for most of 
the day in mild areas, and should have afternoon 
shade and ample water in the interior regions.  These 
plants are intolerant of frequent summer water; they 
should not be planted near lawns or other moisture-
loving plants.  These plants require excellent 
drainage.  Compacted or other water-holding soils 
may need to be modified.  Fertilization increases 
biomass and seed production. 
 
Irises start growing with the first cool weather and 
rains in fall, reaching the height of their growth in 
spring and early summer.  
 
Propagation by Plant Division : Bowl-tube iris does 
not form clumps, and it is recommended that the 
plants be started from seed.  However, this iris is still 
clonal, radiating in growth outward from the center of 
the plant.  This iris can be propagated from plant 
division, in fall or winter after the first new roots are 
established but before the flowers form.  
 
Native irises in the wild tend to produce only a small, 
dry rhizome with stringy roots, which is difficult to 
dig.  Vigorous garden or greenhouse plants produce  firm, white, growing roots es
pecially in winter and 
spring growing seasons, and clumps are easily 
divided at those time.  Remove a new fan with fleshy 
roots set in a prepared site, water it, and provide 
shade for a few days if the plant is placed in full sun.  
Frequent division appears to keep the plants 
vigorous, as well as being the best method of 
increasing the supply of superior forms. 
 
Propagation by Seed : Iris seed is easily collected 
from the large capsules.   The seedpods from bowl-
tube iris are sometimes right on the ground, almost 
like a peanut.  The capsules turn from green to brown 
and open at the top when they  are ripe.  The ripe fruit 
disperse very rapidly.   Two days after splitting, the 
seed is gone.  Collect capsules carefully to avoid 
spilling seeds.  Each capsule has from 20 to 80 seeds.  
Seeds should be stored in paper envelopes at room 
temperature until they are planted. The seeds of all 
species will keep up to 10 years at room temperature. 
 
Plant seeds in 6-inch pots, using a combination of 
leaf mold and peat moss.  Cover seeds with 1/2 inch 
of same material.  Any good potting soil that's acidic 
is good for seed germination. 
 
After planting, over-winter the pots outdoors in 
November or December.  They will come up in 2-3 
months, depending on the weather.  Germination 
increases the second year, because there's always a 
percentage of hard seeds that won't germinate the 
first year.  Some seeds do not germinate until the 
second year, to increase the probability for good 
weather conditions and optimize germination 
success. 
 
Plant the seedlings in May,  when the young plants 
are usually 3 to 6 inches tall or even taller.  Plants are 
likely to require watering the first year while roots 
are being established.  Plant from 6 inches to one-
foot spacing.  If a natural look is desired, scatter and 
clump the plantings.  Plants will begin to bloom by 
their second year if growth has been continuous.  
 
Direct seeding is possible in places that can be left 
undisturbed, as among shrubs, or among low 
perennials where the seedlings can be sheltered.  If 
planting seeds in the ground, autumn is the best time 
for seeding; germination begins in two or three 
months and often continues beyond that time.  A 
friable seed mixture of sand , loam, and either peat or 
screened leaf mold is best, covering the seed with 
sphagnum moss to aid in preventing damping-off of 
seedlings.

Management 
In autumn old leaves should be removed from the 
center of large clumps, the foliage cut back, and a 
mulch applied, especially if the irises are being 
naturalized in a semi-dry area. Traditional resource 
management included harvesting huge bunches of iris 
leaves in the fall, and storing these leaves until 
needed.  The fibers are then harvested from the 
leaves. This naturally accomplished the pruning and 
mulching that modern horticulturists practice to 
maintain iris beds. 
 
The PCI borer (Amphipoea americana   var. pacifica ) 
and iris borer are serious pest s of iris.  The iris borer 
stays in the rhizome th rough the winter, then 
metamorphose, coming out sometime in the spring as 
a nocturnal moth.  Controlling the moth when its 
flying, to prevent it from laying its eggs on the iris, 
would control the borer.  At this time, it is 
recommended to dig the infected plant out entirely, 
put it a plastic bag, and put them in the garbage can 
to avoid contamination of other plants. 
 
Milkweed ( Asclepias species) and dogbane 
( Apocynum cannibinum ) were traditionally burned by 
native people in the fall to maintain vigorous plant 
production, to stimulate plant growth, to optimize 
long and abundant fiber production from leaves and 
stalks, and to stimulate seed production.  It is 
probable that iris was burned for the same reasons.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
IRMA is widely available through native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Seeds and plants of 
selected iris cultivars are available from many 
nurseries.  It is best to plant species from your local 
area, adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
American Iris Society.  SPCNI.  4333 Oak Hill Road, 
Oakland, California. 
 
Archer, W.A.  1957.   Abstract of Pharmacological 
research .  pp. 108-131 IN: "Medicinal Uses of Plants 
by Indian Tribes of Nevada," by Percy Train, James 
R. Henrichs and W. Andrew Archer.  Contributions 
Toward a Flora of Nevada, No. 45. Beltsville, 
Maryland: USDA, Plant Industry Station. [Facsimile  Reprint: Quarterman Publications, Lawrence, 
Massachusetts, 1978.] 
 
Balls, E.K. 1962
.  Early uses of California plants.   
University of California Press. 103 pp. 
 
Cohen, V.A. 1967.   Guide to the Pacific Coast irises .  
A monograph with drawings and photos.  British Iris 
Society.  This monograph has been reprinted by the 
Society for Pacific Coast  Native Iris (SPCNI).  4333 
Oak Hill Road, Oakland, California 94605. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the Cattail-Eater Northern Paiute 
People of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5. U.S. Department of the Interior.  Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Region 1.  Stillwater National 
Wildlife Refuge. 264 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10 (1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.   The Jepson manual.  Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press. 
1399 pp. 
 
Hunn, E. & J. Selam and family 1990.   Nch'i-Wana 
"The Big River."   Mid-Columbia Indians and Their 
Land.  University of Washington Press.  Seattle and 
London.  378 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America.   Shambhala. Boston & London. 382 pp. 
 
Lawyer, A. & L. Lawyer (J anuary/February) 1996.  
Growing and hybridizing your own iris .  Growing 
Native.  The Newsletter of the Growing Native 
Research Institute.15 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts a guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Lenz, L.W.A. 1958.   Revision of the Pacific Coast 
irises.   A monograph with drawings and site maps for 
both species and naturally occurring hybrids.  
Originally published in RSABG's publication.  Also 
in 1958, it has been reprinted by the Society for

Pacific Coast Native Iris (SPCNI).  4333 Oak Hill 
Road, Oakland, California.  
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.  A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California.  878 pp.  
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
Southern California.   Riverside Museum Press. 155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press.  366 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.   Koeltz Scientific Books. USA\Germany.  
210 pp. 
 
Warburton, B. date unknown.   American Iris Society.  
718 West 67th Street, Tulsa, Oklahoma. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.