Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YAUPON 
Ilex vomitoria  Ait. 
Plant Symbol = ILVO  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Caution: Poisonous plant -berries can cause nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. 
 
Alternate names 
Yaupon holly, cassena, cassina, cassine, evergreen 
cassena, evergreen holly, Indian blackdrink, 
Christmas berry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Most if not all of the Native American 
tribes in the Southeastern United States including the 
Alabama, Cherokee, Creek, Natchez, and Seminole 
used Yaupon for medicinal as well as other purposes.  
A decoction was made from the leaves and shoots, 
called “black drink”, which was used medicinally, 
ceremonially, and was also served as a social drink.  
The leaves and shoots, which contain caffeine, were 
roasted in an earthenware container over a fire, much 
like coffee beans are roasted.  The black drink was 
drunk socially and offered  to visitors to indicate 
friendly intensions.  Its primary medicinal use was as 
an emetic, to induce vomiti ng and as a purgative or 
laxative.  It was taken to cure “a tremor in the 
nerves.”  The drink was used in ceremonial medicine 
as an emetic to “clear out  the system and produce 
ceremonial purity.”  In so me tribes, women and boys 
were prohibited from imbibing the drink.  The 
Florida Seminoles still brew a “black drink” for their 
annual Green Corn Dance,  although it is not always 
made with Yaupon, but from other plants.  The plant  was also used as a hallucinogen to “evoke ecstasies.”  
The bark was used to tr
eat nightmares where the 
patient sees ghosts and talks during sleep.  Sore eyes 
were treated with eyewash  made by scraping off the 
inner bark and boiling it in water for several hours.  
The wood was used to make arrows and ramrods that 
were used in hunting and fishing.  In addition to 
trading Yaupon with nearby neighbors, Native 
American tribes in the Southeastern United States 
probably increased the distribution of yaupon.  There 
is evidence that they transplanted and cared for the 
trees (see Hammett 1992 for references).   
 
Wildlife : The showy red berries of yaupon attract 
wildlife and are an important food for many 
songbirds, gamebirds and waterfowl.  Bluebirds, 
catbirds, mockingbirds, robins, yellow-shafted 
flickers, red-naped sapsuckers, yellow-bellied 
sapsuckers, white-throated sparrows and cedar 
waxwings are among the many songbirds that feed on 
the berries.  Florida ducks, black ducks, mourning 
doves, ruffed grouse, bobwhite quail and wild turkeys 
also consume the berries.  Armadillos, black bears, 
gray foxes, western foxes, raccoons and skunks eat 
the fruits.  White-tailed de er browse the foliage and 
twigs.  The evergreen nature of the yaupon is 
important to wildlife as it provides cover during the 
winter months.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Holly Family (Aquifo liaceae).  Yaupon is a 
native, perennial, evergreen shrub or a small tree (8 
m tall).  The leathery leaf blades (1 to 2.5 cm long) 
are alternate, elliptical or  oval with shallow teeth at 
the margins.  The upper surface is a lustrous green 
with a lighter green lower surface.  The leaves 
contain caffeine.  Yaupon is the only native plant in 
North America that contains  caffeine.  Flowers (5 to 
5.5 mm) with four greenish white petals appear from 
March through May.  Blooms appear on axillary 
clusters on year-old wood.  Male flowers appear in 
clusters while female flowers grow either solitarily or 
in pairs.  Young stems are covered with a purplish 
down which changes to whitish gray with age.  The 
bark is light in color, from white to gray.  The 
heartwood is hard and close-grained.  Female plants

have beautiful, round fruits that are a translucent red 
(5 to 6 mm in diameter) and contain four nutlets.  The 
fruits frequently stay on the bush until the following 
spring.   
 
Distribution: Yaupon occurs in the Coastal Plain of 
the Southeastern United States.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: Yaupon generally occurs in coastal areas in 
well-drained sandy soils.  It can be found on the 
upper edges of brackish and salt marshes, sandy 
hammocks, coastal sand dunes, inner-dune 
depressions, sandhills, maritime forests, nontidal 
forested wetlands, well-drained forests and pine 
flatwoods.  
 
Establishment 
Yaupon is a picturesque tree with an upright stature 
and irregular branches.  Th e plants may be used as 
screens, hedges and mass plantings.  They make good 
specimen trees and can be espaliered or used as a 
topiary plant.  The trees are one of the toughest of the 
hollies, easy to transplant, medium to fast growing 
and grow well on a variety of soils.  They can grow 
in dry to fairly wet soils and are tolerant of salt spray.  
They make excellent plants for coastal areas but also 
do well a considerable distance from the coast.  
Yaupon is better adapted to warmer climates than 
other evergreen hollies.  Be sure to include at least 
one male plant in order to insure adequate pollination 
for fruit set.   
 
Management 
The tree commonly forms thickets by sending up 
suckers that sprout from the roots.  The tree responds 
well to pruning and shearing.  Limbs may be 
removed in order to expose the bark, which is a 
lovely grayish white.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Yaupon has no serious pest or disease problems 
although leafminers have been reported to 
occasionally be a problem. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Brown, R.C. 1994.   Florida’s first people: 12,000 
years of human history . Pineapple Press, Inc., 
Sarasota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants. 
Fifth Edition.  Stipes Publishing, Champaign, Illinois.  
1187 pp. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol 2.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  933 
pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft 1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp. 
 
Hammett, J.E. 1992.   The shapes of adaptation: 
Historical ecology of anthropogenic landscapes in 
the Southeastern United States.   Landscape Ecology 
7(2):  123-135.  
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Merrill, W. L. 1979.   The beloved tree: Ilex vomitoria 
among the Indians of the Southeast and adjacent 
region  pp 40-82  in Charles M. Hudson, Editor.  
Black Drink: A Native Ameri can Tea.  University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  175 pp.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001). 
 
Neill, W.T. 1956.  Florida’s Seminole Indians.  
Second Edition.  Great Outdoors Publishing Co., St. 
Petersburg, Florida.  128 pp.

Small, J.K. 1933.  Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Swanton, J.R. 2000.   Creek religion and medicine .  
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska.  
684 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes .  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst.  328 pp. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory 2001, May.   Fire Effects Information 
System, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [19 June 2001]. 
 
Whitcomb, C.E. 1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants .  Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma. 
740 pp. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.