Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
IFIT 
Intsia bijuga  (Colebr.) O. 
Kuntze 
Plant Symbol = INBI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and USDA NRCS Pacific Basin 
 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Synonyms: Afzelia bijuga   Albizia bijuga , Intsia 
retusa , Macrolobium bijugum , Eperua decandra  
 
Common names: ifit, ifet ifil, ipil, Moluccan 
ironwood, Bornec teak, merbau ipil, ife-lele, kwila, 
kayu besi, Vesi, Go Nuoc, bendora, lumpaw, and 
marabow. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The ifit tree plays an important role in  
Polynesian life during cultural celebrations, 
woodcarving, canoe building, and home construction.   
 
Commercial : Ifit was an important forest pre-World 
War II species used in churches, houses, and other 
large wooden structures.  Ifit wood flooring, beams, 
and windowsills were common in almost all of the 
homes before the war.  Other wood uses include: 
high class exterior windows, solid panel doors, 
interior trim, framing, weatherboarding, furniture, 
stairs, handrails, poles, turnery, carving, musical 
instruments, building bridges, wharves, sluices and 
sheet piles. 
 
Wildlife:  The tree is good for bird nesting and grazing 
for feral deer and pigs. 
 
Medical : The leaves and bark are used medicinally 
and the seeds are edible.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values. 
 
Description  
General: Family (Leguminoseae).  Ifit is a medium to 
large, slow growing, evergr een tree.  At maturity, it 
ranges in height from 7 to 45 m tall, but rarely 
exceeds 25 m in Guam.  The trunk is usually 0.5 to 
5m, crooked, and often buttresses at the base.  The 
buttresses are formed by woody roots expanding 
vertically creating radial walls extending from the 
sides of the trunk .  The rooting system allows the 
tree to cover large areas containing rocks and thin 
soil, reduce competition, and  increase its resistance to 
uprooting during cyclones. 
 
The wood is strong and reddish brown with the 
heartwood yellow to orange brown.  It has a high 
resistance to attacks by termites. Aging bark is red or 
bronze. The bark contains tannins, and a dye can be 
extracted from both the wood and bark. 
 
The crown in full sunlight is usually upright, 
however, under shady conditions the crown will 
spread.  The alternate compound leaves are 7-15 cm 
long, with 1-2 pairs of o pposite, broadly elliptic to 
subrotund dark green coriaceous leaflets, each about 
8-12 cm long and 5-8 cm wide on short petiolules, 
apex obtuse, and slightly symmetric sides.   
 
Flowers grow in puberulent, terminal clusters of 
corymbose panicles, 6-10 cm long.  Single petals are  
 © Lincoln Moore.  National Plant Data Center

white, or slightly pinkish, with three stamens.  The 
filaments are about 2.5 cm long.   
 
The fruit are long, thick, rigid, leathery, oblong or 
pear-shaped green pods up to 30 cm long and 10 cm 
wide, which become dark brown at maturity.  Each 
pod can contain 2 to 8 seeds varying in size and 
shape from round to slightly kidney shape. 
 
Distribution: Ifit is native from the Indian Ocean 
eastward to Polynesia.  It is found throughout 
American Samoa, Austra lia, Burma, Cambodia, 
India, Indonesia, Madagascar (at low altitudes in the 
west), Malaysia, Myanmar, Pacific Islands, Papua 
New Guinea, Philippines, Seychelles, Tanzania, 
Thailand, and Vietnam.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation:   Ifit grows best in areas receiving 2000  
mm of rainfall annually, but will tolerate long dry 
seasons.  It prefers rocky well-drained soils, strongly 
acidic to strongly alkaline.  While intolerant to saline 
soils, ifit will tolerate a wide range of soil types 
including inundated inland sites.   
 
Although, it is a lowland, tropical rain forest tree 
often in areas bordering  mangroves, swamps, rivers, 
or floodplains, ifit will grow inland up to 600 m. 
 
Propagation by seed : Ifit is easily propagated from 
seed or stem cutting.  Its seed coat is very hard and 
impermeable to water.  A variety of treatments are 
available to pretreat the seed prior to sowing, 
allowing water to enter the internal seed tissue.  One 
effective seed pretreatment involves nicking the seed 
with a large nail clipper or filing the outer seed coat, 
opposite the hilum (scar), then soaking for 12-24 
hours to ensure the seeds swell with water.  Sow 
pretreated seed in a ver tical orientation with the 
hilum down and at least 2.5cm deep.  Treated seeds 
should germinate in four-to-seven days while 
untreated seeds could take two months or more  
because of the water repelling seed coat.   
 
Seedling production : Treated seeds should be sowed 
in trays or individual planting containers.  If directly 
sowed in trays, seeds should be sown in a moist 
potting medium with hilum positioned downward.  
There should be 5cm between seeds and 15 cm 
between rows.  Care should be taken to lightly tamp 
the seed to ensure all sides are lightly covered with 
the potting medium.  Ifit seed will germinate in 7-9 
days after sowing.  After germination, prick out the 
seedling after seed leaves have dropped off to avoid  stunting.  Young seedlings should be held for 10-18 
months before outplanting   
 
Containerized seedlings 
produced for large-scale 
reforestation should be started by sowing one treated 
seed into a ridge one-gallon root-trainer container.  
Seedling production in root-trainer pots and grow 
bags allows adequate root growth in a confined 
space, increases root to sh oot ratio, and reduces wind 
throw and shock during extraction and replanting.   
The potting medium can be screened “top soil” with 
rocks, large organic matter, and hard soil clods 
removed.  Top soil potting medium must be amended 
with the proper proportion of composted organic 
matter and sand.  Irrigation must be used if seedlings 
are planted during the dry season or if the potting 
medium becomes dry.  Seedlings are usually ready 
for outplanting in the field in about 12 weeks.  
Seedling should be 25 to 16 cm 
   
Propagation by cuttings : Propagation is primarily 
through bare root seedling, although stump cutting 
has been used. 
 
Management  
General: Young ifit plantings must be protected from 
wind if they are expected  to produce merchantable 
stems within 80-100 years.  Planting around or near 
the beach should be  avoided because of salt spray and 
the plant’s intolerance to saline conditions.  Trees 
growing around homes, public buildings, parks, and 
other common areas should be protected from lawn 
mowers and other lawn equipment.  Under natural 
conditions, ifit appears to perform well because of its 
wide growing range and tolerance of differing 
environmental conditions.  Trees managed for high 
value timber in both natural and planted areas must 
be thin to a level that will support maximum 
production based on land use and soil type.   
      
Pest : The most notable pest of ifit is the psyllid.   
They feed on the young expanding leaves and stems 
during the period of stem extension and on small 
developing flowers during panicle growth.  This 
feeding can result in defoliation and growth loss.   
 
References 
International Tropical Tree Organization. 1996. 
Annual review and assessment of the world tropical 
timber situation.  
(
http://www.itto.or.jp/live/PageDisplayHandler?pageI
d=199) [online: cited 6 April 2001]. Yokohama. 
 
Marler, T.E. & J.H. Lawrence. 1994.  Ifit: Intsia 
bijuga- the territorial tree of Guam.   Gaum

Department of Agricultural, Forestry and Soil 
Resource Division, USDA Forest Service and the 
Department of Defense.   
 
National Academy of Sciences. 1979. Tropical 
legumes: resources for the future . National Academy 
of Sciences, Washington. 
 
Ng, P.K.L. & Y.C. Wee (eds.). 1994.  The Singapore 
Red Data Book . The Nature Society, Singapore.   
 
Papua New Guinea Department of Forests. 1989. 
Facts and figures 1989 . Boroko NCD: Papua New 
Guinea Department of Forests.  
 
Soerianegara s, I. and R. H. M. J. Lemmens, 1993. 
Plant  resources of southeast Asia.  No. 5(1). Timber 
trees: major commercial timbers.  Pudoc Scientific 
Publishers, Wageningen.  
 
USDA-NRCS.  2006.  The PLANTS Database . 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) [online: cited 03 April 2006]. 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Kellie King 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
John Lawrence   
USDA NRCS Pacific Basin Area Office  
Mongmong, Guam 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 06apr00lmm; 20jul05 rln; 4Aug2005 rln; 3mar06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.