Plant Guide
PALEYELLOW IRIS 
Iris pseudacorus L.  
Plant Symbol =  IRPS 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Montana State Office  
 
Figure  1. Paleyellow iris flowers. Photo by Jane Mangold, Montana 
State University, Bozeman, Montana  
 
Alternate Names 
Yellowflag iris  
 
Uses  
Paleyellow iris has been used as a horticultural plant.  
Because p aleyellow iris tolerates low oxygen, it lives in 
areas with high levels  of soluble organics and it may 
reduce the organic load by 25% over one year.   Within a 
24- hour period, rhizome reductions of Escherichia coli  
were 50 percent, Sal monella 70 percent, and Enterocoli  
60 percent.   It has been suggested that paleyellow iris can 
r emove heavy metals efficiently and economically from 
wastewater because of its ability to absorb the metals and 
survive in unfavorable conditions.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s cu rrent status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   Paleyellow 
iris is listed as an  invasive, banned, prohibited, 
designated, or noxious weed in Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, Montana, New Hampshire, Oreg on, and 
Washington.  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.   Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agri culture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for furt her 
information.  This species is weedy in many riparian 
habitats.    
 
Description  
General : Paley ellow iris is perennial and grows from a 
stout rhizome ranging in diameter from 0.4 to 1.6 inches 
(1 -4 centimeters).   The sap of the rhizome is black. Roots 
are n ormally four to eight inches (10- 20 centimeters) 
long, but may reach lengths of 12 inches (30 centimeters). 
The hairless (glabrous) plants form clones when rhizomes 
separate.   Each individual (ramet) produces 10 leaves 
covered with a fine waxy powder giving  the leaves a 
whitish or bluish (glaucous) cast.   The sword-shaped 
leaves have a raised midrib and are about 0.4 to 1.2 inches 
(10 -30 centimeters) wide.   Leaves range from 20 to 40 
inches (50 -100 centimeters) in length, or about as long as 
the flowering stem .  Typical of iris, flowers form on a 
leafless stalk (peduncle) that is round in cross -section and 
is often branched.   Beneath each flower is a large solitary 
bract (spathe), with thin, dry, margins that lack green 
color (scarious).   Flower pedicels are about  1.5 to three 
inches (4 -8 centimeters) long, about the length of the 
ovary.   Flowers are about three to four inches (8 -10 
centimeters) in diameter, and vary in color from pale 
yellow to nearly orange, pale yellow being the most 
common color (see Figure 1).   There are six perianth 
segments (sepals and petals) fused at their bases to form a 
tube and situated on top of the ovary.   The sepals are 
variable in form but generally curve outward, have short 
claws, are commonly purple- veined, and have an orange 
spot nea r the base.   The petals are smaller than the sepals 
and curve upward.   The style has three petal -like yellow 
branches, and on the underside near the tip, is a small lip -
like stigma.   The three stamens are hidden beneath the 
three style branches.   The elliptic capsules are 1.5 to three 
inches (4 -8 centimeters) long and have three chambers 
each with two rows of seeds.   The seeds are smooth, disc-