Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FERNALD’S IRIS 
Iris fernaldii R.C. Foster 
Plant Symbol = IRFE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Warning: Fresh iris roots may be toxic. 
 
Ethnobotanic : Flour was made from iris seed by the 
Monache and the Southern Yokuts in California.  The 
Pomo placed acorn meal in a shallow pit and covered 
the meal with iris leaves before pouring water over 
the meal to leach out tannic acid.  
 
Iris makes some of the finest cordage.  The fibers are 
particularly strong and flexible.  Only two fibers can 
be taken from each iris leaf margin.  Huge numbers 
of leaves were harvested in the fall and stored until 
needed.  Iris cordage was used for fishing nets, string, 
rope, snares, hairnets, camping bags, and regalia.  
The fibers are fine like silk, but surprisingly strong.  
The iris leaves were gather ed in large bundles and a 
single silky fiber was taken from each margin of the 
leaf.  None of the other fibers were used. In spite of 
the tremendous labor of preparing this material, the 
iris fiber was one of the most generally employed in 
northwestern California.  Since iris is fine and can be 
bent at sharp angles, it also makes an excellent 
starting knot in coiled baskets. 
 
Using a mussel-shell or abalone "thumbnail," the 
women stripped the fibers from the leaves.  The 
fibers are detached from the leaves and scraped clean 
of all tissues.  The threads were twisted on the bare  thigh by the men, mostly while sitting around in their 
sweathouses.  The men knotted the material into 
fishing nets.  To catch deer, a rope was made of about 
20 feet in length with lasso at one end and about half 
an inch in diameter.  This loop was set over a deer 
trail to catch the head or antlers.  Within the set loop 
over the trail was spread a delicate network of the 
same material to draw in th
e loop.  One Indian stated 
that "it takes nearly six weeks to make a rope twelve 
feet long." 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
A poultice of the raw rhizom e is especially effective 
against staph sores.  Extern ally, iris is successfully 
used in infected wounds, ulcers, fistulas and to take 
away freckles.  Only the  dry root should be used 
internally.  Iris is active as a cathartic, has a 
stimulating effect on the production of both 
pancreatic enzymes and bile, is a strong diuretic, and 
will stimulate both saliva and sweat.  This is a useful 
drug plant but should be used with care and 
preferably in combinations where less energetic 
plants form the bulk of  a medicinal formula.  
 
Tea from iris roots was used for kidney trouble by 
several California Indian peoples (Murphey 1959).  
The Yana chewed iris roots to cure coughs.  The 
Modoc used an Iris root decoction to soothe sore 
eyes.  A piece of iris root  was inserted in a tooth 
cavity to kill the nerve, so the tooth would come out.  
Roots were burned and the smoke inhaled to alleviate 
dizziness.  A root decoction was used as a cathartic 
and emetic, but large doses could cause severe 
digestive problems. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The beautiful and variable 
blossoms lend themselves to landscaping, where they 
require minimal maintenance.   Native irises are free 
flowering, most are long lived, require very little 
attention, and provide an abundance of seeds.  In 
some situations, such as pastures, iris can be invasive.  
Iris flowers attract insects and birds while providing 
both nectar and insects to hummingbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Iris Family (Iridaceae).   Iris fernaldii has 
narrowed; dark gray-green leaves with beet red

staining at the base and often up the broad stems and 
even into the spathes. It has cream-yellowish flowers 
with lavender to red-brown veining and blooms from 
April-May.  This perennia l, evergreen iris has two 
flowers to a stem.  The  rhizomes average 6 mm in 
diameter. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Fernald’s iris grows in woods from Santa Cruz 
north to Sonoma, Solano, and Lake Counties in 
California. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It is able to tolerate sun to high shade, 
and requires moderate moisture.  In the wild, 
Fernald’s iris grows in sh ady places from 50 to 2000 
m in elevation.  This iris is native to shady sloped in 
the mixed evergreen forest.  Horticulturally, it is used 
for borders, among trees and shrubs.  This iris is not a 
clumping form; it will reseed densely in good 
conditions.   Iris fernaldii  hybridizes with  Iris 
macrosiphon  and the hybrid populations threaten the 
pure strains. 
 
The native irises are excellent in shade situations, 
even dense shade of walls and fences (Schmidt 
1980).  They will tolerate sun for most of the day in 
mild areas, and should have afternoon shade and 
ample water in the interior regions.  These plants are 
intolerant of frequent summer water; they should not 
be planted near lawns or other moisture-loving 
plants.  These plants require excellent drainage.  
Compacted or other water-holding soils may need to 
be modified.  Fertilization increases biomass and 
seed production. 
 
When allowed to increase freely, plants will 
naturalize and eventually  form extensive ground 
cover.  Unless the seed vessels are removed there will 
be many volunteer plants, but if inferior flower size 
or color appears it should be culled immediately. 
 
Irises start growing with the first cool weather and 
rains in fall, reaching the height of their growth in 
spring and early summer. 
 
Propagation by Plant Division : Iris species are 
clonal, radiating in their growth outward from the 
center.  The best propagation method for these is 
division, in fall or winter after the first new roots are 
established but before the flowers form.  
 
Native irises in the wild tend to produce only a small, 
dry rhizome with stringy roots which is difficult to 
dig.  Vigorous garden or greenhouse plants produce 
firm, white, growing roots es pecially in winter and 
spring growing seasons, and clumps are easily 
divided at those time.  Remove a new fan with fleshy 
roots set in a prepared site, water it, and provide 
shade for a few days if the plant is placed in full sun.  
Frequent division appears to keep the plants 
vigorous, as well as being the best method of 
increasing the supply of superior forms. 
 
Propagation by Seed : Iris seed is easily collected 
from the large capsules.  The capsules turn from 
green to brown and open at the top when they are 
ripe.  You have to watch them closely, they split very 
rapidly, then two days later the seed is spilled out.  
Collect capsules carefully to avoid spilling seeds.  
Each capsule contains from 20 to 80 seeds. 
 
Seeds should be stored in paper envelopes at room 
temperature until they are planted. The seeds of all 
species will keep up to 10 years at room temperature. 
 
Plant seeds in 6-inch pots, using a combination of 
leaf mold and peat moss.  Cover seeds with 1/2 inch 
of same material.  Any good potting soil that's acidic 
is good for seed germination. 
 
After planting, over-winter the pots outdoors in 
November or December.  They will come up in 2-3 
months, depending on the weather.  Germination 
increases the second year, because there's always a 
percentage of a hard seed that won't germinate the 
first year.  Part of the seed  waits for the next year, to 
increase the probability for good weather conditions 
and optimize germination success. 
 
Plant the seedlings in May,  when the young plants 
are usually 3 to 6 inches tall or even taller.  Plants are 
likely to require watering the first year while roots 
are being established.  Plant from 6 inches to one-
foot when spacing.  If a natural look is desired, 
scatter and clump the plantings.  Plants will begin to 
bloom by their second year if growth has been 
continuous.  
 
Direct seeding is possible in places that can be left 
undisturbed, as among shrubs, or among low 
perennials where the seedlings can be sheltered.  If 
planting seeds in the ground, autumn is the best time 
for seeding; germination begins in two or three 
months and often continues beyond that time.  A 
friable seed mixture of sand , loam, and either peat or 
screened leaf mold is best, covering the seed with

sphagnum moss to aid in preventing damping-off of 
seedlings. 
 
Management 
In autumn old leaves should be removed from the 
center of large clumps, the foliage cut back, and a 
mulch applied, especially if the irises are being 
naturalized in a semi-dry area.  Traditional resource 
management included harvesting huge bunches of iris 
leaves in the fall, and storing these leaves until 
needed.  The fibers are then harvested from the 
leaves.  This naturally  accomplished the pruning and 
mulching that modern horticulturists practice to 
maintain iris beds. 
 
The PCI borer (Amphipoea americana  var. pacifica  ) 
and iris borer are serious pest s of iris.  The iris borer 
stays in the rhizome th rough the winter then 
metamorphose, coming out sometime in the spring as 
a nocturnal moth.  Controlling the moth when its 
flying, to prevent it from laying its eggs on the Iris, 
would control the borer.  At this time, it is 
recommended to dig the infected plant out entirely, 
put it a plastic bag, and put them in the garbage can 
to avoid contamination of other plants. 
 
Milkweed ( Asclepias species) and dogbane 
( Apocynum cannibinum ) were traditionally burned by 
native people in the fall to maintain vigorous plant 
production, to stimulate plant growth, to optimize 
long and abundant fiber production from leaves and 
stalks, and to stimulate seed production.  It is 
probable that iris was burned for the same reasons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
IRFE is widely available through native plant 
nurseries throughout its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
American Iris Society.  SPCNI.  4333 Oak Hill Road, 
Oakland, California. 
 
Archer, W.A. 1957.   Abstract of Pharmacological 
Research .  pp. 108-131 IN: "Medicinal Uses of Plants 
by Indian Tribes of Nevada," by Percy Train, James 
R. Henrichs and W. Andrew Archer. Contributions 
Toward a Flora of Nevada, No. 45. Beltsville, MD: 
USDA, Plant Industry Station. [Facsimile Reprint:  Quarterman Publications, Lawrence, Massachusets, 
1978.] 
 
Balls, E.K. 1962. 
Early uses of California plants .  
University of California Press.  103 pp. 
 
Cohen, V.A. 1967.   Guide to the Pacific Coast irises .  
A monograph with drawings and photos.  British Iris 
Society.  This monograph has been reprinted by the 
Society for Pacific Coast  Native Iris (SPCNI), 4333 
Oak Hill Road, Oakland, California. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
Northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak. An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
People of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5.  USDI, FWS, Region 1, Stillwater 
National Wildlife Refuge.  264 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington . University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of Cal ifornia.  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hunn, E. & J. Selam and family. 1990.   Nch'i-Wana 
"The Big River ".  Mid-Columbia Indians and their 
land .  University of Washington Press, Seattle and 
London.  378 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston & London.  382 pp. 
 
Lawyer, A. and L. (Jan uary/February) 1996.  
Growing and hybridizing your own iris.   Growing 
Native .  The Newsletter of the Growing Native 
Research Institute. 15 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.   
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Lenz, L,W.A. 1958.   Revision of the Pacific Coast 
irises. A monograph with drawings and site maps for 
both species and naturally occurring hybrids .  
Originally published in RSABG's publication Also in 
1958, it has been reprinted  by the Society for Pacific

Coast Native Iris (SPCNI), 4333 Oak Hill Road, 
Oakland, California. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.  A glora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California.  878 pp.  
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California . Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
pla nts.  University of California Press.  366 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Koeltz Scientific Books. USA\Germany.  
210 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990412. 
 
Warburton, Bee. date unknown.  The world of irises.  
American Iris Society, 718  West 67th Street, Tulsa, 
Oklahoma. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.