Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN BLUE FLAG  
Iris missouriensis  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = IRMI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Blue flag, flag lily, liver lily, water flag, snake lily, 
wild iris, lirio, Rocky Mountain iris 
 
Uses 
Warning: Fresh iris roots and rhizomes may be 
toxic .
 
Ethnobotanic : Iris makes some of the finest cordage; 
the fibers are particularly  strong and flexible.  Iris 
cordage was used for fishing nets, string, rope, 
snares, hairnets, and regalia.  These fibers are very 
fine and silky, but surprisingly strong.  The threads 
and cords of this fiber were used to make fishing  nets, camping bags and snares for catching deer, 
birds, and other game.  In spite of the tremendous 
labor of preparing this material, the iris fiber was one 
of the most generally employed in northwestern 
California.  
 
Rope was made from fibers, which occur, on the 
outer margins of iris leaves. Huge bunches of leaves 
were harvested in the fall and stored until needed.  A 
single silky fiber was taken from each margin of the 
leaf.  None of the other fibers were used.  The men 
always knotted the fishing nets.  A deer rope is near 
20 feet long with a lasso at one end, and about half an 
inch in diameter.  This loop
 was set over a deer trail 
to catch the head or antlers.   Within the set loop over 
the trail was spread a delicate network of the same 
material to draw in the loop .  One Indian stated that 
"it takes nearly six weeks to make a rope twelve feet 
long."  
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
A poultice of the raw rhizom e is especially effective 
against staph sores.  Externally iris rhizomes are 
successfully used on infected  wounds, ulcers, fistulas 
and to take away freckles.  Only the dried iris root or 
rhizome should be used internally.  Iris is active as a 
cathartic, has a stimulating effect on the production 
of both pancreatic enzymes and bile, is a strong 
diuretic, and will stimulate both saliva and sweat.  
This is a useful medicinal plant but in general should 
be used with care and preferably in combinations 
where less energetic plants forming the bulk of a 
medicinal formula.   
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The beautiful and variable 
blossoms lend themselves to landscaping, where they 
naturalize and require minimal maintenance.  Native 
irises are free flowering, most are long lived, require 
very little attention, and provide an abundance of 
seeds.  Iris flowers attract both insects and 
hummingbirds.   
 
Invasive Potential : Western blue flag is considered a 
noxious weed in pastures, because leaves are 
unpalatable and bitter.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Iris Family (Iridaceae).  Western blue flag is 
a perennial herb, usually evergreen and growing from 
a creeping, tuberous rhizome.  Rhizomes on blue flag 
are between 20-30 mm in di ameter, quite large for a 
native iris.  The leaves are long and linear with 
parallel venation, 3-9 mm wide, and sometimes 
purplish.  Stems are 2-5 dm  and sometimes branched.  
Blossoms of  Iris missouriensis  are pale lilac to 
whitish with lilac-purple veins. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
The native irises are excellent in shade situations, 
even dense shade of walls and fences (Schmidt 
1980).  They will tolerate sun for most of the day in 
mild areas, and should have afternoon shade and 
ample water in the interior regions.  These plants are 
intolerant of frequent summer water; they should not 
be planted near lawns or other moisture-loving 
plants.  However,  Iris missouriensis does need 
irrigation to get established.  Fertilization increases 
biomass and seed production.  Irises start growing 
with the first cool weather  and fall rains, reaching the 
height of their growth in spring and early summer.  
This iris is rhizomatous, forms clumps, and 
propagates readily from plant division in fall or 
winter. 
 
Propagation by Plant Division : In the wild, Iris 
missouriensis  tends to produce only a small, dry 
rhizome with stringy roots.  Vigorous garden or 
greenhouse plants produce firm, white, growing roots 
especially during the winter and spring growing 
seasons, allowing easy division of clumps.  Remove a 
new rhizome fan with fleshy roots and set it in a 
prepared site.  Keep th e newly planted rhizome 
watered so that it is moist, and provide shade for a 
few days if the plant is placed in full sun.  Frequent 
division appears to keep the plants vigorous, as well 
as being the best method of increasing the supply. 
 
Propagation by Seed : Iris seeds are easily collected 
from the large capsules.  These capsules turn from 
green to brown and open at the top when ripe.  Care 
must be taken when handling seeds because they split 
very rapidly; two days after ripening the seed has 
spilled out.  Collect capsules carefully to avoid 
spilling seeds; each capsule has  from 20 to 80 seeds.  
Seeds should be stored in paper envelopes at room 
temperature until they are planted.  The seeds of all 
species will keep up to 10 years at room temperature. 
 
Plant seeds in 6-inch pots, using a combination of 
leaf mold and peat moss.  Cover seeds with 1/2 inch 
of same material.  Any good potting soil that's acidic 
is good for seed germination.  Keep soil moist but not 
wet.  After planting, over-winter the pots outdoors in 
November or December.  They will come up in 2-3 
months, depending on the weather.  Germination 
increases the second year, because there's always a 
percentage of hard seeds that won't germinate the 
first year.  Delaying germination until the next year, 
to increase the probability for good weather 
conditions and optimi ze germination success 
enhances seedling survival. 
 
Plant the seedlings outdoors in May, when the young 
plants are usually 3 to 6 inches tall or even taller.  
Plants are likely to require watering the first year 
during roots establishment.  Plant from 6 inches to 
one-foot spacing.  If a natural look is desired, scatter 
and clump the plantings.  Plants will begin to bloom 
by their second year if growth has been continuous.  
 
Direct seeding is possible in places that can be left 
undisturbed, as among shrubs, or among low 
perennials where the seedlings can be sheltered.  If 
planting seeds in the ground, autumn is the best time 
for seeding; germination begins in two or three 
months and often continues beyond that time.  A 
friable seed mixture of sand , loam, and either peat or 
screened leaf mold is best, covering the seed with 
sphagnum moss to aid in preventing damping-off of 
seedlings. 
 
Management 
In autumn, old leaves should be removed from the 
center of large clumps, th e foliage cut back, and a 
mulch applied, especially if the irises are being 
naturalized in a semi-dry area.  Traditional resource 
management included harvesting huge bunches of iris 
leaves in the fall, and storing these leaves until 
needed.  The fibers are then harvested from the 
leaves.  This naturally  accomplished the pruning and 
mulching that modern horticulturists practice to 
maintain iris beds. 
 
The PCI borer (Amphipoea americana  var. 
pacifica  ) 
and iris borer (in the eastern U.S.) are serious pests of 
iris.  The PCI borer stays in the rhizome through the 
winter, then metamorphoses, coming out sometime in 
the spring as a nocturnal moth.  Controlling the moth, 
to prevent it from laying its eggs on the iris, will 
control the borer.  However, it is recommended to dig 
infested plant out entirely, put it a plastic bag, and 
then place it in the garbage can to avoid 
contamination of other plants.

Milkweed (Asclepias species) and dogbane 
( Apocynum cannibinum ) were traditionally burned by 
native people in the fall to maintain vigorous plant 
production, to stimulate plant growth, to optimize 
long and abundant fiber production from leaves and 
stalks, and to stimulate seed production.  It is 
probable that iris was burned for the same reasons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
IRMI is readily available through native plant 
nurseries within its rangeSeeds and plants of selected 
iris cultivars are available from many nurseries.  It is 
best to plant species from  your local area, adapted to 
the specific site conditions where the plants are to be 
grown.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
American Iris Society.  SP CNI, Oakland, California. 
 
Archer, W.A. 1957.  Abstract of pharmacological 
research.   IN: Medicinal uses of plants by Indian 
tribes of Nevada, by P. Train, JR. Henrichs & W.A 
Archer, Pages 108-131.  USDA, Plant Industry 
Station, Contributions Toward a Flora of Nevada, 
No. 45, Beltsville, Maryland [Facsimile Reprint: 
Quarterman Publications, Lawrence, Massachusetts, 
1978.]. 
 
Cohen, V.A. 1967.   Guide to the Pacific Coast irises.  
A monograph with drawings and photos .  British Iris 
Society.  This monograph has been reprinted by the 
Society for Pacific Coast  Native Iris (SPCNI), 4333 
Oak Hill Road, Oakland, California. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
people of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5.  USDI, FWS, Region 1, Stillwater 
National Wildlife Refuge.  264 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston & London.  382 pp. 
 
Lawyer, A. & L. (Janua ry/February) 1996.  Growing 
and hybridizing your own iris.  Growing native .  The 
Newsletter of the Growing Native Research Institute.  
15 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Koeltz Scientific Books, USA\Germany.  
210 pp. 
 
Warburton, B. n.d.   The world of irises.  American 
Iris Society, Tulsa, Oklahoma. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.