Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOUGLAS IRIS 
Iris douglasiana Herbert 
Plant Symbol = IRDO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Uses 
Warning: Fresh iris roots may be toxic . 
 
Ethnobotanical: Iris makes some of the finest 
cordage; the fibers are  particularly strong and 
flexible.  Only two fibers can be taken from each iris 
leaf margin.  Huge bunches of leaves were harvested 
in the fall and stored until needed.  Iris cordage was 
used for fishing nets, string, rope, snares, hairnets, 
and regalia. The fibers are fine like silk, but 
surprisingly strong.  
 
Rope was made from fibers, which occur, on the 
outside of iris leaves.  The iris leaves were gathered 
in large bundles and a single silky fiber was taken 
from each margin of the leaf. None of the other fibers 
was used.  Using a mussel-shell or abalone 
"thumbnail" the women stripped the fibers from the 
leaves.  The fibers are detached from the leaves and 
scraped clean of all tissues.  The men, mostly while 
sitting around in their sweathouses twisted the 
threads on the bare thigh. The men always knotted 
the fishing nets.  A deer rope is near 20 feet long with 
lasso at one end, and about half an inch in diameter.  
This loop was set over a deer trail to catch the head 
or antlers.  Within the set loop over the trail was  spread a delicate network of the same material to 
draw in the loop.  One Indian stated that "it takes 
nearly six weeks to make a rope twelve feet long."  In 
spite of the tremendous 
labor of preparing this 
material, the iris fiber was one of the most generally 
employed in northwestern California.  The threads 
and cords of this fiber were used to make fishing 
nets, camping bags and snares for catching deer, 
birds, and other game. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Since iris is fine and can be bent at sharp angles, it 
makes an excellent starting knot in coiled baskets.  It 
is said that babies were wrapped in the soft green 
leaves of  Iris douglasiana  while their mothers 
collected manzanita berries,  to keep the babies cool 
and to prevent dehydration.  
 
The Monache and the Southern Yokuts in California 
make flour from iris seed.  The Pomo placed acorn 
meal in a shallow pit and  covered the meal with Iris 
leaves before pouring wate r over the meal to leach 
out tannic acid.  
 
A poultice of the raw rhizom e is especially effective 
against staph sores.  Extern ally, iris is successfully 
used in infected wounds, ulcers, and fistulas, plus to 
take away freckles.  Only the dry root should be used 
internally.  Iris is active as a cathartic, has a 
stimulating effect on the production of both 
pancreatic enzymes and bile, is a strong diuretic, and 
will stimulate both saliva and sweat.  This is a useful 
medicinal plant, but in general should be used with 
care and preferably in  combinations where less 
energetic plants form the bulk of a medicinal 
formula.  
 
Tea from iris roots was used for kidney trouble by 
several California Indian peoples (Murphey 1959).  
The Yana chewed iris roots to cure coughs.  The 
Modoc used an iris root decoction to soothe sore 
eyes. A piece of iris root was inserted in a tooth 
cavity to kill the nerve, so the tooth will come out.  
Tests showed slight bactericid al effects, slight effects 
on rabbit pneumonia, and an ascorbic acid content of 
4% (Archer 1957).  Roots were burned and the 
smoke inhaled to alleviate dizziness.  A root 
decoction was used as a cathartic and emetic, but 
large doses could cause severe digestive problems. 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : The beautiful and variable 
blossoms lend themselves to landscaping, where they 
naturalize and require minimal maintenance.

Horticulturally, it is used for rock gardens, ground 
cover, borders, wetlands, ponds, and streams.  Native 
irises are free flowering, most are long lived, require 
very little attention, and provide an abundance of 
seeds.  Iris flowers attract insects and birds.  Irises 
provide nectar to hummingbirds.  The mountain 
beaver ( Aplodontia rufa  ) is also known to feed on 
the leaves and stems of iris  that occur in the vicinity 
of its tunnels.  
 
Invasive Potential : Irises are sometimes invasive.  
Irises can become noxious weeds in pastures, because 
the leaves are unpalatable and bitter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Iris Family (Iridaceae).  The native irises 
are perennial herbs, usually evergreen and growing 
from a creeping, tuberous rhizome.  Irises can be 
identified by their double row of leaves, which 
overlap like praying hands.  The leaves are long and 
linear with parallel venation. Flower stems are erect 
and simple.  Blossoms vary somewhat in spacing of 
the parts, width of sepals, and the inner, erect 
standards (petals).   Iris douglasiana has pale cream to 
light, dark lavender or deep reddish purple flowers 
that bloom from May to June. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Iris douglasiana  grows abundantly along the 
coast from north Santa Barbara County, California, 
into Oregon.  It is found in shade with moist soils 
with ample organic matter. This plant is common in 
grassy places, especially near  the coast, at elevations 
generally less than 100 m.  It grows naturally in the 
coastal prairie and mixed evergreen forest 
communities. 
 
Establishment 
The native irises are excellent in shade situations, 
even dense shade of walls and fences (Schmidt 
1980).  They will tolerate sun for most of the day in 
mild areas, and should have afternoon shade and 
ample water in the interior regions.  Plants may be 
watered the year round.  Fertilization increases 
biomass and seed production. This iris has a 
clumping rhizome system, a nd is readily propagated 
by plant division in fall or winter. 
 
When allowed to increase freely, plants will 
naturalize and eventually  form extensive ground 
cover.  Unless the seed vessels are removed there will 
be many volunteer plants, but if inferior flower size 
or color appears it should be culled immediately.  
Irises start growing with the first cool weather and 
rains in fall, reaching the height of their growth in 
spring and early summer.  They go dormant after 
seed set, in hot dry summer.  
 
Propagation by Plant Division : Iris douglasiana is 
clonal, radiating outward in growth from the center.  
The best propagation method for these is division, in 
fall or winter after the first new roots are established 
but before the flowers form.  
 
Native irises in the wild tend to produce only a small, 
dry rhizome with stringy roots, which is difficult to 
dig.  Vigorous garden or greenhouse plants produce 
firm, white, growing roots es pecially in winter and 
spring growing seasons, and clumps are easily 
divided at those time.  Remove a new fan with fleshy 
roots set in a prepared site, water it, and provide 
shade for a few days if the plant is placed in full sun.  
Frequent division appears to keep the plants 
vigorous, as well as being the best method of 
increasing the supply of superior forms. 
 
Propagation by Seed : Iris seed is easily collected 
from the large capsules.  The capsules turn from 
green to brown and open at the top when they are 
ripe.  They have to be watched closely, because they 
disperse rapidly.  Two days after ripening, the seed is 
gone.  Collect capsules carefully to avoid spilling 
seeds.  Each capsule has from 20 to 80 seeds. 
 
Seeds should be stored in paper envelopes at room 
temperature until they are planted. The seeds of all 
species will keep up to 10 years at room temperature. 
 
Plant seeds in 6-inch pots, using a combination of 
leaf mold and peat moss.  Cover seeds with 1/2 inch 
of same material.  Any good potting soil that's acidic 
is good for seed germination. 
 
After planting, over-winter the pots outdoors in 
November or December.  They will come up in 2-3 
months, depending on the weather.  Germination 
increases the second year, because there's always a 
percentage of hard seeds that won't germinate the 
first year.  Part of the seed  waits for the next year, to 
increase the probability for good weather conditions 
and optimize germination success. 
 
Plant the seedlings in May,  when the young plants 
are usually 3 to 6 inches tall or even taller.  Plant

from 6 inches to one-foot spacing.  If a natural look is 
desired, scatter and clump the plantings.  Water 
plants through the dry season until the roots have 
established. After the first year the plants should be 
self-maintaining without additional watering, unless 
there is an unusually hot, dry spell.  Plants will begin 
to bloom by their second  year if growth has been 
continuous. 
 
Direct seeding is possible in places that can be left 
undisturbed, as among shrubs, or among low 
perennials where the seedlings can be sheltered.  If 
planting seeds in the ground, autumn is the best time 
for seeding; germination begins in two or three 
months and often continues beyond that time.  A 
friable seed mixture of sand, loam, and either peat or 
screened leaf mold is best, covering the seed with 
sphagnum moss to aid in preventing damping-off of 
seedlings. 
 
Management 
In autumn old leaves should be removed from the 
center of large clumps, th e foliage cut back, and a 
mulch applied, especially if the irises are being 
naturalized in a semi-dry area. Traditional resource 
management included harvesting huge bunches of iris 
leaves in the fall, and storing these leaves until 
needed.  The fibers are then harvested from the 
leaves. This naturally accomplished the pruning and 
mulching that modern horticulturists practice to 
maintain iris beds. 
 
The PCI Borer (Amphipoea americana  var. pacifica  ) 
and Iris Borer are serious pests of iris.  The Iris Borer 
stays in the rhizome th rough the winter, then 
metamorphoses, coming out in the spring as a 
nocturnal moth. Controlling the moth when its flying, 
to prevent it from laying its eggs on the iris, would 
control the borer.  The UC Botanical Garden used the 
biological control  Bacillus thuringienis , but it didn't 
help.  At this time, it is recommended to dig the 
infected plant out entirely, put it a plastic bag, and 
put them in the garbage can to avoid contamination 
of other plants. 
 
Milkweed ( Asclepias species) and dogbane 
( Apocynum cannibinum  ) were traditionally burned 
by native people in the fall to maintain vigorous plant 
production, to stimulate plant growth, to optimize 
long and abundant fiber production from leaves and 
stalks, and to stimulate seed production.  It is 
probable that iris was burned for the same reasons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Cultivars : Seeds and plants of selected iris cultivars 
are available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
American Iris Society.  SPCNI.  4333 Oak Hill Road. 
Oakland, CA 94605. 
 
Archer, W.A. 1957.   Abstract of pharmacological 
research .  IN "Medicinal Uses of Plants by Indian 
Tribes of Nevada," by Percy Train, James R. 
Henrichs and W. Andrew Archer, PP. 108-131. 
Contributions Toward a Flora of Nevada, No. 45. 
Beltsville, Maryland: USDA, Plant Industry Station. 
[Facsimile Reprint: Quarterman Publications, 
Lawrence, Massachusetts, 1978.] 
 
Balls, E.K. 1962.   Early uses of California plants .  
University of California Press. 103 pp. 
 
Cohen, V.A. 1967.   Guide to the Pacific Coast irises .  
A monograph with drawings and photos.  British Iris 
Society. This monograph has been reprinted by the 
Society for Pacific Coast  Native Iris (SPCNI), 4333 
Oak Hill Road, Oakland, California 94605. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
people of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5.  USDI, Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 
1, Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge.  264 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp.

Hunn, E. & J. Selam and family 1990.  Nch'i-Wana 
"The Big River."   Mid-Columbia Indians and Their 
Land. University of Washington Press, Seattle and 
London. 378 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala, Boston & London. 382 pp. 
 
Lawyer, A. et al. January/February 1996.   Growing 
and hybridizing your own iris .  Growing Native.  The 
Newsletter of the Growing Native Research Institute. 
15 pp. 
 
Lenz, L. 1958.   Revision of the Pacific Coast irises.  
A monograph with drawings and site maps for both 
species and naturally occurring hybrids .  Originally 
published in RSABG's publication Aliso in 1958, it 
has been reprinted by the Society for Pacific Coast 
Native Iris (SPCNI). 4333 Oak Hill Road. Oakland 
CA 94605. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California. 878 pp.  
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959 .  Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press. 366 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Koeltz Scientific Books. USA\Germany.  
210 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Warburton, B. date unknown.   The world of irises.  
American Iris Society, 718  West 67th Street, Tulsa, 
Oklahoma 74132-1808. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens,  Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Revised: 05dec00 jsp;  20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.