Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VIRGINIA IRIS 
Iris virginica L. 
Plant Symbol = IRVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Blue flag, southern blue flag, blue iris 
 
Warning:  The roots of Virginia iris are toxic when 
taken internally, without sufficient preparation.   
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Cherokee and other tribes in the 
southeastern United States are known to have used 
Virginia iris for its medicinal properties.  The root 
was pounded into a paste that was used as a salve for 
skin. An infusion made from the root was used to 
treat ailments of the liver,  and a decoction of root was 
used to treat “yellowish urine.”  Virginia iris may  have been one of the iris species used by the 
Seminole to treat “shock following alligator-bite.” 
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 ©William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
Description 
General : Iris Family (Iridaceae).  Virginia iris is a 
perennial plant.  The slightly fragrant flowers (4 cm 
long, 7 cm across) consist of 3 horizontal sepals, or 
“falls,” and 3 erect petals.  The petals and sepals can 
vary in color from dark-violet to pinkish-white.  The 
sepals have a splash of yellow to yellow-orange at the 
crest.  Each plant has 2 to 6 flowers that bloom from 
April to May upon a single, erect, 3-9 dm tall stalk.  
The stalk is sometimes branched and has a slight 
zigzag appearance.  The plant has 2 to 4 erect or 
arching, bright green, lanc e-shaped leaves that are 
flattened into one plane at the base.  Leaves are 1 – 3 
cm wide and are sometimes longer than the flower 
stalk.  The fleshy roots  (1-2 cm in diameter) are 
rhizomes that spread underground.  Pale brown, 
variably shaped seeds are born in three-part fruit 
capsules (3-6 cm long, 1-2 cm wide).    
 
Distribution: Virginia iris is common along the 
coastal plain from Florida to  Georgia.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
This plant grows in wet areas and sometimes in 
shallow water in both fresh and brackish tidal 
marshes.  It can be found in low savannas, thin 
woods and open meadows as well as along the edges 
of swamps, rivers, and ditches.   
 
Establishment 
Virginia iris is a sturdy plant that is easy to grow and, 
once established, needs very little care.  They make 
lovely additions to the ga rden and are ideal for the 
borders of a garden pond.   This is because the plants 
prefer moist to wet soils that are high in organic 
matter.  The plants will grow best in mild climates 
where they can be grown in partial shade to full sun.  
The plants can be grown from seed, but are easiest to 
propagate through division.  Seeds may be planted in 
the autumn, without pretreat ment.  To propagate by 
division, divide the plants either after flowering or

when the new leaves just begin to appear in the 
spring.  Cut the roots so that each piece contains a 
portion the feeding roots, the rhizome, and a leaf fan.  
Place the rhizomes very near  to the surface of the soil 
when planting.  Allow 45 to 60 cm between plants.  
The plants grow best if divided every three to five 
years to thin out the colonies that form.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Snails are known to eat the leaves.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)   
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the southern United 
States: Flowering plants and ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Clinton, J. 2001.   Easy living native perennial 
wildflowers.  
http://www.easywildflowers. com/quality/iri.virgi.htm
(12 June 2001).   
 
Cullina, W. 2000.  The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers in the United States and Canada .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, New York.  
322 pp.  
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote 1975.  Wildflowers of 
the southeastern United States. University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. &  J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of southeastern United States .  Vol 1.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  712 
pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the south: native and exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Ottensen, C. 1995.   The native plant primer.  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp 
 
Steffek, E.F. 1983.   The new wild flowers and how to 
grow them.  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  186 pp. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States . University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, Massachusetts.  
328 pp. 
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o  
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 21June2001 jsp; 20may03 ahv 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.