Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK 
NEEDLERUSH 
Juncus roemerianus  Scheele 
Plant Symbol = JURO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program and USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center:  
 
 Larry Allain, NWRC, GS, USDI 
 
Alternate Names 
black grass, Roemers rush, black rush, black 
needlegrass. 
 
Uses 
Dense stands of black needlerush form deep fibrous 
root systems, which provide very good shoreline 
protection, filter suspended solids, uptake nutrients, 
and facilitate substrate oxidation. With its range of 
salinity tolerances, black needlerush is used in tidal 
estuary restoration along the  Atlantic and Gulf coasts. 
Seed and vegetative parts of black needlerush are 
utilized by waterfowl, muskrats, nutria, rice rat, 
marsh rabbit and non-game birds. More than 60 bird 
species use black needlerush dominated marsh at 
least seasonally.  
 
Ninety percent of the biomass of marsh plants, such 
as black needlerush, is not consumed by herbivores.                                
Instead, marsh plant biomass is decomposed to 
microbial biomass. This microbial biomass is 
available to primary consumers which initiate food 
webs leading to commercially important fishes and 
crustaceans.   
 
Black needlerush is commonly planted in constructed 
wetlands, which are used for the treatment of dilute 
organic wastes.  
 
Researchers evaluated three marsh plant species, 
black needlerush, common reed (
Phragmites 
australis) and bulltongue arrowhead (Sagittaria 
lancifolia) for tolerance of soil contaminated with 
diesel oil. Bulltongue arrowhead exhibited the 
highest level of tolerance,  
common reed the least 
tolerance and black needlerush was intermediate.  
 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Black needlerush is a moderate growing, 
bunch forming, grass-like perennial. It is course and 
rigid. Where soil salinity is low, black needle grass is 
robust with leaves reaching over 2.2 m in height. But 
in high saline areas the plants are dwarfed often less 
than 0.3 m tall. Leaves are terete, stiff and pungent.  
Inflorescence appear laterally; involucral bract terete 
and erect.  Perianth usually brownish, 3-3.5 mm long; 
sepals longer and are more pointed than petals. It is 
composed of two types of plants based on flower 
morphology: one form produces perfect (bisexual 
flowers) and another form produces pistillate 
(unisexual) flowers. Seeds are dark and 0.6 mm long 
(May to October). Black needlerush is found growing 
in brackish marshes in dense zonal stands. 
 
Distribution : Black needlerush is one of the dominate 
species in the marshes on the southern Atlantic and 
Gulf coasts. It dominates 20.7% of the marsh in the 
south Atlantic states and 7.3% of Gulf coast marshes. 
But, it covers more marsh area on the Gulf coast than 
on the Atlantic coast. Its distribution is continuous 
from Maryland to Florida and westward to 
southwestern Texas. It is usually restricted to coastal

marches and estuaries, but it may extend 10 to 15 
miles inland along river estuaries. 
 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Black needlerush occupies the edge of 
ditches and shorelines of bays, back bays and 
tributaries of tidal systems in coastal systems. Black 
needlerush grows on soils ranging from almost pure 
sand to fine silt loam and clay mixtures. It also, 
grows in highly organic soils including peat soils. It 
has a high tolerance to anaerobic conditions, high 
tolerance to CaCO
3 and tolerates pH ranges from 4.0-
7.0 
 
Adaptation 
Black needlerush dominated  plant communities are 
classified into three generalized categories based on 
elevation and salinity influences: 1) Saline marsh, 
which experiences little dilution of tidal waters; 2) 
Brackish marsh, where tidal waters are routinely 
diluted, 3) Intermediate marsh, which is transitional 
between brackish and freshwater marsh. The number 
of species in association w ith black needlerush tends 
to increase as water salinity decreases. However, 
Spartina  species are thought to be more tolerant of 
flooding and salinity than black needlerush.  In 
freshwater habitats black needlerush’s growth may be 
restricted by organisms that feed on its rhizomes. 
 
Salt marsh plant communities are characterized by 
striking zonal patterns across elevation gradients. In a 
study conduced in Georgia, black needlerush 
dominated the high elevation marsh and smooth 
cordgrass (
Spartina alterniflora) dominated the 
middle and low elevation ma rsh. Black needlerush 
did not occur naturally in the cordgrass zone and 
preformed poorly when tran splanted there. The poor 
performance of black needlerush occurred whether or 
not cordgrass neighbors were removed, which 
indicates the poor performance was caused by 
physical stress. In contrast, although smooth 
cordgrass occurred naturally at low densities in the 
black needlerush zone, it preformed well there only if 
the black needlerush neighbors were removed. The 
excellent performance of smooth cordgrass only 
where black needlerush neighbors were removed 
indicates that performance is limited by competition 
from black needlerush.   
 
Establishment 
In the wild, black needlerush establishes from seed, 
rhizomes or vegetative divisions from storm derived 
floatsum. Pistillate-flowered plants produce more  seed and seed with higher viability than perfect-
flowered plants. Seed germination requires light and 
seeds will not germinate if covered. Seeds remain 
viable for over a year. Seeds will germinate when 
submerged or floating on water. Black needlerush 
seedlings are found mainly in areas with no or little 
associated vegetation. Seed
lings are seldom found in 
mature stands of black needlerush or other marsh 
species. Black needlerush maintains itself in 
established stands though rhizome growth.  
 
The percentage germination of seed collected in 
Mississippi averaged 75 for pistillate flowered plants 
and 60 for perfect flowered  plants. Black needlerush 
seeds collected from the Mississippi Gulf coast 
exhibited high percentage germination without a 
cold-wet stratification.  Nursery and greenhouse 
production are effectively accomplished with seed or 
vegetative divisions. Seed can be stratified in 
saturated soil-less potting media with high percentage 
of fine organics. At the USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS) Cape May Plant 
Materials Center (PMC), New Jersey, seed and media 
were thoroughly moistened, placed in zip lock bags 
and stored at approximately 36 ºF for 60 days. 
Materials were direct seeded into greenhouse starter 
trays with diurnal temperatures of 80° F days and 50° 
F nights and 14 hour photoperiods. Seedling 
emergence was limited and rate of growth slow.  
 
For greenhouse forced materials, vegetative divisions 
use similar environmental photoperiods and diurnal 
temperatures listed above.  
 
Tissue culture and plant regeneration protocols have 
been developed for blank needlerush.  
 
Management 
The effects of fire on  blank needlerush dominated 
marsh vary with water depth and soil moisture. On 
flooded sites and sites with exposed but saturated 
soil, fires will not harm the underground reproductive 
structures. When the mash soil is dry, fire can 
consume the rhizomes and the entire stand.  In 
Mississippi, burning increased the biomass produced 
in a black needlerush dom inated marsh, but black 
needlerush recovered more slowly than 
Spartina 
species. Three years after  burning black needlerush 
biomass was less than before burning.  In Maryland, 
the biomass and stem densities of several marsh 
species increased after burning, but burning did not 
change either the biomass or stem density of black 
needlerush. In Florida, bl ack needlerush biomass was 
47% less one year after burning. In another Florida 
study, winter burning increased the frequency of 
common three-square (
Schoenoplectus pungens  var.

pungens) when it occurred as a competing 
subdominant with black need lerush. But, in nearly 
pure stands of black needlerush burning did not 
change the species composition. In general, the effect 
of burning on black needlerush was either a decrease 
in biomass and frequency or no change in these 
parameters.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
In the mid-Atlantic, several major nursery pests may 
present themselves and required IPM strategies.  
These pests can include pythium, brown patch, 
fungus gnats and algae.  This is based upon 
professional experiences at the NRCS Cape May 
PMC, New Jersey and diagno sis of pests by Rutgers 
University Turf Grass Department staff. 
 
Consult your local university extension service agent 
for pesticide recommendations. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No improved varieties are known, but numerous 
wetland nurseries carry local or regional ecotypes. 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information. Look in the phone book under 
“United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, L. and A. Brown, 1970.  An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Press. 
 
Brown, M.L. and R.G. Brown. 1984 .  Herbaceous 
plants of Maryland . Port City Press. 
 
Eleuterius, L.N. 1975.  The life history of the salt 
marsh rush, Juncus roemerianusin . Bull. Torrey 
Pines Bot. Club. 102: 135-140. 
 
Eleuterius, L.N. 1976.  The distribution of Juncus 
roemerianusin the salt marshes of North America . 
Chesapeake Science 17: 289-292.   
 
Eleuterius, L.N.1976.  Vegetative morphology and 
anatomy of the salt marsh rush, Juncus 
roemerianusin . Gulf Research Reports 5: 1-10. 
 
Eleuterius, L.N. 1984.  Autecology of the black 
needlerush Juncus roemerianusin . Gulf Research 
Reports 7: 27-34.   
 
Fell, J.W. and I.L. Hunter. 1979.  Fungi associated 
with the decomposition of the black rush Juncus 
roemerianus in south Florida . Mycologia 71: 323-
342.  
 
Fernald, M.L. 1950.  Grays manual of botany . 8th 
Edition.  American Book Co. 
 
Flores, C. and D. Bonds.  Evaluation of vegetative 
response to fire exclusion and prescribe burning on 
Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge and Fishing 
Bay Wildlife Management Area . Accessed: 070215. 
<http://
www.fws.gov/blackwat er/fire_research.pdf> 
 
Gleason, H.A and A.Cronquist. 1963.  Manual of 
vascular plants of the United States and adjacent 
Canada .  Van Norstrand Reinhold Co. 
 
Hill, D.T., W.E. Payne, J.W. Jones and S.R. Kown. 
1997. Ammonia effects on the biomass production of 
five constructed wetland plant species . Bioresource 
Technology 62: 109-133. 
 
Hackney, C.T. and A.A. De LaCruz. 1981.  Effects of 
fire on two brackish marsh communities” 
management implications . Wetlands 1: 75-86. 
 
Lin, Q, & I.A. Mendelssohn. 2006.  Determination of 
diesel oil tolerance of coastal dominant marsh plants 
for restoration and remediation of the oil-impacted 
habitats . 
<http://
www.osradp.lsu.edu/maySymp06/MaySymp0
6_Lin.pdf
> 
 
Meyrs, K.E. 1956.  Mangement of needlerush marsh 
at the Chassahowitzka Refuge . Proc. Annual 
Conference Southeast Assoc. Game and Fish Comm. 
9: 175-177.   
 
Odum, W.E., J.C. Zieman and E.J. Heald. 1973. 
Importance of various plant detritus to estuaries . Pp. 
91-114.  In: Proceedings of the Costal Marsh and 
Estuary Management Symposium. Ed. R.H. 
Chabrech, Louisiana State  Univ., Baton Rouge.    
 
Pennings, S.C., M. Grant and M.D. Bertness. 2005. 
Plant zonation in low-latitude salt marshes: 
disentangling the roles of flooding, salinity and 
competition. Journal of Ecology 93: 159-167. 
 
Stout, J.P. 1984 . The ecology of irregularly flooded 
salt marches of the Northeaster Gulf of Mexico; a 
community profile . Biol. Rep. 85. U.S. Dept. of 
Interior, Fish & Wildlife Service.

UDSA-Forest Service. Fire effect information system  
<http://www.fs.fed. us/database/feis/>. Accessed: 
070215. Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
 
USDA, NRCS. 2007.  The PLANTS database  
(
http://plants.usda.gov, 31 January 2007). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
  
Wang, J., D.M. Seliskar and J.L. Gallagher. 2005. 
Tissue culture and plant rgeneration of the sast 
marsh monocots Juncus roemerianus and Juncus 
gerardi . 
<http://cat.inist.fr/?aModele=afficheN&cpsidt=16953
946>.  
 
Prepared By 
William Skaradek 
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center,  
Cape May, New Jersey 
James F. Henson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
William Skaradek 
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center, 
Cape May, New Jersey 
                                                                            
Document Reviewer: 
Joel Douglas 
USDA NRCS Central National Technology Support 
Center, Fort Worth, Texas 
Robert Glennon 
USDA NRCS National Headquarters, Washington,  
D.C. 
 Edited: 070227 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.