Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROCKY MOUNTAIN JUNIPER  
Juniperus scopulorum  Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = JUSC2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
cedar tree, juniper, juniper bush, savin, evergreen, 
cedar apple, Rocky Mountain cedar 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Rocky Mountain juniper was and still 
is used by many tribes for incense in purification and 
ritual (Kindscher 1992).   The Blackfeet made a tea 
from the berries of the Rocky Mountain juniper to 
stop vomiting (Kindscher 1992).  A Blackfeet 
remedy for arthritis and rheumatism was to boil 
juniper leaves in water, add one-half teaspoon of 
turpentine, and when cooled, rub the mixture on 
affected parts.  The Blackf eet also drank a tea made 
from  Juniperus scopulorum  root as a general tonic;  mixed with 
Populus leaves this root tea became a 
liniment for stiff back or backaches (M
cClintock 
1909, Johnston 1970, Hellson 1974). 
 
The Cheyennes steeped th e leaves of the Rocky 
Mountain juniper and drank the resulting tea to 
relieve persistent coughing or a tickling in the throat.  
It was also believed to produce sedative effects that 
were especially useful  for calming a hyperactive 
person.  Cheyenne women drank juniper tea to speed 
delivery during childbirth (Grinnell 1962).  The 
Cheyenne, along with the  Flathead, Nez Perce,  
Kutenai, and Sioux, made a tea from juniper boughs, 
branches, and fleshy cones.  The tea was used as a 
cure for colds, fevers, tonsillitis, and pneumonia 
(Hart 1976). 
 Horticulture: Landscape Plants  © Oregon State University 
 
As a cure for asthma, th e Gros Ventres ate whole 
juniper berries or pulverized them and boiled them to 
make a tea.  They also  made a preparation from the 
leaves mixed with the root, which they applied 
topically to control bleeding (Kroeber 1908).  The 
Crow drank this medicinal tea to check diarrhea and 
to stop lung or nasal hemorrhage.  Crow women 
drank it after childbirth for cleansing and healing 
(Hart 1976).  
 
The wood of red cedar is very durable, and is used 
for lance shafts, bows, and other items.  Flutes made 
from juniper wood were highly regarded by the 
Cheyenne. 
 
Ornamental : All of the native junipers are valuable 
ornamental species, and many horticultural varieties 
have been developed.  Rocky Mountain juniper is 
widely used in shelterbelts and wildlife plantings.  
The close-grained, aroma tic, and durable wood of 
junipers is used for furniture, interior paneling, 
novelties, and fence posts.  The fruits and young 
branches contain aromatic oil that is used in 
medicines. 
 
Wildlife : Junipers are important to wildlife 
throughout the country.  Their twigs and foliage are 
eaten extensively by hoofed  browsers, but the chief 
attraction to wildlife is the bluish-black berry-like 
fruit.  The cedar waxwing is one of the principal 
users of juniper berries, but numerous other birds and 
mammals, both large and small, make these fruits and 
important part of their diet.  In addition to their 
wildlife food value, junipers provide important 
protective and nesting cover.  Chipping sparrows,

robins, song sparrows, and mockingbirds use these 
trees as one of their favorite nesting sites.  Juncos, 
myrtle warblers, sparrows of various kinds, and other 
birds use the dense foliage as roosting cover.  In 
winter their dense protective shelter is especially 
valuable.  
 
Description 
General : Cypress Family (Cupressaceae).  Rocky 
Mountain cedar ( Juniperus scopulorum ) is a medium 
sized dioecious or rarely  monoecious tree from 10-20 
m (33-66') tall (M
cGregor et al. 1986, Stephens 
1973).  The evergreen tree  is scraggly with rounded 
crown to pyramidal.  The bark is dark reddish-brown 
to grayish in color, thin, fibrous, and usually shreds 
with age.  Leaves are green or blue-green, usually 
barely overlapping and closely appressed, scalelike 
and 0.2-0.3 cm (1/16-1/8") long or needlelike and 
0.6-1.2 cm (1/4-1/2") long.  Recessed glands occur on 
the dorsal side of the leaves.   Juniperus scopulorum 
differs from red cedar ( J. virginiana) by the blunt 
leaves, the leaves not ove rlapping, and the longer, 
elliptic glands.  The fruits of  J. scopulorum mature in 
the second season, while in  J. virginiana fruits 
mature in the first season.   Juniperus  scopulorum is 
usually a more rounded tree and  J. virginiana is more 
conical.  
 
Male and female cones are on separate trees.  The 
staminate (male) cones are yellowish-brown, papery, 
solitary at the tips of branchlets, ovoid to ellipsoid, 
and 0.2-0.4 cm (1/16-1/8") long.  The ovulate 
(female) cones are solitary at the tips of branchlets, 
dark blue or bluish-purple, waxy and berry-like, and 
0.4-0.7 cm (3/16-1/4") long.  The female cones ripen 
from September through October.  There are 1-3 
seeds per cone, yellow-brown and round, 2-4 mm in 
diameter, ridged near the base and sometimes 
shallowly pitted.  
 
Distribution 
Rocky Mountain juniper grows in prairie hillsides, 
fields, pastures, and occasionally in woodlands, in 
rocky, sandy, or clay soils.  The distribution of Rocky 
Mountain juniper is from British Columbia and 
Alberta south through the Great Basin and the Rocky 
Mountains to Arizona and New Mexico and into 
western Texas, north across eastern Colorado, 
western Nebraska to western North Dakota, and west 
in Montana.  The range overlaps that of  Juniperus 
virginiana  only in North Dakota.  
 
Establishment 
Rocky Mountain juniper is often used as an 
ornamental because of its evergreen foliage.  Juniper 
can be easily transplanted in the early spring before it  starts its new growth.  It is
 especially well adapted to 
dry areas.  The junipers are generally propagated by 
cuttings.  
 
Propagation from Cuttings 
Cuttings are made 5 to 15 cm (2 to 65 inches) long 
from new lateral growth tips stripped of older 
branches.  A small piece of old wood, a “heel,” is 
thus left attached to the base of the cutting.  Some 
propagators believe this to be advantageous.  In other 
cases, good results are obta ined when the cuttings are 
just clipped without the “heel” from the older wood.  
Cuttings from the current season’s terminal growth 
also root well. 
 
Cuttings to be rooted in the greenhouse can be taken 
at any time during the winter or rooted outdoors on 
heated beds.  Exposing the stock plants to several 
hard freezes seems to give better rooting.  Optimum 
time for taking cuttings is when stock plants have 
ceased growth (i.e. the late fall-winter propagation 
period is more successful than summer).  For 
propagating in an outdoor cold frame, cuttings are 
taken in late summer or early fall.  There may be 
advantages to using bottom heat.  Lightly wounding 
the base of the cuttings is sometimes helpful, and the 
use of root-promoting chemic als, especially IBA, is 
beneficial.  Recommendations for root-promoting 
chemicals include the fo llowing: 2500 IBA Quick-
dip (Alabama), 3000 – 8000 ppm IBA liquid, and 
0.3-4.5 percent IBA talc.  A medium-coarse sand or a 
10:1 mixture of perlite and peat moss is a satisfactory 
rooting medium.  Maintenance of a humid 
environment without excessive wetting of the 
cuttings is desirable, as is a relatively high light 
intensity.  A light, intermittent mist can be used.  
Bottom heat of 60-65°F (12°C) is critical the first six 
weeks of propagation to allow the basal wound of 
cuttings to callus. 
 
Seed Propagation 
Juniperus scopulorum  flowers from April to June.  
The fruits should be gathered in the fall (September-
October) as soon as the berry-like cones become ripe.  
Rocky Mountain juniper tr ees come to seed-bearing 
age in 10-20 years, and th ey bear cones every 2-5 
years.  Seed collection can be done by stripping or 
picking the berries by hand from the trees, or by 
flailing the fruits to ground cloths.  Be careful to pick 
only ripe berries.  Since the number of filled seeds 
varies widely from tree to tree, it is important to test 
the seeds by cutting to determine percent fill.  Seeds 
may be stored as berries or cleaned seeds. 
 
The seeds can be recovered by macerating the fruits 
and floating the seeds to the top.  The addition of

detergent to the maceration water helps to separate 
seeds from the resinous fruits.  Juniper seeds store 
quite well.  They should be dried to 10-20% moisture 
and stored in a sealed container at cold temperatures. 
 
For best germination, seeds should be removed from 
the fruits, then the seed coat is softened by treating it 
with sulfuric acid for 120 minutes.  After soaking the 
seeds in sulfuric acid, follow with 6 weeks of warm 
stratification at 20 to 30°C (70 to 85°F), or summer 
planting, then 10 weeks of pre-chilling at 4°C (40°F).  
Use of fresh seed reduced the warm stratification 
time.  Rather than the acid treatment, two to three 
months of warm stratification could be used.  As an 
alternative for cold stratification, the seed may be 
sown in the fall.  Germination is delayed at 
temperatures above 15°C (60° F).  Germination is 
often delayed in juniper seeds, as seeds are 
consistently highly dormant.  
 
Juniper seeds are usually sown in the nursery in the 
late summer or fall, but may be sown in spring or 
summer.  The seeds of most  species should be sown 
in fall to take advantage of natural pre-chilling. 
 
Juniper seeds are usually drilled in well-prepared 
seedbeds in rows 15 to 20 cm apart and covered with 
0.6 cm of soil.  In nurseries with severe climates, 
such as those in the Great Plains, considerable care 
must be taken to protect the beds with mulch and 
snow fences. 
 
Viability of the seed varies considerably from year to 
year and among lots, but it is never much over 50 
percent.  Treated seed is usually planted in the spring, 
either in outdoor beds or in flats in the greenhouse. 
Two or three years are required to produce plants 
large enough to graft. 
 
Juniperus scopulorum  –   11-28 seeds per 110 kg 
fruit, 60 seeds per gram 
 
Extensive information about collecting and 
processing Rocky Mountain juniper seed can be 
found in Scianna (2000). 
 
Management 
The following information on the  Traditional 
Resource Management  (TRM) for Rocky Mountain 
juniper was provided by Lynn Youngbuck, who is 
Cherokee, Chiracahua, and Fox.  TRM includes the 
following: 
•   Take what you need, leaving the best to 
reproduce. 
•  Speak to the plant, leave an offering of tobacco 
or sage before harvesting. The plant will grow 
back two stems for every one cut. 
•  We humans are another strand in life.  Plants 
sustain us and should be treated as another living 
being. 
•  Plants were taken care of in extended family 
groups of women.  They were taken care of and 
watched each year for generations. 
•  Materials harvested were shared and traded with 
the whole tribe. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
JUSC2 is readily available  from nurseries throughout 
its range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
Some cultivars are as follows: Blue Arrow, Blue 
Creeper, Blue Haven, Blue Heaven, Blue Trail 
Cologreen, Erecta Glauca, Gray Gleam, Green Ice, 
Greenspice, Jewell Frost, Medora, Moffat Blue, 
Montana Green, Moonglow, Pathfinder, Platinum, 
Skyrocket, Sparkling Skyrocket, Springbark, 
Sutherland, Table Top, Table Top Blue, Tolleson’s 
Blue Weeping, Tolleson’s Green Weeping, Welchii, 
Witchita Blue, and Winter Blue. 
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883.   The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1:116-118. 
 
Bentrup, G. & J. C. Hoag 1998.   The practical 
streambank bioengineering guide.  User's guide for 
natural streambank stabilization techniques in the 
arid and semi-arid Great Basin and intermountain 
west .  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939.   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Ar ts, & Letters 25:517-543. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.  How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Grinnell, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 Vols.  
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York.

Hart, J. A. 1976.  Montana native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.   
Prentice Hall. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hellson, J.C. 1974.   Ethnobotany of the Blackfoot 
Indians .  National Museum of Man, Mercury Series, 
Canadian Ethnology Service Paper No. 19. 
 
Johnston, A. 1970 .  Blackfoot Indian utilization of the 
flora of the northwestern Great Plains.   Economic 
Botany 24:301-24. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press 
of Kansas. 340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press 
of Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1908.   The ethnology of the Gros 
Ventre .  American Museum of Natural History, 
Anthropological Papers 1:145-281. 
 
Marlow, C.B. & T.M. Pogacnik 1985.   Time of 
grazing and cattle-induced damage to streambanks .  
Pages 279-284. IN Johnson, R.R., C.D. Ziebell, D.R. 
Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, & R.H. Hamre (Tech. Coords.).  
Riparian ecosystems and their management: 
Reconciling conflicting uses.   Proc. First North Am. 
Riparian Conf. U.S. Dep. Agric., For. Serv. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-120.  523 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie.  273-279 pp. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.)   Flora of the Great Plains .  Great 
Plains Flora Association. Un iversity Press of Kansas.  
1402 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west.   Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Oregon State University 1999.   Landscape plants.  
Vol. 2.  Images, identification, and information .  Version: 000328.  
<http://www.orst.edu/dept/ldplants/jusc2.htm>.  
Horticulture Department, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Scianna, J.D. 2000.  
Improved Processing of Rocky 
Mountain juniper seed .  USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Plant Materials Technical Note No. 
MT-34, Bridger, Montana.  4pp. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the north 
central plains .  The University Press of Kansas.  530 
pp. 
 
Tilford, G.L. 1997.   Edible and medicinal plants of 
the west .  Mountain Press Publishing Company, 
Missoula, Montana.  
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000328.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Vestal, P.A. & R.E. Schultes 1939.   The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians .  Botanical Museum, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Young, A.J. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 08jan02 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.