Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
REDBERRY JUNIPER
Juniperus pinchotii Sudw. 
Plant Symbol = JUPI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Pinchot’s juniper 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  The Comanche used Pinchot’s juniper 
as a treatment for headaches, vertigo, and ghost 
sickness.  For these ailments the Comanche would 
sprinkle dried leaves over  hot coals and inhale the 
smoke.  The Comanche also used an extract of the 
dried and pulverized roots of Pinchot’s juniper for 
menstrual problems. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Cypress Family (Cupressaceae).  Pinchot’s 
juniper grows to be a shrub or small tree, reaching a 
maximum height of 6 meters.  Multiple stems coming 
from the base of the tree form a dense clump.  The 
bark is thin and ashy-gray colored with longitudinal 
fissures.  The branches are rigid, with slender 
ascending tips.  Pinchot’s juniper has white sapwood 
and reddish-brown heartwood.  The leaves on mature 
fruiting branches are triangular-ovate and pressed 
together in groups of two or three (1.5-2.5 mm long).  
The leaf margins are serrated with teeth that point 
forward.  The fruits are variable in size, ranging in 
color from reddish to copper-brown.  Each fruit has 
either one or two seeds.  The seeds are 5 mm long, 
have a broad oval shape, and are chestnut brown in 
color.   
 from Native Trees of Texas 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Found on open flats, dry hills, in arroyos, 
and in canyons.   
 
Adaptation 
Low to moderate intensity fires will kill seedlings 
and saplings.  Mature trees, will resprout after top-
kill by fire if soil is protecting the basal bud zone.  
Once top-killed, mature tr ees require 3-50 years to 
attain pre-fire height. 
 
Establishment 
Pinchot’s juniper requires two years of above average 
precipitation for seedling establishment.  The optimal 
soil temperature for germination is 64 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Reproduction also occurs from 
resprouting of already established plants.  Following 
injury or top removal, Pinchot’s juniper will resprout 
from the base of the stem.   
 
Management 
Fire has been successfully used to prevent the 
encroachment of Pinchot’s juniper on rangeland.  For 
further information regarding the use of fire to 
manage the tree consult your local land management 
agency.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, Pinchot’s juniper should not be prone to 
debilitating pests. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
Great Plains.   University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
 
Jones, D.E. 1968.   Comanche plant medicine .  Papers 
in Anthropology 9:1-13. 
 
McPherson, G.R. & H.A. Wright 1997.   Factors 
affecting reproductive maturity of redberry juniper  
( Juniperus pinchotii ).  Forest Ecology and 
Management 21:191-196. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn, Michigan.  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb. 
 
Texas A&M University 2002.  Native trees of Texas .  
Department of Horticulture, College Station, Texas.  
<http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/ornamentals/natives/indexscien
tific.htm>.  Accessed: 30May2002. 
 
United States Department  of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2001.   Fire effects information system .  
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Science 
Laboratory, Boise, ID.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/ feis/plants/tree/junpin/i
ndex.html
 
Prepared By:  
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 30May2002 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060801 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.