Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LITTLE WALNUT 
Juglans microcarpa  Berl. 
Plant Symbol = JUMI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 
 
Fruit and foliage of little walnut  photographed by W.L. Wagner @ 
USDA-NRCS Plants Database. 
 
Alternate Names  
Texas walnut, dwarf walnut, river walnut, nogal, 
Texas black walnut 
 
Uses 
The wood of little walnut is sometimes used in the 
production of furniture, cabinets, paneling, and 
veneer, but its scarcity limi ts its use in this regard. 
The nuts produced by this  tree are consumed by 
wildlife and are considered a valuable food source for 
many small mammals. Deer are also reported to 
browse little walnut. Little walnut shows promise as a 
small tree for shelterbelt and conservation tree 
plantings especially in dry climates. Little walnut has 
been used as rootstock in developing non-native 
walnuts and has potential value in the development of 
walnut cultivars. Plants were first cultivated in 1868 
(Brinkman, 1974). 
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
Description 
General
: Walnut family or Juglandaceae. A 
monoecious tree with large pinnately compound 
alternate leaves without stipules. There are two 
members of the Juglandaceae family 1)  Carya or 
pecan and hickory and 2)  Juglans or walnut . Juglans 
is derived from a Latin phrase  Jovis glans meaning 
“the acorn of Jove” and microcarpa refers to the 
small size of its fruit (Stephens, H.A. 1969).  Little 
walnut is a small to medium tree with single or 
multiple trunks and spreading low branches. The 
mature height depends on the environmental 
conditions grown under, but heights of 6 to 15 meters 
have been described. Leaves are alternately attached 
to the tree and pinnately compound with 17-23 
narrowly linear, lanceolate curved leaflets. Leaves 
overall are 9 to 23 centimeters (cm.) long. The 
individual leaflets are 3 to 9 cm. long and 1 to 2.5 
cm. wide. Flowers bloom in May and have separate 
male and female flowers. Male flowers or catkins are 
yellow green and attached to last years twigs. Female 
flowers are small, yellow  green and are located on 
the ends of branches in small clusters which appear in 
spring with leaves on new growth. Fruit is displayed 
in October and may be single or 2 to 3 in a cluster. 
Fruit shape is globular with a 2.8 to 3.2 cm. diameter 
and a thin brown hairy husk. The mature bark is 
brown, deeply fissured with ridges flat topped and 
occasionally loose. The ba rk of young trees and 
branches is often silvery gray and smooth.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Little walnut is a native species 
that can be found in southw estern and central Kansas 
through western Oklahoma and Texas, New Mexico 
and Arizona and south into northern Mexico. In 
Oklahoma little walnut is most abundant in and 
around the Wichita Mountains, but is scattered 
throughout the western part of the state (Oklahoma 
Biological Survey, 1999). 
 
Habitat: Little walnut grows in dry, rocky ravine 
banks and hillsides (Stephens, 1973). It would also 
commonly be found within the narrow riparian 
forests adjoining a river or creek bottom.  
 
Adaptation 
This tree is adapted to sites that are more severely 
limited, moisture wise than other trees. Accessions 
that are being grown in Tribune, KS have responded 
well to the low water potential that they have

experienced in that western region of Kansas. Little 
walnut commonly grows on shallow calcareous or 
alluvial soils.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seed is the most reliable way to 
produce little walnut seedlings. Like most walnut 
species, the seeds are characterized as having a 
dormant embryo (Brinkman, 1974). The North 
American species also have a hard seed coat (Young 
and Young, 1992). Dormancy can be broken by 
chilling at 3 to 5 degrees Centigrade (°C) for 90 to 
120 days.  In the nursery trade walnuts are either 
sown in the fall shortly after harvest or pre-chilled 
outdoors over winter in moist sand, covered with 60 
cm of soil mulch. Screening is used to prevent rodent 
damage and normally fungicide is applied to prevent 
disease during the long  pre-chilling process. After 
pre-chilling is accomplished a germination test can be 
conducted in moist sand at 20 to 30 °C alternating 
temperatures. The removal of a small section of shell 
may speed up the germination at this point. A 
germination percentage of around 50 percent is 
normal. Pre-chilled seed can be sown in the spring. 
Some nurseries simply broadcast the nuts on a tilled 
surface and then press the nu ts into the ground with a 
roller. Some nursery personnel hand sows the nuts at 
a rate of 160 per meter squared. Seed should be 
covered with 2.5 to 5.0 cm. of nursery soil and again 
protected from rodent damage. Cleaned seed 
averages 203 seed units  in a kilogram (Brinkman, 
1974).  
 
Management 
Seedlings will need to be protected from browsing 
animals until established. Seedling growth rate will 
be fairly rapid once the plants are established and 
growing well. Little walnut will bear fruit at 
approximately 15 to 20 year s. The interval (2 to 3 
years) and amount of fruit produced will be irregular 
in subsequent years (Young and Young, 1992). The 
nut meat of little walnut is described as nutritious and 
of high quality (Simpson, 1988).   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The walnut husk fly infests ripening fruit of little 
walnut after summer rains (Lamb, 1971). The amount 
of damage caused by this insect is variable, but 
appears to be less in open, windy areas. Little walnut 
is highly susceptible to root or crown rot when 
periodically flooded. It is less susceptible to the 
fungus that causes walnut anthracnose than is black 
walnut. 
 
 
  Environmental Concerns 
 There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with little walnut.                                           
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Walnut fruits should be collected from the ground in 
the fall or early winter, either after naturally falling 
from the trees or being knocked from the trees by 
flailing or shaking. Mechan
ical tree shakers are used 
in the commercial production of walnuts. Nuts are 
easiest to extract from husks at the early stages when 
husks are softening. At later stages husks become 
mushy and can not be removed completely and if 
allowed to dry completely the husks become very 
hard and removal is all but impossible. After 
cleaning, unfilled nuts can be separated from filled 
nuts by floating them in water. Seed enclosed in a 
husk will germinate, but for standardization in 
planting and in topical applications of fungicides 
husks are generally removed in nursery operations.    
Seeds of  Juglans can be stored for long periods of 
time at low temperatures (3 to 4 °C) and high (80 to 
90 %) humidity (Young and Young, 1992). Most 
species of this genus have a dormant embryo and 
must be stratified 3 to 4 months or planted in the fall 
to break the dormancy (Dirr and Heuser, 1987). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under   
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of  Agriculture.” There are 
currently no conservation releases of little walnut 
from the plant materials pr ogram. However, they are 
commercially available at selected nurseries.  
 
References 
Brinkman, K.A. 1974. Juglans L. Walnut. In: 
Schopmeyer, C.S., Ed. Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States. USDA Forest Service Agric. Handb. 
No. 450. Washington, D.C. 
 
Dirr, M.A. and C.W. Heuser. 1987. The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation. Varsity Press 
Inc., Athens, GA. 
 
Lamb, S.H. 1971. Woody plants of New Mexico and 
their value to wildlife. Bulletin 14. New Mexico 
Department of Game and Fish, Albuquerque, NM.  
 
Oklahoma Biological Survey. 1999.  Juglans 
microcarpa  Berl. var. microcarpa.  
(http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/jumim.htm)

[online: cited 15 October 2008]. University of 
Oklahoma, Norman, OK. 
 
Simpson, B.J. 1988. A field guide to Texas trees. 
Texas Monthly Press. Austin, TX. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1969. Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
of Kansas. University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, 
KS. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973. Woody plants of the North 
Central Plains. University of Kansas Press. 
Lawrence, KS. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2008. The PLANTS database 
(http://plants.usda.gov
, 20 October 2008). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
 
Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of woody 
plants in North America. Dioscorides Press. 
Portland,OR. 
 
Prepared By 
Richard L. Wynia, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Species Coordinator  
Morris J. Houck,  USDANRCS Louisiana State 
Office, Alexandria, Louisiana  
 
Edited: 081029 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources 
Conservation Service.