Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOFT RUSH 
Juncus effusus  L. 
Plant Symbol = JUEF  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
There are several taxonomic  varieties of this species. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Coiled basketry prevails in Southern 
California, with the mottled yellowish brown of soft 
rush providing a natural colored and variegated 
background (Turnbaugh and Turnbaugh 1986).  
Juncus  stems are used in the coiled baskets of 
Southern California tribes such as the Cahuilla, 
Luiseño, Chumash, Diegueño, Agua Caliente, 
Gabrieliño, Juaneño, Death Valley Shoshone, and 
Fernandeno (Barrows 1967; Murphey 1959).  The 
foundation material is made of  Juncus balticus and 
Juncus effusus , and the sewing material is made of 
Juncus textilis.   The Quinalt of western Washington 
used soft rush for plaiting tumplines for baskets 
(Gunther 1973).  They also mixed soft rush with 
cattails to make string.  The Snoqualmie used the 
stalks for tying things. 
 
The early sprouts of soft rush were sometimes eaten 
raw by the Snoqualmie of Washington (Gunther 
1973).   Juncus shoots were eaten raw, roasted in 
ashes, or boiled by Maidu, Luiseño, and others 
(Strike 1994).  Owens Valley Paiute ate the seeds.  
Soft rush stalks was gathered in wetlands and was 
eaten on occasion by the  Nlaka'pamux and Lillooet 
people of British Columbia (Kunlein and Turner 
1991). 
 
Soft rush, also called candle rush by the Japanese, is 
used for tatami mats.  Large mats were also made by  
 
California Indians by piercing holes in  Juncus and 
threading cordage through the holes so the  Juncus 
stalks were aligned side-by-side (Strike 1994).  These 
flexible mats could be rolled and stored when not 
needed. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Wildlife : A wide range of mammal and avian species 
depend on  Juncus species  for food and habitat (Hoag 
and Zierke 1998).  Waterfowl, songbirds, and small 
mammals such as jack rabbits, cottontail, muskrat, 
porcupine, and gophers (Martin 1951) eat rush seeds.  
Rushes provide habitat for amphibians and spawning 
areas for fish.  Muskrats feed  on the rootstalks of soft 
rush, and various wetland wading birds find shelter 
among the stems. 
 
Livestock : Cattle will graze  Juncus effusus late in the 
season after more palatable plants are eaten.  Rushes 
tend to be resistant to grazing pressure and fairly 
unpalatable to cattle, so tend to increase in species 
composition in pastures. 
 
Erosion & Restoration : Rushes provide the following 
conservation uses: erosion control, sediment 
accretion and stabilization, nutrient uptake and 
transformation, wildlife food  and cover, restoration 
and creation of wetland ecosystems, and wastewater 
treatment applications.  The rhizomatous nature, 
nitrogen fixation capabilities, dense root system, and 
phenotypic plasticity to flooding and drought stress 
provide high soil and slope stabilization capabilities, 
particularly in areas with  flooded soils or fluctuating 
hydrology.  The rhizomes form a matrix for many 
beneficial bacteria, making this plant an excellent 
addition for wastewater treatment.  This species can 
have invasive characteristics in certain situations. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rush Family (Juncaceae).  Soft rush is a 
rhizomatous, perennial herb with a large, tufted, 
cespitose growth form.   Juncus effusus  stems are 
stout but soft, 5-15 dm tall and 1.5-3 mm wide.  The

basal sheaths are bladeless or the inner ones tipped 
with a short awn, the edges usually overlapping 
nearly to the subtruncate or emarginate tip, with the 
veins converging at the tip.  The leaves are dull 
chocolate brown or chestnut-colored at the base, the 
inner sheaths dark toward the summit.  The 
inflorescence is a many-flowered, loosely clustered 
panicle, 2- 10 cm long.  The capsule is oblong-
obovoid, of about the same length as the perianth, 
obtuse or retuse.  The seeds are retucilate.   
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  Soft rush occurs in wet places on 
hillsides or valley flats below 2500 m.  It occurs 
through California to British Columbia, the eastern 
United States, Mexico, and Eurasia. 
 
Establishment 
Juncus effusus  is easily propagated from bare root 
stock or seedlings, from container stalk, or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Bare root stock or seedlings are 
preferred revegetation methods where there is 
moving water.  
These plants can be invasive.  They 
are useful for stabilization and revegetation of 
disturbed areas.   Juncus effusus requires moderate 
summer watering (irrigation), generally 1 - 4 times 
per month depending on the absorption rate and 
water retention capacity of the soil.  Salt rush plants 
may need to have their roots in moist or wet soils.  
These native plants are especially good for stabilizing 
or restoring disturbed or degraded areas for erosion 
and slope control. 
 
Live Plant Collections : The following information on 
Juncus balticus is provided by J. Chris Hoag and 
Mike Zierke (USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho).  Due  to their taxonomic and 
habitat similarity, it is likely that  Juncus effusus 
establishes in a similar manner. 
•   Planting plugs is the surest way to establish a 
new stand of this species.  Plug spacing of 25-30 
cm will fill in within one growing season.  
Fluctuating the water level during the 
establishment period may speed spread of 
Juncus .  Water levels can be managed to enhance 
spread and control weeds.   
•   Clip leaves and stems to 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches) before planting; this allows the plant to 
allocate more energy into root production.  
Transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible in moist (not flooded or anoxic) soils.  
Plants should be transported and stored in a cool 
location prior to planting.  The roots should 
always remain moist or in water until planted.   
•  Soil should be kept saturated after planting.  
Plants can tolerate 2.5 -  8 cm of standing water 
as long as the level fluctuates over the growing 
season.  Allow roots to become established 
before flooding soils if possible. 
•   Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall just 
after the first rains (usually late October to 
November).  Survival is highest when plants are 
dormant and soils are moist.   
•  Fertilization is very helpful for plant growth and 
reproduction.  Many more seeds are produced 
with moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections : The flowering period is late May to 
August, occasionally to September.  Seed ripens in 
early August.  Phenology will change by area, aspect, 
elevation, and specific site conditions. 
•   Seed may be collected by hand, using a pair of 
hand shears, or with a gas-powered handheld 
seed harvester. 
•  The tiny, black seeds ar e easily lost from the 
capsules when collecting by hand.  Be careful to 
keep capsules upright before putting in collection 
bag.  Use paper sacks when collecting seeds for 
this species. 
•   To clean the seed, run  the collection through a 
hammermill to break up debris and knock the 
seeds loose.  Use a 1/20 inch screen on the top 
and a solid sheet on the bottom of the seed 
cleaner.  Adjust the air  flow to blow off the 
chaff.  The cleaning process can be speeded up 
by shaking the hammermilled collection to settle 
seed to the bottom of the pan.  The top portion of 
the chaff can then be discarded and the seed-rich 
mixture that is left in the bottom can be run 
through the seed cleaner.   
 
Seed germination in greenhouse :  
•  Seeds need light, moisture and heat for 
germination.  Soaking the seeds in water for 1 - 7 
days will decrease the time the seed takes to 
sprout.   
•  To grow seeds, place on soil surface and press in 
lightly to assure good soil contact.  Do not cover 
the seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  Greenhouse 
should be kept hot (32-38°C).   
•   Seeds begin to germinate in approximately 1 
week.  Maintain soil moisture until plants are to 
be transplanted.  Seedlings cannot withstand 
long periods without water while growing in the 
greenhouse. 
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants

are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.    
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management 
(Hoag et al. 1995).  Juncus species can tolerate 
periods of drought and total inundation.  It is 
important to keep transplanted plugs moist, not 
flooded, until roots are established.  Water levels can 
then be managed to enhance or reduce spread as well 
as control terrestrial weeds.   
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation such as  Juncus species for hut 
construction and for food.  Typically, an area of open 
water is created around the huts.  Muskrat eatouts 
increase wetland diversity by providing opportunities 
for aquatic vegetation to become established in the 
open water and the huts provide a substrate for shrubs 
and other plant species.   
 
Juncus  species tend to be fairly resilient to insect and 
disease problems.  Aphids may feed on the stems, but 
rarely cause significant damage.  If an insect or 
disease problem is encountered in the greenhouse, 
treatment options may be limited by cultural 
constraints if these plants  are to be used by Indian 
basketweavers.  Pesticide exposure is higher for 
basketweavers than the re st of the population.  Juncus 
culms are split with the mouth to process basketry 
materials; therefore, an unusually high degree of 
human exposure and risk occur with plants 
designated for ethnobotanic use.  Rushes are 
perennial, rhizomatous plants.  In most cases, they 
will out-compete other species within the wetland 
area of the site, eliminating the need for manual or 
chemical control of invasive species. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: The management 
of  Juncus effusus  stands includes the following: 
ownership of prime basket rush sites, stimulation of 
new growth through harvesting stalks, periodic 
burning, and not harvesting when soils are very 
mucky and likely to be compacted.  The stalks are cut 
above the rhizomes and roots, leaving plenty of buds 
to regrow new shoots.  As with other rhizomatous 
species, harvesting stimulates new growth and  maintains the clone in a juvenile or immature growth 
phase, where productivity is highest.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  This plant 
is available at many nurseries nationwide. 
 
References 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  
A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of Western Washington and 
Northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Dahl, T.E. and C.E. Johnson 1991.   Status and trends 
of wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid-
1970s to mid-1980s .  USDI, FWS, Washington, D.C.  
28 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. n.d.   Wetland plant fact sheet - Baltic rush 
(Juncus balticus) .  Interagency Riparian/Wetland 
Project.  USDA, NRCS, Pl ant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  3 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Zierke (February) 1998.   A 
reference guide for the collection and use of ten 
common wetland plants of the Great Basin and 
Intermountain West. Riparian/Wetland Project 
Information Series No. 13.  USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberd een, Idaho.  13 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands . Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7.  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Hurd, E.G., N.L. Shaw, & L.C. Smithman 1992.  
Cyperaceae and Juncaceae - selected low-elevation 
species.   Proceedings of Symposium of Ecology, 
Management, and Restoration of Intermountain

Annual Rangelands, Boise, Idaho.  May 18-22, 1992.  
Pages 380-383. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, botany and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
 
Manning, M.E., S.R. Swanson, T. Svejcar, & J. Trent 
1989.   Rooting characteristics of four Intermountain 
meadow community types .  Journal of Range 
Management 42(4):309-312. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Merrill, R.E. 1970. Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians .  Acoma Books, Ramona, 
California.  
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians. Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1984.   Wetlands of the United States: 
Current status and recent trends . USDI, FWS, 
National Wetlands Inventory, Washington, D.C.  58 
pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. (June) 1997.  California Indian 
Basketweavers Association newsletter .  
 
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffler Publishing, Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania.  Pages 194-205. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp: 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.