Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUTTERNUT 
Juglans cinerea  L. 
Plant Symbol = JUCI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Project 
 
Alternate common names  
White walnut, demon walnut, oilnut 
 
Uses 
Butternut is called "white walnut" because of its 
light-colored wood, which has a natural golden luster 
that becomes satin-like when polished.  The wood is 
only moderately hard and saws and carves easily.  It 
has been used for furniture, cabinetry, instrument 
cases, interior woodwork, including hand-carved wall 
panels and trim, and church decoration and altars.  It 
is stocked in specialty lumberyards because little is 
cut annually.    
 
Butternuts were often planted close to the house on 
farmsteads for their use as food.  Kernels were used 
in baking and cultivars have been selected for nut 
size and for ease of cracking  and extracting kernels.   
 
They have been popular in New England for making 
maple-butternut candy.  Early settlers used the fruit 
husks and inner bark to make orange or yellow dye 
and the root bark provided a laxative. 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Walnut family (Juglandaceae).  Small to 
medium-sized native trees with stiff upright branches 
and a wide-spreading crown, the young twigs, stems, 
and leaflets have hairs sticky-oily to the touch; 
terminal buds 12-18 mm long; bark brownish-gray, 
thick, shallowly divided into smooth or scaly plates.  
Leaves are pinnately compou nd, the leaflets (7-) 11-
17, ovate to lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, ± 
symmetric, mostly 5-11cm long, with finely toothed 
margins, terminal leaflet  present, the lower surfaces 
densely covered with stellate hairs.  Flowers are 
unisexual, female (pistillate) and male (staminate), 
but on the same tree (the species monoecious), 
usually not opening simultaneously on any individual 
tree; male flowers in slender catkins 6-14 cm long, 
the female flowers in terminal clusters of 6-8 flowers 
each.  Fruit is an oblong-ovo id nut 4-6(-8) cm long, 
single or in clusters of 2-5, with a hard, thick, deeply 
furrowed shell enclosed by a thick husk with a sticky-
glandular surface.  The nuts usually remain on the 
tree until after leaf fall.  The common name refers to 
the mature nut kernels, wh ich are sweet and oily, like 
butter.   
 
Distribution 
Butternut is primarily a species of the northeastern 
and north-central US and southern Canada from 
southeastern New Brunswick to Ontario and Quebec; 
in the US in Minnesota to Missouri and eastward 
through Tennessee into North Carolina and Virginia, 
with disjunct outlyers in  Arkansas, Mississippi, 
Alabama, South Carolina,  and Georgia.  It is 
uncommon throughout most of its range and formally 
listed as rare in many of the states in which it occurs.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant

Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Establishment  
Adaptation: Butternut is found most frequently in 
rich woods of coves and stream benches and terraces, 
on slopes, in the talus of rock ledges, and on other 
sites with good drainage; at elevations of 0-1000 (-
1500) meters.  Young trees may grow in considerable 
competition, but they are shade-intolerant and mature 
trees must reach the overstory.  Flowering occurs 
from April-June and fruiting from September-
October.   
 
General : Seed production begins at about 20 years 
and is optimum from 30-60 years.  Good crops can be 
expected every 2-3 years,  with light crops during 
intervening years.  Premat ure seed losses may result 
from consumption by insects, birds, and rodents, and 
a lack of butternut trees  in the immediate vicinity 
may limit pollination and fruit formation.  Seeds 
germinate in the spring after seedfall and a cold 
period at 20°-30° C. for 90-120 days to break 
dormancy.    
 
Stumps of young butternut trees and saplings are 
capable of sproutin g.  The trees are reported to be 
slow growing and seldom live  longer than 75 years.   
 
Management 
Butternut canker is killing the species over its whole 
range.  The fungal pathogen (Sirococcus 
clavigignenti -juglandacearum ) apparently was 
introduced from outside of North America.  It was 
first reported from southwestern Wisconsin in 1967 
but is believed to have spread from the southeastern 
US coastal region, where it first appeared about 40-
50 years ago.  The Forest  Service estimated in 1995 
that 77% of the butternuts in the Southeast were 
dead.  The fungus infects  trees through buds, leaf 
scars, and possibly insect  wounds and other openings 
in the bark, rapidly killing small branches.  Spores 
produced on branches are spread by rain, resulting in 
multiple, perennial stem cankers that eventually 
girdle and kill infected trees – these do not resprout.  
The cankered portions should be removed and 
destroyed and the wounds should be covered with 
fungicidal paint; leaves that might harbor fungus 
(brown leaf spot) should be destroyed.    
 
A few healthy butternut trees have been found 
growing among canker-diseased and dying trees and 
may be resistant.  Black walnut apparently is 
unaffected.  A research coalition has been formed to 
locate surviving trees or populations, characterize 
sites, identify trees with putative resistance, develop  screening methodology for disease resistance, study 
fungal physiology, and preserve germplasm. 
 
Fire easily top-kills butternut and older trees rarely 
sprout from the root crown or stump.  A single hot 
fire or repeated cool fire
s can effectively eliminate 
the species in mixed hardwood stands  
 
There is commonly a zone of no-growth or inhibited 
growth around walnut trees, because they produce a 
naphthoquinone (juglone) that selectively inhibits 
growth of associated plants .  Juglone is concentrated 
in root tissue and fruit husks, with lesser amounts in 
the leaves, catkins, buds, and inner bark.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of  Agriculture.”  These 
plant materials are readily available from commercial 
sources. 
 
Two hybrids show strong growth and extreme 
hardiness and produce nuts similar to the butternut in 
clusters of 10-15.    
Juglans cinerea  X  J. regia  = Juglans  X 
quadrangulata 
Juglans  cinerea  X  J. ailantifolia  = Juglans  X bixbii   
 
References 
Anderson, R.L. & L.A. LaMadeleine 1978.   The 
distribution of butternut decline in the eastern United 
States .  USDA, Forest Service,  Forest Survey Report 
S-3-78.  Northeastern  Area State and Private 
Forestry, Broomall, Pennsylvania.    
 
Black, W.M. & D. Neely 1978.  Relative resistance 
of Juglans species and hybrids to walnut 
anthracnose .  Plant Disease Rep. 62:497-499.    
 
Coladonato, M. 1991.   Juglans cinerea. IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).  The Fire Effects Information 
System [Data base]. U.S.D.A., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Felter, H.W. & J.U. Lloyd 1998.   Juglans (U. S. 
P.)— Juglans.  King's American Dispensatory.   
<http://metalab.unc.edu/herbmed/eclectic/kings/jugla
ns-cine.html>

Furnier, G.R., A.M. Stolz, R.M. Mustaphi, & M.E. 
Ostry 1999.  Genetic evidence that butternut canker 
was recently introduced into North America .  Canad. 
J. Bot. 77:783-785.    
<http://www.cisti.nrc.ca/cisti/journals/cjb/b99-
013.html> 
 
Ostry, M.E., M.E. Mielke , & D.D. Skilling 1994.  
Butternut – strategies for managing a threatened 
tree .  Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-165. USDA Forest 
Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station.  
St. Paul, Minnesota.    
 
Ostry, M.E., M.E. Mielke , & R.L. Anderson 2000.  
How to identify butternut canker and manage 
butternut trees .  USDA, Forest Service, North 
Central Forest Experiment Station, Northeastern 
Area.   
 <http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/ht_but/ht_but.htm> 
  
Rink, G. 1990.   Juglans cinerea L.  Butternut .  Pp. 
386-390, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics 
of North America . Volume 2.   Hardwoods .  USDA, 
Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, 
D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Schlarbaum, S.E., F. Hebard, P.C. Spaine, & J.C. 
Kamalay 2000 .  Three American tragedies: chestnut 
blight, butternut canker, and Dutch elm disease .  
<http://webriver.com/tn-
eppc/symposium/schlarba.htm>  
 
Stanford, A.M., R. Harden, & C.R. Parks 2000.  
Phylogeny and biogeography of Juglans 
(Juglandaceae) based on ITS sequence data .  Amer. 
J. Bot. 87:872-882.   
 
USDA, NRCS 1993.   Northeast wetland flora: Field 
office guide to plant species .  Wetland Science 
Institute, Laurel, Maryland. 
 
Whittemore, A.T. & D.E. Stone 1997.   Juglans.  Pp. 
425-428, IN:  Flora of North America, North of 
Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford Univ. Press, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.