Plant Guide

BLACK WALNUT

Juglans nigra L.

Plant Symbol = JUNI 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Robert Mohlenbrock @ PLANTS 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The bark of black walnut was used by 
many native groups, including the Cherokee, in tea as 
a laxative and chewed for toothaches. Caution: Bark 
should be used cautiously in medicine, because it is 
poisonous. The Cherokee also ate the fruit of the 
black walnut.  The Chippewa and the Cherokee used 
the bark to make brown and black dyes.  The 
Comanche created a paste from the leaves and husk 
of the fruit for treatment of ringworm.  Black walnut 
was also used by the Appalachian, Cherokee, 
Comanche, Iroquois, and Rappahannock to treat 
athlete’s foot, hemorrhoids, and as an insecticide.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Walnut Family (Juglandaceae).  Black 
walnut is usually a medium sized tree ranging from 
70-90 feet tall and 2-3 feet in diameter at breast 
height. However, black walnut can reach 150 feet 
tall and 8 feet in diameter at breast height.  The 
branches are widely spread and form a massive 
crown.  The bark is thick and brown to grayish-black 
in color.  The bark has deep furrows and narrow 
forking ridges. The furrows and ridges form a 
diamond pattern.  The twigs are stout with notched 
leaf scars. They are light brown to orangish in color. 
The terminal buds are short, blunt, and covered with 
a few hairy scales.  The leaves are up to 6 dm long 
with 9-23 leaflets attached directly to a stout rachis 
without a supporting stalk.  The rachises are covered 
with fine short hairs.  Flowers appear in late May to 
early June.  The flowers bear 17-50 stamens, but lack 
pistils.  The fruits are 4-6 cm in diameter and 
spherical shaped.  They can be found in groups of 2-3 
or solitary.  The fruits have a thick, semi-fleshy, husk 
covered with short hairs and are yellowish-green in 
color.  The nut is corrugated with rounded ridges. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: Black walnut is found in fields and rich 
woodlands. 
Adaptation 
Black walnut produces a toxin, known as “juglone”, 
which inhibits the growth of other plants around it, 
thereby reducing competition.  Juglone deprives 
sensitive plants of energy needed for photosynthate 
production.  The symptoms of plants being affected 
by juglone include foliar yellowing, wilting, and 
eventually death.  The largest sources of juglone on 
the tree are located in the buds, roots, and nut hulls. 
Establishment 
Black walnut is difficult to transplant and therefore, 
propagation by seed is recommended. Seeds should 
be planted in the fall in moist, well-drained, deep soil 
that is rich in organic matter.  Black walnut prefers 
full sun. 
Management 
Black walnut is a very intolerant tree.  Planted in 
fairly dense stands or under forest competition the 
tree develops a tall and well formed, clear bole.  This 
bole form results from the tree putting its resources 
into competing for sunlight and is ideal for wood 
fiber production.  Logs 10 inches in diameter at 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

breast height can be developed in 35 years under 
ideal growing conditions.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Black walnut suffers from a variety of deforming and 
deadly pests and diseases including parasitic 
nematodes, mistletoe, fusarium canker, bacterial 
blight, white trunk rot, and cylindrockadium root rot. 
Environmental Concerns 
Juglone may be a concern when landscaping or 
planting black walnut near a garden. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940. Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians. Papers of 
the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970. Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas. Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas. 1881 pp. 
Dana, M.N. & B.R. Lerner 1994. Department of 
Horticulture, Purdue University Cooperative 
Extension Service. West Lafayette, North Carolina. 
http://www.agcom.purdue.edu/AgCom/Pubs/HO/HO 
-193.pdf 
Gilmore, M. 1977. Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri river region. University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 109 pp. 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986. Flora of the 
Great Plains. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975. Cherokee 
plants their uses-a 400 year history. Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina. 65 pp. 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin, & F.M. 
White 1996. Textbook of dendrology. 8th edition. 
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, New York. 534pp. 
Hart, J.H. & J.E. Cummings Carlson 1997. The 
American Phytopathological Society. 
http://www.scisoc.org/resource/common/names/blkw 
alnt.htm 
Johnston, Tim. 2000. Guide to herbs. Holisticopia 
http://www.herbweb.com/herbage/A270.htm 
Michigan State University, Home Horticulture. 1996. 
Michigan State University Extension Service, East 
Lansing, Michigan. 
http://www.msue.msu.edu/msue/imp/mod03.0170052 
3.html 
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999. Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb 
Rydberg, P.A. 1932. Flora of the prairies and plains 
of central North America. The Science Press Printing 
Company, Lancaster, Pennsylvania. 969 pp. 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.