Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN RED CEDAR  
Juniperus virginiana  Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = JUVI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Carlinville (IL) Field Office, & Missouri 
State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
Cedar tree, juniper, savin, evergreen, cedar apple, and 
Virginia red cedar 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The red cedar is used by many tribes 
for incense in purification and ritual (Kindscher 
1992).  For numerous tribes, the red cedar tree 
symbolizes the tree of life and is burned in sweat 
lodges and in purification rites. 
 
The Blackfeet made a tea from the berries of the red 
cedar to stop vomiting (Kindscher 1992).  A  
 
 
blackfeet remedy for arthritis and rheumatism was to 
boil red cedar leaves in water, add one-half teaspoon  
of turpentine, and when cooled, rub the mixture on 
affected parts.  The Blackf eet also drank a tea made 
from red cedar root as a general tonic; mixed with 
Populus  leaves this root tea became a liniment for 
stiff backs or backache (M
cClintock 1909, Johnston 
1970, Hellson 1974). 
 Robert Molenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
The Cheyenne steeped the leaves of the red cedar and 
drank the resulting tea to relieve persistent coughing 
or a tickling in the throat.  It was also believed to 
produce sedative effects that  were especially useful 
for calming a hyperactive person.  Cheyenne women 
drank the red cedar tea to speed delivery during 
childbirth (Grinnell 1962).  The Cheyenne, along 
with the Flathead, Nez Perce, Kutenai, and Sioux, 
made a tea from red cedar boughs, branches, and 
fleshy cones, which they drank for colds, fevers, 
tonsillitis, and pneumonia (Hart 1976). 
 
As a cure for asthma, the  Gros Ventres ate whole red 
cedar berries or pulverized them and boiled them to 
make a tea.  They also  made a preparation from the 
leaves mixed with the root, which they applied 
topically to control bleeding (Kroeber 1908).  The 
Crows drank this medicinal tea to check diarrhea and 
to stop lung or nasal hemorrhage.  Crow women 
drank it after childbirth for cleansing and healing 
(Hart 1976).  
 
The young leafy twigs of the red cedar were officially 
listed in the  U.S. Pharmacopoeia  from 1820 to 1894 
as a diuretic (Kindscher 1992).  The distilled oil of 
the red cedar has been officially listed as a reagent in 
the  U.S. Pharmacopoeia since 1916 ( ibid.).  
 
The wood of red cedar is very durable, and was used 
for lance shafts, bows, and other items.  Flutes made 
from red cedar wood were highly regarded by the 
Cheyenne.  Cedar boughs were used for bedding. The 
Menomini wove mats of cedar bark.  The mats were 
used for roofing temporary structures, for partitions, 
floor mats and wrappings, and for various purposes in 
the canoes.  
  
Ornamental : Seedlings of red ced ar are ordinarily 
used as stock for grafting ornamental juniper clones.

Red cedars are often used as ornamentals for their 
evergreen foliage.  Most cemetery plantings include 
old red cedar trees and many younger dwarf junipers.  
All of the native junipers are valuable ornamental 
species, and many horticultural varieties have been 
developed.  Red cedar is widely used in shelterbelts 
and wildlife plantings.  The close-grained, aromatic, 
and durable wood of junipers is used for furniture, 
interior paneling, novelties, and fence posts.  The 
fruits and young branches contain aromatic oil that is 
used in medicines. 
 
Wildlife: Red cedar and other junipers are important 
to wildlife throughout the country.  Their twigs and 
foliage are eaten extensively by hoofed browsers, but 
the chief attraction to wildlife is the bluish-black 
berry-like fruit.  The cedar waxwing is one of the 
principal users of red cedar berries, but numerous 
other birds and mammals, both large and small, make 
these fruits an important part of their diet.  In addition 
to their wildlife food value, cedars provide important 
protective and nesting cover.  Chipping sparrows, 
robins, song sparrows, and mockingbirds use these 
trees as one of their favorite nesting sites.  Juncos, 
myrtle warblers, sparrows of various kinds, and other 
birds use the dense foliage as roosting cover.  In 
winter, their dense protective shelter is especially 
valuable.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Cypress Family (Cupressaceae).  Red cedar 
( Juniperus virginiana ) is a medium-sized dioecious 
or rarely monoecious tree from 10-20 m (33-66') tall 
(M
cGregor et al. 1986, Stephens 1973).  The 
evergreen tree is shaped like a pyramid or column, 
with reddish-brown to grayish colored bark that is 
fibrous and shedding.  Branches are usually reddish-
brown.  Leave are opposite, simple, green or blue-
green, closely appressed  and overlapping the leaf 
above, scale-like, and 0.2-0.3 cm (1/16-1/8”) long or 
needlelike and 0.6-1.2 cm (1/4-1/2”) long.  Male and 
female cones are on separate trees.  The staminate 
(male) cones are yellowish-brown, papery, solitary at 
the tips of branchlets, ovoid to ellipsoid, and 0.2-0.4 
cm (1/16-1/8”) long.  The ovulate (female) cones are 
solitary at the tips of branchlets, dark blue or bluish-
purple, waxy and berrylike, 0.4-0.7 cm (3/16-1/4”) 
long.  The female cones ripen from September 
through October.  There are 1-3 seeds per cone.  Red 
cedar seeds are yellow-brow n and round, 2-4 mm in  diameter, ridged near the base, and sometimes 
shallowly pitted. 
 
Distribution 
The distribution of red cedar (Juniperus virginiana) 
spans the U.S. east of the  Rockies. The species also 
occurs in Oregon in the west. The southern red cedar 
(
var. silicicola) occurs only in the southeastern US.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
It is especially well adapted to dry areas.  Red cedar 
is generally propagated by cuttings.  
 
Propagation from Cuttings 
Cuttings are made 5 to 15 cm (2 to 65 inches) long 
from new lateral growth tips stripped of older 
branches.  A small piece of old wood, “a heel,” is 
thus left attached to the base of the cutting.  Some 
propagators believe this to be advantageous.  In other 
cases, good results are obta ined when the cuttings are 
just clipped without the “heel” from the older wood.  
Cuttings from the current season’s terminal growth 
also root well. 
 
Cuttings to be rooted in the greenhouse can be taken 
at any time during the winter or rooted outdoors on 
heated beds.  Exposing the stock plants to several 
hard freezes seems to give better rooting.  Optimum 
time for taking cuttings is when stock plants have 
ceased growth (i.e. the late fall-winter propagation 
period is more successful than summer).  For 
propagating in an outdoor cold frame, cuttings are 
taken in late summer or early fall.  There may be 
advantages to using bottom heat.  Lightly wounding 
the base of the cuttings is sometimes helpful, and the 
use of root-promoting chemic als, especially IBA, is 
beneficial.  Recommendations for root-promoting 
chemicals include the fo llowing: 2500 IBA Quick-
dip (Alabama), 3000 – 8000 ppm IBA liquid, and 
0.3-4.5 percent IBA talc.  Medium-coarse sand or a 
10:1 mixture of perlite and peat moss is a satisfactory 
rooting medium.  Maintenance of a humid 
environment without excessive wetting of the 
cuttings is desirable, as is a relatively high light 
intensity.  A light, intermittent mist can be used.  
Bottom heat of 60-65°F (12°C) is critical the first six 
weeks of propagation to allow the basal wound of 
cuttings to callus. 
 
Seed Propagation 
Juniperus virginiana  flowers from March to May.  
The fruits should be gathered in the fall (September-
November) as soon as the berry-like cones become

ripe.  Red cedar trees come to seed-bearing age in 10 
years, and they bear cones every 2-3 years.  Seed 
collection can be done by stripping or picking the 
berries by hand from the trees, or by flailing the fruits 
to ground cloths.  Be careful to pick only ripe berries.  
Since the number of filled seeds varies widely from 
tree to tree, it is important to test the seeds by cutting 
to determine percent fill.  Seeds may be stored as 
berries or cleaned seeds. 
 
The seeds can be recovered by macerating the fruits 
and floating the seeds to the top.  The addition of 
detergent to the maceration water helps to separate 
seeds from the resinous fruits.  Red cedar seeds store 
quite well.  They should be dried to 10-20% moisture 
and stored in a sealed container at cold temperatures. 
 
For best germination, seeds should be removed from 
the fruits, then the seed coat is softened by treating it 
with sulfuric acid for 120 minutes.  After soaking the 
seeds in sulfuric acid, follow with 6 weeks of warm 
stratification at 20 to 30°C (70 to 85°F), or summer 
planting, then 10 weeks of pre-chilling at 4°C (40°F).  
Use of fresh seed reduced the warm stratification 
time.  Rather than the acid treatment, two to three 
months of warm stratification could be used.  As an 
alternative for cold stratification, the seed may be 
sown in the fall.  Germination is delayed at 
temperatures above 15°C (60° F).  Germination is 
often delayed in red cedar seeds, as seeds are 
consistently highly dormant.  
 
Red cedar seeds are usually sown in the nursery in 
the late summer or fall, but may be sown in spring or 
summer.  The seeds of most  species should be sown 
in fall to take advantage of natural pre-chilling.  Red 
cedar seeds are usually drilled in well-prepared 
seedbeds in rows 15 to 20 cm apart and covered with 
0.6 cm of soil.  In nurseries with severe climates, 
such as those in the Great Plains, considerable care 
must be taken to protect the beds with mulch and 
snow fences. 
 
Viability of the seed varies considerably from year to 
year and among lots, but it is never much over 50 
percent.  Treated seed is usually planted in the spring, 
either in outdoor beds or in flats in the greenhouse.  
Two or three years are required to produce plants 
large enough to graft. 
 
Juniperus virginiana  – 14-18 seeds per 110 kg fruit, 
96 seeds per gram. 
     
Management 
The following information on the  Traditional 
Resource Management  (TRM) red cedar was  provided by Lynn Youngbuck, who is Cherokee, 
Chiracahua, and Fox.  TRM includes the following: 
•
  Take only what you need, leaving the best to 
reproduce. 
•  Speak to the plant, leave an offering of tobacco 
or sage before harvesting.  The plant will grow 
back two stems for every one cut. 
•  Humans are another strand in life.  Plants sustain 
us and should be treated as another living being. 
•  Plants were taken care of by extended family 
groups of women.  They were taken care of and 
watched each year for generations. 
•  Materials harvested were shared and traded with 
the whole tribe. 
•  Cedar bark was harvested in early June or early 
July as the bark is more easily removed at that 
season (Densmore 1974).   The gathering of cedar 
bark was attended with a simple ceremony, 
followed by a feast.  The next day the tree was 
cut.  The bark was removed, and the tree was 
permitted to remain as it fell, and when 
thoroughly, dry was used for fuel.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
JUVI is available through  most nurseries.  Cultivars 
include: Baker’s Blue, Blue Mountain, Brodie, 
Burkii, Canaerti, Cupressifolia, Dundee, Emerald 
Sentinel, Glauca, Gray Owl, Hillspire, Idyllwild, 
Manhattan Blue, Mission Spire, Nova, Pendula, Patt 
River, Princeton Sentry, Royo, Silver Spreader, 
Stover, and Taylor.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883.   The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1:116-118. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939 .  Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25:517-543. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts .   Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Grinnell, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 Vols.  
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York.

Hart, J. A. 1976.  Montana native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.   
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hellson, J.C. 1974.   Ethnobotany of the Blackfoot 
Indians .  National Museum of Man, Mercury Series, 
Canadian Ethnology Service Paper No. 19. 
 
Johnston, A. 1970  . Blackfoot Indian utilization of the 
flora of the northwestern Great Plains.   Economic 
Botany 24:301-24. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie. An ethnobotanical guide.  University Press of 
Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie. An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press of 
Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1908.   The ethnology of the Gros 
Ventre .  American Museum of Natural History, 
Anthropological Papers 1:145-281. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1985.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
Great Plains Flora Association. University Press of 
Kansas. 1402 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west.   Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the north 
central plains .  The University Press of Kansas.  530 
pp. 
 
Tilford, G.L. 1997.   Edible and medicinal plants of 
the west .  Mountain Press Publishing Company, 
Missoula, Montana.  
 
Vestal, P.A. & R.E. Schultes 1939.  The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians .  Botanical Museum, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Young, A.J. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Jerry Kaiser 
USDA, NRCS, Missouri State Office, Elsberry, 
Missouri 
 
Ivan Dozier 
USDA, NRCS, Carlinville Field Office, Carlinville, 
Illinois 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 23may05 rln; 060801 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.