Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BALTIC RUSH 
Juncus balticus Willd. 
Plant Symbol = JUBA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center & the National Plant Data Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Coiled basketry prevails in southern 
California, with the mottled yellowish brown of rush 
providing a natural colored and variegated 
background (Turnbaugh and Turnbaugh 1986).  Rush 
stems are used in the coiled baskets of southern 
California and Mexican Indian basketweavers, such 
as the Cahuilla, Luiseño, Chumash, Diegueño, Agua 
Caliente, Gabrieliño, Juaneño, Death Valley 
Shoshone, and Fernandeno (Barrows 1967; Murphey 
1959).  Chumash baskets, from southern California, 
are made with  Juncus stems for the tan color and 
roots for the black color (Timbrook 1997).  The 
foundation material is made of  Juncus balticus and 
the sewing material is made of  Juncus textilis.  
 
The Cahuilla, Diegeño, Luiseño, and Chumash dye 
the mature rushes black by steeping them for several 
hours in an infusion of either horned sea-blite 
(Suaeda calceoliformis  or bush seepweed (Suaeda 
moquinii ).  This dye is very penetrating and the color 
is durable, but it has a fetid, disagreeable smell.   Juncus
 species are also dyed yellow in an infusion of 
indigo bush ( Psorothamnus emoryi ) (Barrows 1967; 
Merrill 1970).  
 
The early sprouts of Baltic rush were sometimes 
eaten raw by the Snuqualmi of Washington (Gunther 
1973).   Juncus shoots were eaten raw, roasted in 
ashes, or boiled by Maidu, Luiseño, and others 
(Strike 1994).  Owens Valley Paiute ate the seeds. 
 
 Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
Other Uses : Wildlife habitat and food, erosion 
prevention, sediment retention, basketry, food, tatami 
mats, and nutrient transformation.  Baltic rush has 
nitrogen-fixing capabilities.  They are useful for 
stabilization and revegetation of disturbed areas.  
These plants can be invasive. 
 
Juncus  species are used by a wide range of mammal 
and avian species for food and habitat (Hoag and 
Zierke 1998).  Rush seeds  are eaten by waterfowl, 
songbirds, small mammals, jack rabbits, cottontail, 
muskrat, porcupine, quail, and gopher (Martin 1951).  
Rushes help improve habitat for amphibians and 
spawning areas for fish.  Muskrats feed on the roots 
and rhizomes of soft rush, and various wetland 
wading birds find shelter among the stems. 
 
Cattle generally do not gr aze rushes, because they 
have low palatability.  Cattle will graze Baltic rush 
late in the season after more palatable plants are 
eaten.  Rushes provide the following conservation 
uses; erosion control, sediment accretion and 
stabilization, nutrient uptake and transformation, 
wildlife food and cover, re storation and creation of 
wetland ecosystems, and wastewater treatment 
applications.  The rhizomatous nature, nitrogen 
fixation capabilities, dense root system, and 
phenotypic plasticity to flooding and drought stress 
provide high soil and slope stabilization capabilities, 
particularly in areas with  flooded soils or fluctuating 
hydrology.  Rushes tend to be resistant to grazing 
pressure and fairly unpalatable to cattle, so tend to 
increase in species composition in stockwater ponds 
and troughs.  The rhizomes  form a matrix for many 
beneficial bacteria, making this plant an excellent 
addition for wastewater treatment. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Rush Family (Juncaceae).  Baltic rush is a 
perennial, rhizomatous, wetland plant.  Rushes are 
grasslike, usually tufted herbs with terete leaves.  The 
leaf sheaths are clustered at the base, 2-15 cm long, 
multi-colored from red to light to dark brown, and 
bladeless.  The lowest bract of the Baltic rush  
inflorescence is round and 2-20 cm long.  This bract 
appear to be a continuation of the stem.  The 
inflorescence forms a loose  to compact panicle of 10-
50 flowers up to 6 cm long.  Flowers are greenish or 
brownish, sessile to pedice llate, each subtended by a 
pair of hyaline-scarious bracts.  Tepals are 3.5-5 mm 
long.  The 6 stamens have anthers 1.5-2.5 mm long.  
Fruits are brownish red and about the size of ground 
pepper (0.6-0.8 mm long).  The fruits are found in a 
capsule. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It occurs throughout California to Alaska, 
eastern North America, and Eurasia.  Baltic rush is 
the most widespread and common rush found in the 
Great Basin and dry Intermountain regions.  It grows 
in standing water to seasonally dry places, with an 
elevation generally below 2200 m.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Juncus  species can tolerate shade and 
flooded, anoxic soil conditions, at least periodically.  
They can also tolerate mild to moderate soil salinities 
and alkaline to calcareous so ils.  Often these plants 
are found on drier or seasonally fluctuating wetland 
sites (for example, desert playas) and can tolerate 
seasonal drought.   
 
Juncus  species may be planted from bare rootstock or 
seedlings from container stalk or directly seeded into 
the soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are preferred 
revegetation methods where there is moving water. 
 
Live Plant Collections : The following information on 
Baltic rush is provided by J. Chris Hoag and Mike 
Zierke, USDA, Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Ce nter, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
"Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild 
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand 
of this species.  Plug spacing of 25-30 cm will fill in 
within one growing season.  Soil should be kept from 
saturated conditions up to 8 cm of standing water.  
Fluctuating the water level during the establishment 
period may speed spread. Water levels can be 
managed to enhance spread and control weeds."  
 
To collect wild plants, no more than 1/4 of the plants 
in an area should be collected.  If no more than 0.09 
m2 
(1 ft 2
)  should
 be removed from a 0.4 m 2 
(4 ft 2
) 
area, the plants will grow back into the  hole in one 
good growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes  to grow back during the 
growing season.  
 
Clip leaves and stems to 15 to  25 cm (6 to 10 inches); 
this allows the plant to allocate more energy into root 
production.  Transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible in moist (not flooded or anoxic) soils.  Plants 
should be transported and stored in a cool location 
prior to planting.  Plugs may be split into smaller 
units, generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 
in), with healthy rhizomes and tops.  The important 
factor in live plant collections is to be sure  to
 include
 
a growing bud in either plugs or rhizomes.  Weeds in 
the plugs should be removed by hand.  Soil can either 
be left on the roots of harvested material or removed.  
For ease in transport, soil may be washed gently from 
roots.  The roots should always remain moist or in 
water until planted.  
 
Soil should be kept saturated after planting.  Plants 
can tolerate 2.5 - 8 cm of standing water as long as 
the level fluctuates over the growing season.  Allow 
roots to become established before flooding soils if 
possible.  Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall 
just after the first rains (usually late October to 
November).  This enables plant root systems to 
become established before heavy flooding and winter 
dormancy occurs.  Survival  is highest when plants are 
dormant and soils are moist.  
 
Fertilization is very helpful for plant growth and 
reproduction.  Many more seeds are produced with 
moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections 
•   For Baltic rush near Aberdeen, Idaho, the 
flowering period is late May to August, 
occasionally to September.   Seed ripens in early 
August.  Phenology will differ with plant 
growing in different areas, and for different 
Juncus  species. 
•  Seed may be collected by hand, using a pair of 
hand shears, or with a gas-powered handheld 
seed harvester. 
•  The tiny, black seeds ar e easily lost from the 
capsules when collecting by hand.  Be careful to 
keep capsules upright before putting in collection

bag.  Use paper sacks when collecting seeds for 
this species. 
•  To clean the seed, run  the collection through a 
hammer mill to break up debris and knock the 
seeds loose.  Use a 1/20 inch screen on the top 
and a solid sheet on the bottom of the seed 
cleaner.  Adjust the airflow  to blow off the chaff.  
The cleaning process can be speeded up by 
shaking the hammermilled collection to settle 
seed to the bottom of the pan.  The top portion of 
the chaff can then be discarded and the seed-rich 
mixture that is left in the bottom can be run 
through the seed cleaner.  
 
Seed germination in greenhouse 
•   Seeds need light, moisture and heat for 
germination.  Soaking the seeds in water for 1 - 7 
days will decrease the time the seed takes to 
sprout.  
•  To grow seeds, place on soil surface and press in 
lightly to assure good soil contact.  Do not cover 
the seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  Greenhouse 
should be kept hot (32-38°C).  
•  Seeds begin to germinate in approximately 1 
week.  Maintain soil moisture until plants are to 
be transplanted.  Seedlings cannot withstand 
long periods without water while growing in the 
greenhouse. 
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success. 
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management.  
Juncus  species can tolerate periods of drought and 
total inundation.  It is important to keep transplanted 
plugs moist, not flooded, until roots are established.  
Water levels can then be managed to enhance or 
reduce spread as well as control terrestrial weeds.  
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation such as  Juncus species for hut 
construction and for food.  Typically, an area of open 
water is created around the huts.  Muskrat cleared 
areas increase wetland diversity by providing  opportunities for aquatic vegetation to become 
established in the open water and the huts provide a 
substrate for shrubs and other plant species.  
Muskrats opening up the dense stands of emergent 
vegetation also create hab
itat for other species.  
 
Traditional Resource Management: According to one 
Northern Diegueño basketweaver, most weavers have 
favorite collecting areas where the  Juncus is 
plentiful, long, tough, deeply colored with red, or 
simply nearby.  Any  Juncus stand will have plants 
that are immature, mature but still in seed, and those 
starting to senesce.  Plants can be harvested during 
any month or season.  The stalks are cut above the 
rhizomes and roots, leaving plenty of buds to re-grow 
new shoots.  As with other rhizomatous species, 
harvest stimulates new growth and maintains the 
clone in a juvenile or immature growth phase, where 
productivity is highest.  Attempts at harvesting 
during times of heavy rain or flooding are likely to 
fail, as deep water and mud make plants inaccessible.  
 
Juncus  species tend to be fairly resilient to insect and 
disease problems.  Aphids may feed on the stems, but 
rarely cause significant damage.  If an insect or 
disease problem is encountered in the greenhouse, 
treatment options may be limited by cultural 
constraints if these plants  are to be used by Indian 
basket weavers.   Juncus culms are split with the 
mouth to process basketry materials; therefore, an 
unusually high degree of human exposure and risk 
occur with plants designat ed for ethnobotanic use.  
Rushes are perennial, rhizomatous plants.  In most 
cases, they will out-compete other species within the 
wetland area of the site, eliminating the need for 
manual or chemical control of invasive species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
JUBA is available through selected native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  Listed below are some 
sources where these plants ar e known to be available: 
 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho. 
Accession Number 9067411, for Land Resource 
Region (LRR) B East from Sterling Wildlife 
Management Area, just north of the town of 
Aberdeen Bingham County, Idaho

Accession Number 9057580, for Land Resource Region (LRR) B West from Roswell Wildlife 
Management Area, just west of the town of 
Roswell, Canyon County, Idaho. 
Accession Number 9057632, for Land Resource Region (LRR) D North from Stillwater National 
Wildlife Refuge, northwest of the town of 
Fallon, Churchill County, Nevada. 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Dahl, T.E. & C.E. Johnson 1991.   Status and trends 
of wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid-
1970s to mid-1980s .  USDI, FWS, Washington, D.C. 
28 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973 .  Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1). University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual:  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press. 1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. no date.   Wetland plant fact sheet  - Baltic 
Rush  (Juncus balticus ).  Interagency 
Riparian/Wetland Project.  USDA, NRCS. Plant 
Materials Center, Aber deen, Idaho.  3 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Zierke 1998.   A reference guide for 
the collection and use of ten common wetland plants 
of the Great Basin and Intermountain West .  
Riparian/Wetland Project In formation Series No. 13 
(February 1998).  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 13 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1995.   Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands .  
Riparian/Wetland Project  Information Series No. 7 
(April 1995).  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Hurd, E.G., N.L. Shaw, & L.C. Smithman 1992 .  
Cyperaceae and Juncaceae - selected low-elevation 
species.  Proceedings of Symposium of Ecology, 
Management, and Restoration of Intermountain  Annual Rangelands, Boise, Idaho.  May 18-22, 1992.  
pp. 380-383. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  
Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.   
Nutrition, Botany and Use. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 633 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951.  
American wildlife and plant: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 500 pp. 
 
Manning, M.E., S.R. Swanson, T. Svejcar, & J. Trent 
1989.   Rooting characteristics of four Intermountain 
meadow community types .  Journal of Range 
Management 42(4): 309-312. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, California. 878 pp. 
 
Merrill, R.E. 1970 .  Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians .  Acoma Books, Ramona, 
California.  
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
Southern California .  Riverside Museum Press. 155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society. 81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Volume 2.  Aboriginal Uses of California's 
Indigenous Plants.  Koeltz Scientific Books.  
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. June 1997.   California Indian 
basketweavers association newsletter.   
 
Tiner, R.W. 1984.  Wetlands of the United States: 
Current status and recent trends .  USDI, FWS, 
National Wetlands Inventory, Washington, D.C.  58 
pp. 
 
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh. 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffler Publishing, Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania. 19380.  pp. 194-205. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Chris Hoag 
Riparian/Wetland Plan t Development Project

USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Plant Material Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.