Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SALT RUSH 
Juncus lesueurii  Boland 
Plant Symbol = JULE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Coiled basketry prevails in Southern 
California, with the mottled yellowish brown of 
Juncus  rush providing a natural colored and 
variegated background (Turnbaugh and Turnbaugh 
1986).   Juncus stems are used in the coiled baskets of 
Southern California basket  weavers such as the 
Cahuilla, Luiseño, Chumash, Diegueño, Agua 
Caliente, Gabrieliño, Juaneño, Death Valley 
Shoshone, and Fernandeno (Barrows 1967; Murphy 
1959).  Chumash baskets, from southern California, 
are made with  Juncus stems for the tan color and 
roots for the black color (Timbrook 1997).  The 
foundation material is made of  Juncus lesueurii or 
Juncus balticus, and the sewing material is made of 
Juncus textilis . 
 
Rushes are cut off at ground level, or at the length 
desired.  The rush, in its natural state, furnishes a  variety of colors; a deep red near the base, lightening 
in color upwards passing through several shades of 
light brown, and ending at the top in a brownish  
 
yellow.  
Juncus stems can be bleached in the summer 
sun for several months to assure a light tan uniform 
color.   
 
The Cahuilla, Diegeño, Luiseño, and Chumash dye 
the mature rushes black by steeping them for several 
hours in an infusion of either horned sea-blite 
( Suaeda calceoliformis ) or bush seepweed (Sueda 
moquinii ).  This dye is very penetrating, and the color 
is durable, but has a fetid, disagreeable smell.   Juncus  
species are also dyed yellow  in an infusion of indigo 
bush ( Psorothamnus emoryi ) (Barrows 1967; Merrill 
1970).   
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Other Uses : A wide range of mammal and avian 
species for food and habitat (Hoag and Zierke 1998) 
uses Juncus species.  Waterfowl, songbirds and small 
mammals such as jack rabbits, cottontail, muskrat, 
porcupine, and gopher (Martin 1951) eats rush seeds.  
Rushes help improve habitat for amphibians and 
spawning areas for fish.  Muskrats feed on the roots 
and rhizomes, and various wetland wading birds find 
shelter among the stems. 
 
Rushes provide the following conservation uses: 
erosion control, sediment accretion and stabilization, 
nutrient uptake and transfor mation, wildlife food and 
cover, restoration and creation of wetland 
ecosystems, and wastewater  treatment applications.  
The rhizomatous nature, nitrogen fixation 
capabilities, dense root system, and phenotypic 
plasticity to flooding and drought stress provide high 
soil and slope stabilization capabilities, particularly in 
areas with flooded soils or fluctuating hydrology.  
The rhizomes form a matrix for many beneficial 
bacteria, making this plant an excellent addition for 
wastewater treatment.  Rushes tend to be resistant to 
grazing pressure and fairly unpalatable to cattle, so 
they tend to increase in species composition in 
stockwater ponds and troughs. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Rush Family (Juncaceae).   Juncus lesueurii  
is a grasslike, perennial, rhizomatous wetland plant.  
Salt rush  has stems that are 3-9 dm tall, stout, 
smooth, erect or aching, with a distinctive twist to the 
stems.  The stems arise from stout, creeping 
rhizomes.  The terete leaf sheaths are bladeless, and 
shining or light brown in color.  The inflorescence 
appears lateral with open branches, the lowest bract 
cylindric, with many flowers.  The capsule is oblong-
ovoid, light brown, and three-angled.  This species is 
sometimes confused with  Juncus balticus, from 
which it may be distinguished by its longer and 
usually darker-colored segments.    
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Salt rush grows in salt marshes or sand 
dunes along the California coast from Ventura 
County north to British Columbia.   Juncus lesueurii 
can tolerate mild to moderate soil salinity and 
flooded soil conditions.  Often these plants are found 
on drier or seasonally fluctuating wetland sites (for 
example, dune swales) and can tolerate periodic 
drought.   
 
General : Juncus  species may be planted from bare 
rootstock or seedlings, from container stalk or 
directly seeded into the soil.  Bare rootstock or 
seedlings are preferred revegetation methods where 
there is moving water.  Juncus lesueurii  requires 
moderate summer watering (irrigation), generally 1 - 
4 times per month depending on the absorption rate 
and water retention capacity of the soil.  Salt rush 
plants may need to have their roots in moist or wet 
soils.  These native plants are especially good for 
stabilizing or restoring disturbed or degraded areas 
for erosion and slope control.  Salt rush may become 
invasive.   
 
Live Plant Collections : J. Chris Hoag and Mike 
Zierke (USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho) provided  the following information 
on  Juncus balticus .  Due to their taxonomic and 
habitat similarity, it is likely that  Juncus lesueurii 
establishes in a similar manner.  Planting plugs is the 
surest way to establish a new stand of this species.  
Plug spacing of 25-30 cm will fill in within one 
growing season.  Fluctuating the water level during 
the establishment period  may speed spread of the  rush.
  Water levels can be managed to enhance 
spread and control weeds.   
•   Clip leaves and stems to 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches) before planting; this allows the plant to 
allocate more energy into root production.  
Transplants should be planted as soon as 
possible in moist (not flooded or anoxic) soils.  
Plants should be transported and stored in a cool 
location prior to planting.  The roots should 
always remain moist or in water until planted.   
•  Soil should be kept saturated after planting.  
Plants can tolerate 2.5 -  8 cm of standing water 
as long as the level fluctuates over the growing 
season.  Allow roots to become established 
before flooding soils if possible. 
•   Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall just 
after the first rains (usually late October to 
November).  Survival is highest when plants are 
dormant and soils are moist.   
•  Fertilization is very helpful for plant growth and 
reproduction.  Many more seeds are produced 
with moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections : 
•  The flowering period is late May to August, 
occasionally to September.   Seed ripens in early 
August.  Phenology will change by area, aspect, 
elevation, and specific site conditions. 
•   Seed may be collected by hand, using a pair of 
hand shears, or with a gas-powered handheld 
seed harvester. 
•  The tiny, black seeds ar e easily lost from the 
capsules when collecting by hand.  Be careful to 
keep capsules upright before putting in collection 
bag.  Use paper sacks when collecting seeds for 
this species. 
•   To clean the seed, run  the collection through a 
hammer mill to break up debris and knock the 
seeds loose.  Use a 1/20 inch screen on the top 
and a solid sheet on the bottom of the seed 
cleaner.  Adjust the air  flow to blow off the 
chaff.  Shaking the hammer milled collection to 
settle seed to the bottom of the pan can speed up 
the cleaning process.   The top portion of the 
chaff can then be discarded and the seed-rich 
mixture that is left in the bottom can be run 
through the seed cleaner.   
 
Seed germination in greenhouse : 
•  Seeds need light, moisture and heat for 
germination.  Soaking the seeds in water for 1 - 7 
days will decrease the time the seed takes to 
sprout.   
•  To grow seeds, place on soil surface and press in 
lightly to assure good soil contact.  Do not cover

the seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  Greenhouse 
should be kept hot (32-38°C).   
•  Seeds begin to germinate in approximately 1 
week.  Maintain soil moisture until plants are to 
be transplanted.  Seedlings cannot withstand 
long periods without water while growing in the 
greenhouse. 
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.   
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management 
(Hoag et al. 1995).   Juncus species can tolerate 
periods of drought and total inundation.  It is 
important to keep transplanted plugs moist, not 
flooded, until roots are established.  Water levels can 
then be managed to either enhance or reduce spread 
as well as control terrestrial weeds.   
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation such as  Juncus species for hut 
construction and for food.  Typically, an area of open 
water is created around the huts.    
 
Juncus  species tend to be fairly resilient to insect and 
disease problems.  Aphids may feed on the stems, but 
rarely cause significant damage.  If an insect or 
disease problem is encountered in the greenhouse, 
treatment options may be limited by cultural 
constraints if these plants  are to be used by Indian 
basket weavers.   Juncus culms are split with the 
mouth to process basketry materials; therefore, an 
unusually high degree of human exposure and risk 
occur with plants designat ed for ethnobotanic use.  
Rushes are perennial, rhizomatous plants.  In most 
cases, they will out-compete other species within the 
wetland area of the site, eliminating the need for 
manual or chemical control of invasive species. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: Management of 
Juncus lesueurii  stands includes the following: 
ownership of prime basket rush sites, stimulation of 
new growth through harvesting stalks, periodic  burning, and not harvesting when soils are very 
mucky and likely to be co
mpacted.  According to one 
Northern Diegueño basket  weaver, most weavers 
have favorite collecting areas where the basket rush 
is plentiful and having characteristics valued by 
basket weavers (long, flexible, tough stems, deep red 
color, access is available and relatively easy).  Any 
Juncus  stand will have plants that are immature, 
those which are mature but still in seed, and those 
which are starting to senesce.  The stalks are cut 
above the rhizomes and roots, leaving plenty of buds 
to re-grow new shoots.  As with other rhizomatous 
species, harvesting stimulates new growth and 
maintains the clone in a juvenile or immature growth 
phase, where productivity is highest.  The only 
harvesting prohibition might be during times of 
heavy rain or flooding, when deep water and mud 
make many plants inaccessible. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of Western Washington and 
Northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Dahl, T.E. & C.E. Johnson 1991.   Status and trends 
of wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid-
1970s to mid-1980s .  USDI, FWS, Washington, D.C.  
28 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson Manual.  
Higher plants of California . University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. n.d.   Wetland plant fact sheet - Baltic rush 
(Juncus balticus ).  Interagency Riparian/Wetland 
Project. USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 83210.  3 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Zierke (February) 1998.   A 
reference guide for the collection and use of ten

common wetland plants of the Great Basin and 
Intermountain West. Riparian/Wetland Project 
Information Series No. 13.  USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberd een, Idaho.  13 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands.   Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7.  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Hurd, E.G., N.L. Shaw, & L.C. Smithman 1992.  
Cyperaceae and Juncaceae - selected low-elevation 
species.   Proceedings of Symposium of Ecology, 
Management, and Restoration of Intermountain 
Annual Rangelands, Boise, Idaho.  May 18-22, 1992.  
Pages 380-383. 
 
Manning, M.E., S.R. Swanson, T. Svejcar, & J. Trent 
1989.   Rooting characteristics of four Intermountain 
meadow community types .  Journal of Range 
Management 42(4):309-312. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Merrill, R.E. 1970.  Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians .  Acoma Books, Ramona, 
California.  
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.  Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2.  Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. (June) 1997.  California Indian 
Basketweavers Association newsletter .  
 
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffler Publishing, Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania.  Pages 194-205. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 20may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.