Plant Guide
MOUNTAIN RUSH 
Juncus arcticus  Willd.  ssp. 
littoralis  (Engelm.) Hultén  
Plant Symbol = JUARL  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
Mountain rush. Photo by Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS.  
 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  Arctic rush, Baltic  rush  
Scientific Alternate Names:  J. balticus  
Uses  
Ethnobotanic : Coiled basketry prevails in southern 
California, with the mottled yellowish brow n of rush 
providing a natural colored and variegated background 
(Turnbaugh and Turnbaugh 1986).  Rush stems are used 
in the coiled baskets of southern California and Mexican 
Indian basketweavers, such as the Cahuilla, Luiseño, 
Chumash, Diegueño, Agua Calie nte, Gabrieliño, Juaneño, 
Death Valley Shoshone, and Fernandeno (Barrows 1967; 
Murphey 1959).  Chumash baskets, from southern 
California, are made with  rush stems for the tan color and  roots for the black color (Timbrook 1997).  The 
foundation material is 
made of mountain rush  and the 
sewing material is made of basket rush ( J. textilis ).   
 
The Cahuilla, Dieg ueño, Luiseño, and Chumash dye the 
mature rushes black by steeping them for several hours in 
an infusion of either horned sea -blite ( Suaeda 
calceoliformis  or bush seepweed ( Suaeda moquinii).  This 
dye is very penetrating and the color is durable, but it has 
a fetid, disagreeable smell.  Juncus  species are also dyed 
yellow in an infusion of indigo bush ( Psorothamnus 
emoryi ) (Barrows 1967; Merri ll 1970).  
 
The early sprouts of  mountain rush were sometimes eaten 
raw by the Snuqualmi of Washington (Gunther 1973).  
Juncus  shoots were eaten raw, roasted in ashes, or boiled 
by Maidu, Luiseño, and others (Strike 1994).  Owens 
Valley Paiute ate the seeds.  
 
Other Uses : Wildlife habitat and food, erosion prevention, 
sediment retention, basketry, food, tatami mats, and 
nutrient transformation.  Mountain  rush has nitrogen -
fixing capabilities.  They are useful for stabilization and 
revegetation of disturb ed areas.  These plants can be 
invasive.  
 
Juncus  species are used by a wide range of mammal and 
avian species for food and habitat (Hoag and Zierke 
1998).  Rush seeds are eaten by waterfowl, songbirds, 
small mammals, jack rabbits, cottontail, muskrat, 
porc upine, quail, and gopher (Martin 1951).  Rushes help 
improve habitat for amphibians and spawning areas for 
fish.  Muskrats feed on the roots and rhizomes of soft 
rush, and various wetland wading birds find shelter 
among the stems.  
 
Cattle generally do not graze rushes, because they have 
low palatability.  Cattle will graze  mountain rush late in 
the season after more palatable plants are eaten.  Rushes 
provide the following conservation uses; erosion control, 
sediment accretion and stabilization, nutrient up take and 
transformation, wildlife food and cover, restoration and 
creation of wetland ecosystems, and wastewater treatment 
applications.  The rhizomatous nature, nitrogen fixation 
capabilities, dense root system, and phenotypic plasticity 
to flooding and drought stress provide high soil and slope 
stabilization capabilities, particularly in areas with 
flooded soils or fluctuating hydrology.  Rushes are 
resistant to grazing pressure and are  fairly unpalatable to 
cattle, so they  tend to increase near  stock  wat er ponds .  
The rhizomes form a matrix for many beneficial bacteria, 
making this plant an excellent addition for wastewater 
treatment.

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Rush Family (Juncaceae).  Mountain  rush, also 
known as Baltic rush, is a perennial, rhizomatous, wetland 
plant.  Rushes are grasslike, usually  tufted herbs with 
terete leaves.  The leaf sheaths are clustered at the base, 2 -
15 cm (0.75 to 6 in) long, multi -colored from red to light 
to dark brown, and bladeless.  The lowest bract of the 
mountain  rush  inflorescence is round and 2  to  20 cm (0.75 
to 8 in) long.  This bract appear s to be a continuation of 
the stem.  The inflorescence forms a  loose to compact 
panicle of 10 to 50 flowers up to 6 cm long.  Flowers are 
greenish or brownish, sessile to pedicellate, each 
subtended by a pair of hyali ne-s carious bracts.  Tepals are 
3.5 to  5 mm (0.1 to 0.2 in) long.   The 6 stamens have 
anthers 1.5 to 2.5 mm (0.06 to 0.1 in) long.  The fruit is a 
capsule. The seed are brownish red and about the size of 
ground pepper  approximately 0.6 to 0.8 mm (0.02 to 0.03 
in) long .  
Distribution :    
Mountain rush  is widespread throughout temperate 
regions in the northern hemisphere. It occurs throughout 
California to Alaska, eastern North America, and Eurasia.  
Mountain  rush is the most widespread and common rush 
found i n the Great Basin and dry Intermountain regions.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
Habitat :  Mountain  rush is often found in wetland 
habitats, but will grow in any  standing water to seasonally 
dry places, at  elevation s generally below 2 ,200 m  (7,200 
ft) .  
Adaptation  
Juncus  species can tolerate shade and flooded, anoxic soil 
conditions, at least periodically.  They can also tolerate 
mild to moderate soil salinities and alkaline to calcareous 
soils.  Often these plants are found on drier or seasonally 
fluctuating wetland site s (for example, desert playas) and 
can tolerate seasonal drought.   
Establishment  
Juncus  species may be planted from bare rootstock or 
seedlings from container stalk or directly seeded into the 
soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are preferred 
revegetation  methods where there is moving water.  
 
Live Plant Collections :  
Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild 
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand of 
this species.  Plug spacing of 25 -30 cm (10 to 12 in) will 
fill in within one growi ng season.  Soil should be kept 
from saturated conditions up to 8 cm  (3  in)  of standing  water.  Fluctuating water level
s during the establishment 
period may speed spread. Water levels can be managed to 
en hance spread and control weeds.   
 
To collect wild plants, no more than 1/4 of the plants in 
an area should be collected.  If a section no more than 
0.09 m ² 
(1 ft
²)
 is
 removed from a 0.4 m ² 
(4 ft ²) area, the 
plants will grow back into the  hole in one good growing 
season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is sufficien tly deep for 
digging plugs.  This will leave enough plants and 
rhizomes to grow back during the growing season.   
 
Clip leaves and stems to 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 inches). 
T his allows the plant to allocate more energy into root 
production.  Transplants should  be planted as soon as 
possible in moist (not flooded ) soils.  Plants should be 
transported and stored in a cool location prior to planting.  
Plugs may be split into smaller units, generally no smaller 
than 6 x 6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 in), with healthy rhizomes a nd 
tops.  The important factor in live plant collections is to 
be sure  to
 include
 a growing bud in either plugs or 
rhizomes.  Weeds in the plugs should be removed by 
hand.  Soil can either be left on the roots of harvested 
material or removed.  For ease in  transport, soil may be 
washed gently from roots.  The roots should always 
remain moist or in water until planted.  
 
Soil should be kept saturated after planting.  Plants can 
tolerate 2.5 to  8 cm (1 to 3 in)  of standing water as long as 
the level fluctuates over the growing season.  Allow roots 
to become established before flooding soils if possible.  
Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall just after the 
first rains (usually late October to November).   This 
enables plant root systems to become established before 
heavy flooding and winter dormancy occurs.  Survival is 
highest when plants are dormant and soils are moist.   
 
Fertilization is very helpful for plant growth and 
reproduction.  Many more seeds a re produced with 
moderate fertilization.  
 
Management  
Hydrology is the most important factor in determining 
wetland type, revegetation success, and wetland function 
and value.  Changes in water levels influence species 
composition, structure, and distribution of plant 
communities.  Water management is absolutely critical 
during plant establishment, and remains crucial through 
the life of the wetland for proper community 
management.  Juncus  species can tolerate periods of 
drought and total inundation.  It is important to keep 
transplanted plugs moist, not flooded, until roots are 
established.  Water levels can then be managed to 
enhance or reduce spread as well as control terrestrial 
weeds.   
 
Rushes are perennial, rhizomatous plants.  In most cases, 
they will out -compete other species within the wetland

area of the site, eliminating the need for manual or 
chemical control of invasive species. 
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent wetland 
vegetation such as Ju ncus species for hut construction and 
for food.  Typically, an area of open water is created 
around the huts.  Muskrat cleared areas increase wetland 
diversity by providing opportunities for aquatic vegetation 
to become established in the open water and th e huts 
provide a substrate for shrubs and other plant species.  
Muskrats opening up the dense stands of emergent 
vegetation also create habitat for other species.  
 
Traditional Resource Management : According to one 
Northern Diegueño basket weaver , most weavers have 
favorite collecting areas where the Juncus  is plentiful, 
long, tough, deeply colored with red, or simply nearby.  
Any  Juncus  stand will have plants that are immature, 
mature but still in seed, and those starting to senesce.  
Plants can be harvest ed during any month or season.  The 
stalks are cut above the rhizomes and roots, leaving plenty 
of buds to re -grow new shoots.  As with other 
rhizomatous species, harvest stimulates new growth and 
maintains the clone in a juvenile or immature growth 
phase,  where productivity is highest.  Attempts at 
harvesting during times of heavy rain or flooding are 
likely to fail, as deep water and mud make plants 
inaccessible.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Juncus  species tend to be fairly resilient to insect and 
diseas e problems.  Aphids may feed on the stems, but 
rarely cause significant damage.  If an insect or disease 
problem is encountered in the greenhouse, treatment 
options may be limited by cultural constraints if these 
plants are to be used by Indian basket weav ers.  Juncus 
culms are split with the mouth to process basketry 
materials; therefore, an unusually high degree of human 
exposure and risk occur with plants designated for 
ethnobotanic use.    
Environmental Concerns  
Mountain rush is native to western North A merica. It can 
spread under favorable conditions but does not pose any 
environmental concern to native plant communities.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
For  mountain  rush near Aberdeen, Idaho, the flowering 
period is late May to August, occasionally to Septemb er.  
Seed ripens in early August.  Phenology will differ with 
plant growing in different areas, and for different Juncus  
species.  Seed may be collected by hand, using a pair of 
hand shears, or with a gas -powered handheld seed 
harvester.  The tiny, black seeds are easily lost from the 
capsules when collecting by hand.  Be careful to keep 
capsules upright before putting in collection bag.  Use 
paper sacks when collecting seeds for this species.  To  clean the seed, run the collection through a hammer mill 
to bre
ak up debris and knock the seeds loose.  Use a 1/20 
inch screen on the top and a solid sheet on the bottom of 
the seed cleaner.  Adjust the airflow to blow off the chaff.  
The cleaning process can be speeded up by shaking the 
hammer  milled collection to se ttle seed to the bottom of 
the pan.  The top portion of the chaff can then be 
discarded and the seed -rich mixture that is left in the 
bottom can be run through the seed cleaner.  
 
Seed germination in greenhouse  
Seeds need light, moisture and heat for germination.  
Soaking the  seeds in water for 1 to 7 days will decrease 
the time the seed takes to sprout.   To grow seeds, place on 
soil surface and press in lightly to assure good soil 
contact.  Do not cover the seed.  Soil should be kept 
moist.  Gr eenhouse should be kept hot (32 to 38°C). 
Seeds begin to germinate in approximately 1 week.  
Maintain soil moisture until plants are to be transplanted.  
Seedlings cannot withstand long periods without water 
while growing in the greenhouse.  Plants are ready in 10 0 
to  120 days to come out as plugs.  By planting seeds in 
August, plugs are ready to plant in soil by November.  
These plants are very small; growing plants to a larger 
size will result in increased revegetation success.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected M aterials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no cultivars, improved, or selected materials of 
mountain rush. Common wildland collected seed is 
available from commercial sources (Native Seed 
Network).  
References  
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960 .  Illustrated flora of the 
Pacific states.  4 Vols.  S tanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California.  
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common wetland  plants of western Washington and northwestern 
Oregon.  Seattle  Audubon Society and Washington 
Native Plant Society.  4 14 pp. 
Dahl, T.E. & C.E. Johnson 1991.  Status and trends of  wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid -
1970s to mid- 1980s.  USDI, FWS, Washington, D.C. 
28 pp.  
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.  Ethnobotany of Western  Washington.  University  of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1). University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington.  
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.  The Jepson manual:  Higher 
plants of California.  University of California Press. 
1399 pp.  
Hoag, J.C. no date .  Wetland plant fact sheet -  Ba ltic Rush 
(Juncus balticus).  Interagency  Riparian/Wetland 
Project.  USDA, NRCS. Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  3 pp.  
Hoag, J.C. & M. Zierke 1998 .  A reference guide for the 
collection and use of ten common wetland plants of 
the Great Basin and Intermountain West.

Riparian/Wetland Project Information Series No. 13 
(February 1998).  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 13 pp.  
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1995 .  Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
ve getate constructed or created wetlands.   
Riparian/Wetland Project Information Series No. 7 
(April 1995).  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp.  
Hurd, E.G., N.L. Shaw, & L.C. Smithman 1992 .  
Cyperaceae and Juncaceae  - selected low -elev ation 
species.  Proceedings of Symp osium of Ecology, 
Management, and Restoration of Intermountain 
Annual Rangelands, Boise, Idaho.  May 18- 22, 1992.  
pp. 380- 383. 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991 .  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples .  Nutrition, 
Botany and Use. Gordon and Breach Science 
Publishers. 633 pp.  
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951 .  American 
wildlife and plant: A guide to wildlife food habits .  
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York. 500 
pp.  
Manning, M.E., S.R. Swanson, T. Svejcar, & J. Trent  1989.  Rooting characteristics of four Intermountain 
meadow community types.   Journal of Range 
Management 42(4): 309 -312.  
Mason, H.L. 1957.  A flora of the marshes of California.   University of California  Press, Berkeley and Los 
Angeles, California. 878 pp.  
Merrill, R.E. 1970 .  Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians.   Acoma Books, Ramona, 
California.   
Moser, C.L. 1993.  Native American basketry of Southern  California.  Riv erside Museum Press. 15 5 pp. 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.  Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society. 81 pp.  
Native Seed Network. http://www.nativeseednetwork.org  (Accessed June 15, 2012)   
Strike, S.S. 1994 .  Ethnobotany of the California Indians .  
Volume 2.  Aboriginal Uses of California's 
Indigenous Plants.  Koeltz Scientific Books.  
USA/Germany.  210 pp.   Timbrook, J. June 1997.  California Indian basketweavers 
association newsletter.   
Tiner, R.W. 1984 .  Wetlands of the United States: Current 
status and recent trends.  USDI , FWS, National 
Wetlands Inventory, Washington, D.C.  58 pp.  
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh. 1986.  Indian  baskets.   Schiffler Publishing, Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania. 19380.  pp. 194- 205. 
 
Prepared By  
Michelle Stevens  
formerly  USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center  
 
Chris Hoag , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID (ret)  
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
Citation 
Stevens, M., Ho ag, C., Tilley, D., and L. St. John . 2012. 
Plant  Guide for  mountain rush  ( Juncus arcticus ssp . 
littoralis ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation 
Service,  Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, 
Idaho 83210.  
Published  October 2012  
Edited:  05dec2000 jsp;  20may2003ahv; 06aug20 01 jsp; 
13sep2012djt ; 13sep2012ls ; 16sep2012gm  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.
 
 
 
   
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER