Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BASKET RUSH 
Juncus textilis Buch. 
Plant Symbol = JUTE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Coiled basketry prevails in Southern 
California, with the mottled yellowish brown of 
Juncus  textilis  providing a natural colored and 
variegated background (Turnbaugh and Turnbaugh 
1986).   Juncus stems are used in the coiled baskets of 
Southern California  bask etweavers such as the 
Cahuilla, Luiseño, Chumash, Diegueño, Agua 
Caliente, Gabrieliño, Juaneño, Death Valley 
Shoshone, and Fernandeno (Barrows 1967; Murphey 
1959).  Chumash baskets, from southern California, 
are made with  Juncus stems for the tan color and 
roots for the black color (Timbrook 1997).  The 
sewing material is made of  Juncus textilis and the 
foundation material is made of  Juncus balticus. 
 
Rushes are cut off at ground level, or at the length 
desired.  The rush, in its natural state, furnishes a 
variety of colors; a deep red near the base, lightening 
in color upwards passing through several shades of 
light brown, and ending at the top in a brownish  yellow.  
Juncus stems can be bleached in the summer 
sun for several months to assure a light tan uniform  
 
color.  According to some  Diegueño basket weavers, 
the deep brick-red color found in many mission 
baskets was obtained from  Juncus species harvested 
in the higher elevations, 3, 000 feet or above, and in 
canyons usually under sycamores or willow trees 
(Moser 1993).  The red color occurs under the leaf 
thatch or blanketing vegetation mat and varies from 
several inches to nearly 12 inches in length at the 
base of the  Juncus stalk, and is often used alone as a 
design element. 
Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
The Cahuilla, Diegeño, Luiseño, and Chumash dye 
the mature rushes black by steeping them for several 
hours in an infusion of either horned sea-blite 
(Suaeda calceoliformis  ) or bush seepweed (Suaeda 
moquinii ).  This dye is very penetrating, and the color 
is durable, but has a fetid, disagreeable smell.   Juncus 
species are also dyed yellow  in an infusion of indigo 
bush ( Psorothamnus emoryi ) (Barrows 1967; Merrill 
1970).  
 
Juncus  stalks can be harvested throughout the year.  
Preparation for basket weaving involves splitting 
each rush stalk into three equal portions.  The base of 
the reed is split using either a thumbnail or pocket 
knife, then one piece is grasped in the teeth and one 
in each hand and equal pressure is applied.  One 
Digeño basket weaver describes a point about half 
way through the reed when the splitting starts to 
"stutter" and feels like its going to break.  At this 
point he throws the remaining parts away.  The pith is 
removed after soaking the plant in water prior to 
weaving.  The individual pieces are then trimmed to a 
uniform thickness.  The stems are soaked in water 
before using. 
 
Other Uses : Juncus  species are used by a wide range 
of mammal and avian species for food and habitat 
(Hoag and Zierke 1998).  Rush seeds are eaten by 
waterfowl, songbirds, and small mammals such as 
jackrabbits, cottontails, muskrats, porcupines, and 
gophers (Martin 1951).  Rushes help improve habitat 
for amphibians and spawning areas for fish.  
Muskrats feed on the roots and rhizomes, and various 
wetland wading birds find shelter among the stems. 
 
Rushes provide the following conservation uses: 
erosion control, sediment accretion and stabilization, 
nutrient uptake and transfor mation, wildlife food and

cover, restoration and creation of wetland 
ecosystems, and wastewater treatment applications.  
The rhizomatous nature, nitrogen fixation 
capabilities, dense root system, and phenotypic 
plasticity to flooding and drought stress provide high 
soil and slope stabilization capabilities, particularly in 
areas with flooded soils or fluctuating hydrology.  
The rhizomes form a matrix for many beneficial 
bacteria, making this plant an excellent addition for 
wastewater treatment.  Rushes tend to be resistant to 
grazing pressure and fairly unpalatable to cattle, so 
tend to increase in species composition in stock water 
ponds and troughs.  Basket rush is useful for 
stabilization and revegetation of disturbed areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rush Family (Juncaceae).  Basket rush is a 
perennial, rhizomatous wetland plant.  It is a 
grasslike, usually tufted herb 10-20 dm tall, with 
stout, rigid, pale green culms.  The leaf sheaths are 
terete, clustered at the base, 2-15 cm long, multi-
colored from red to tan to dark brown, and bladeless.  
The inflorescence forms a lax panicle with many 
flowers.  The brown, oblong-ovoid capsule is as long 
as or slightly shorter than the perianth, and contains 
many seeds.   Juncus textilis  is closely related to 
Juncus balticus; basket rush can be distinguished 
from baltic rush by its much stouter habit, its paler 
green stems, and its somewhat larger, more 
numerous-flowered pani cle.  The stems of Juncus 
textilis  are more woody in texture, retain their terete 
shape when dried, and do not tend to flatten as do 
those of Juncus balticus .  From this description of 
their growth forms, it is obvious why Juncus textilis  
is used for the sewing material and  Juncus balticus is 
compressed inside the coils of baskets. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Juncus textilis  grows in marshy areas and along 
streams below an elevation of  1800 m.  Basket rush 
grows in coastal and montane southern California, 
north to San Luis Obispo and Kern Counties.  Often 
these plants are found on  drier or seasonally 
fluctuating wetland sites (for example, desert playas) 
and can tolerate both seasonal drought and flooding. 
 
Establishment 
Juncus  species may be planted from bare rootstock or 
seedlings from container stalk or directly seeded into 
the soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are preferred 
revegetation methods where there is moving water. 
 
Live Plant Collections : The following information on 
Juncus balticus is provided by J. Chris Hoag and 
Mike Zierke (USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho).  Due  to their taxonomic and 
habitat similarity, it is likely that  Juncus textilis 
establishes in a similar manner.  Planting plugs is the 
surest way to establish a new stand of this species.  
Plug spacing of 25-30 cm will fill in within one 
growing season.  Fluctuating the water level during 
the establishment period may speed the spread of 
Juncus .  Water levels can be managed to enhance 
spread and control weeds. 
 
Clip leaves and stems to 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 inches) 
before planting; this allows the plant to allocate more 
energy into root production.  Transplants should be 
planted as soon as possible in moist (not flooded or 
anoxic) soils.  Plants should be transported and stored 
in a cool location prior to planting.  The roots should 
always remain moist or in water until planted.   
 
Ideally, plants should be planted in late fall just after 
the first rains (usually late October to November).  
Survival is highest when pl ants are dormant and soils 
are moist.  Soil should be kept saturated after 
planting.  Plants can tolerate 2.5 - 8 cm of standing 
water as long as the level fluctuates over the growing 
season.  Allow roots to become established before 
flooding soils if possible.  Fertilization is very helpful 
for plant growth and reproduction.  Many more seeds 
are produced with moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections : The flowering period is late May to 
August, occasionally to September.  Seed ripens in 
early August.  Phenology will change by area, aspect, 
elevation, and specific site conditions. 
•   Seed may be collected by hand, using a pair of 
hand shears, or with a gas-powered handheld 
seed harvester. 
•  The tiny, black seeds ar e easily lost from the 
capsules when collecting by hand.  Be careful to 
keep capsules upright before putting in collection 
bag.  Use paper sacks when collecting seeds for 
this species. 
•   To clean the seed, run  the collection through a 
hammer mill to break up debris and knock the 
seeds loose.  Use a 1/20 inch screen on the top 
and a solid sheet on the bottom of the seed 
cleaner.  Adjust the air  flow to blow off the 
chaff.  The cleaning process can be speeded up

by shaking the hammer milled collection to settle 
seed to the bottom of the pan.  The top portion of 
the chaff can then be discarded and the seed-rich 
mixture that is left in the bottom can be run 
through the seed cleaner.   
 
Seed germination in greenhouse: 
•  Seeds need light, moisture and heat for 
germination.  Soaking the seeds in water for 1 - 7 
days will decrease the time the seed takes to 
sprout.   
•  To grow seeds, place on soil surface and press in 
lightly to assure good soil contact.  Do not cover 
the seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  Greenhouse 
should be kept hot (32-38°C).   
•  Seeds begin to germinate in approximately 1 
week.  Maintain soil moisture until plants are to 
be transplanted.  Seedlings cannot withstand 
long periods without water while growing in the 
greenhouse. 
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.   
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management 
(Hoag et al. 1995).   Juncus species can tolerate 
periods of drought and total inundation.  It is 
important to keep transplanted plugs moist, not 
flooded, until roots are established.  Water levels can 
then be managed to either enhance or reduce spread 
as well as control terrestrial weeds.   
 
Juncus  species tend to be fairly resilient to insect and 
disease problems.  Aphids may feed on the stems, but 
rarely cause significant damage.  If an insect or 
disease problem is encountered in the greenhouse, 
treatment options may be limited by cultural 
constraints if these plants  are to be used by Indian 
basket weavers.   Juncus culms are split with the 
mouth to process basketry materials; therefore, an 
unusually high degree of human exposure and risk 
occur with plants designat ed for ethnobotanic use.  
Rushes are perennial, rhizomatous plants.  In most 
cases, they will out-compete other species within the 
wetland area of the site, eliminating the need for 
manual or chemical control of invasive species. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: Management of 
Juncus textilis  stands includes the following: 
ownership of prime basket rush sites, stimulation of 
new growth through harvesting stalks, periodic 
burning, and not harvesting when soils are very 
mucky and likely to be co mpacted.  According to one 
Northern Diegueño basket  weaver, most weavers 
have favorite collecting areas where the basket rush 
is plentiful and having characteristics valued by 
basket weavers (long, flexible, tough stems, deep red 
color, access is available and relatively easy).  Any 
Juncus  stand will have immature plants, mature but 
still in seed, and those starting to senesce.  The stalks 
are cut above the rhizomes and roots, leaving plenty 
of buds to re-grow new shoots.  As with other 
rhizomatous species, harvesting stimulates new 
growth and maintains the clone in a juvenile or 
immature growth phase, where productivity is 
highest.  The only harvesting prohibition might be 
during times of heavy rain or flooding, when deep 
water and mud make many plants inaccessible. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. n.d.   Wetland plant fact sheet - baltic rush 
(Juncus balticus) .  Interagency Riparian/Wetland 
Project.  USDA, NRCS, Pl ant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  3 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Zierke (February) 1998.   A 
reference guide for the collection and use of ten 
common wetland plants of the Great Basin and 
Intermountain West.  Riparian/Wetland Project 
Information Series No. 13.  USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberd een, Idaho.  13 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created

wetlands.  Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7.  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Hurd, E.G., N.L. Shaw, & L.C. Smithman 1992.  
Cyperaceae and Juncaceae - selected low-elevation 
species.  Proceedings of Symposium of Ecology, 
Management, and Restoration of Intermountain 
Annual Rangelands, Boise, Idaho.  May 18-22, 1992.  
Pages 380-383. 
 
Manning, M.E., S.R. Swanson, T. Svejcar, & J. Trent 
1989.   Rooting characteristics of four Intermountain 
meadow community types .  Journal of Range 
Management 42(4):309-312. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Merrill, R.E. 1970.  Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians .  Acoma Books, Ramona, 
California.  
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2.  Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. (June) 1997.  California Indian 
Basketweavers Association newsletter .  
 
Turnbaugh, S.P. & W.A. Turnbaugh 1986.   Indian 
baskets .  Schiffler Publishing, Ltd., West Chester, 
Pennsylvania.  Pages 194-205. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060801 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.