Plant Guide
POVERTY RUSH 
Juncus tenuis Willd.  
Plant Symbol = JUTE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center , Oregon  
  
Poverty rush in bloom at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center .  Photo by 
Amy Bartow, 2010  
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common Names : Slender rush, path rush, field 
rush, slender yard rush, wiregrass  
Alternate  Scientific Names: Juncus macer Gray,  Juncus 
tenuis  Willd. var. multicornis  E. May., Juncus tenuis  
Willd. var. williamsii  Fernald 
Uses  
Erosion Control : Poverty rush is ideal for streambank or 
drainage stabilization due to its bunched growth form, and 
ability to grow in saturated and compacted soils.   
 
Biofilters : Poverty rush can  be  used in the bottom of 
constructed bioswales as a groudlayer.  It is also used in 
the scrub shrub layer as a ground cover in constructed 
wetlands (Jurries, 2003).   
 
Groundcover /Landscaping:  Poverty rush is also useful as 
a groundcover, or water plant in a rain garden due to its 
ability to grow in compacted and saturated soils.  
 
Wildlife : Some upland gamebirds and granivorous 
songbirds feed on the seeds of poverty rush.  In addition, 
poverty rush is used as material for nest construction, and 
as cover for f oraging animals. Mamalian herbivores 
typically avoid poverty rush as the plant material becomes 
stringy and tough when mature  (Hilty, 2011) .  
    Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This  plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Pleas e consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department  regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.   Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  
General:   Poverty rush is a tufted perennial of the rush 
family (Juncaceae) with fibrous roots that grows 6 -28 
inches tall. The stems are slen der, rounded and bright 
green. Leaves are borne on the lower 1/5 of the stem, and 
are 0.4 inch wide, flat, and without blades. The two 
involucral bracts are longer than the inflorescence, and 
the lower bract can appear to be a continuation of the 
stem. Inf lorescence is diffuse, 0.4 -3 inches long, 
branched, and terminal with 10 -50 singly borne flowers. 
Tepals are green to straw -colored, 1.5- 2 inches long with 
a green midrib and white margins. Fruit is a straw -
colored , oblong to oval capsule that is subequal or shorter 
than the tepals, with an abruptly round and dimpled tip. 
The seeds are small and elliptical with a ridge along the 
entire length on both sides. Bloom period is June to 
September  (Pojar and MacK innon, 1994).  
 
 Poverty rush,  image  courtesy of USDA  PLANTS, 2012

Distribution : Poverty rush is mainly found at low to 
middle elevations south of latitude 55˚ N.  It is native 
throughout all fifty United S tates, most of Canada, and 
parts of northern Europe. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat : Poverty rush grows on freshwater sites that have  
saturated soil conditions during the winter and dry 
conditions during the summer. It is common in disturbed 
areas with seeps and springs, such as prairies, meadows, 
shaded roads, and ditches.  
 
Ethnobotany  
Poverty rush was used medicinally by the Native 
American Cherokee in an infusion used as a wash to 
strengthen babies, and prevent against lameness. 
Additionally, it was used in a decoction to dislodge 
spoiled saliva  (Hamel  and Chiltoskey, 1975) . Native 
American Iroquois runners and lacrosse players used 
poverty rush in  a decoction or infusion to induce 
vomiting, or as a wash  (Herrick, 1977).  
 
Native American Cherokee used poverty rush stems and 
plant material as cordage to bind dough in oak leaves for 
baking bread  (Hamel  and Chiltoskey, 1975) .  
Adaptation  
Poverty rush has an ability to grow in wet, compacted, 
clayey soils  and proliferates in highly trafficked and/or 
rocky a reas.  Poverty rush typically prefers full sun to 
light shade with wet to mesic soil moisture levels, and 
heavy clay loam, clay, or gravelly soils (Hilty, 2011).    
Establishment  
Poverty rush is best established by seed on restoration 
sites.  For direct se eding , poverty rush seeds should be 
surface sown  in the fall, at a rate of 200- 400 seeds per 
square foot, or 0.5 -1 pound per acre.  Seed of this species 
is quite small and averages 20,000,000 seeds per pound .   
 
Management  
Management actions are minimal for poverty rush. If 
established  in the  fall,  irrigation is unnecessary.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
No significant pests are associated with this species. 
However, some rust has been observed on plants, which  
does not seem  to affect seed production.   
 
Environmental Concerns  
None.  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and  how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructio ns for each control method.    Seed and Plant Production
 
Field  Establishment  &  Management : Seeds are non -
dormant and germinate in the spring as soils warm. It is 
recommended to establish seed increase fields from plugs 
to avoid competition from weeds and th e need for 
irrigation. Plugs are grown in a greenhouse over  winter, 
and  are transplanted out into fields covered with weed 
fabric on a 1 foot by 1 foot spacing in the spring. 
Transplanting plugs creates cleaner fields and results in an 
established producti ve field in the first growing season.   
Weed control is primarily accomplished through the use 
of weed fabric on seed production fields, and when 
necessary can be performed by hand on any site. No 
herbicides are labeled for use on poverty rush, and some 
Jun cus species can be harmed by broadleaf herbicides. 
Plant material is typically removed from seed production 
fields at the time of harvest. However, if stubble is high, 
fields can be mowed in late summer or early fall when 
plants are dormant.  
 
Harvest  Method: Poverty rush is ready to be harvested 
when the seeds are ripe, but the capsules have not yet 
opened to release them. This time roughly coincides with 
the seeds turning from yellow to rust colored, and 
increasing in firmness. Fields of poverty rush are typically 
very even in maturity, and hand checking the seed 
ripeness can indicate the best time to harvest . Harvest is 
typically in early July in the Willamette Valley of Oregon. 
Plant material should be swathed and placed on tarps  or in 
a tub  to dry. As material dries, capsules will open and 
much of the seed will accumulate on the tarp  or bottom of 
the tub .  
 
Seed Cleaning:  Once the seeds have dried and shattered , 
the plant material can be threshed by hand to release large 
amounts of seed into  a receptacle. The remaining plant 
material can be run through a brush machine to remove 
more stubborn seeds from the plants. Following brushing, 
the material can be combined with the seed from the 
tarp/tub/receptacle and an air screen machine can be used 
to remove any stems, chaff, or other debris. Seeds are 
very small and can be cleaned to high rates of purity if 
plant material is not ground up finely in the threshing or 
brushing process. Mechanized combines and threshers 
should be avoided with this speci es as the tiny seeds can 
easily be blown away and lost in machinery.   
 
Yield & Longevity:  Poverty rush does not produce seed in 
the first year following transplanting from plugs. Second  
year  yields can be  approximately 5 -20 lb per acre. 
Subsequent years yi eld larger amounts of seed , averaging 
300- 900 lb per acre. Plants appear to be long -lived, even 
on upland sites, and should produce seed for over 5 years. 
Weed fabric may need to be trimmed back from plant 
crowns as they expand in the first few years of 
pr oduction.

Poverty rush seeds,  photo  courtesy of USDA  PLANTS, 2012 
   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
None, but seed is sometimes available from commercial 
sources in the United States.  
References  
Hamel, P.B., and M.U. Chiltosky. 1975. Cherokee plants 
  and their uses - a 400 year history. Herald 
  Publishing,  Sylva, NC. 
Herrick, J.W. 1977.  Iroquois medical botany. Ph.D. diss. 
  State Univ. of New York, Albany.  
Hilty,  J. 2011. Path rush [Online]. Availa ble at 
  http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/grasses/plant  
s/path_rush.htm  (modified 2 Dec 2011; accessed
  3 Mar 2012). Illinois Wildflowers , Urbana,  IL.   
Pojar, J., and A. MacKinnon. 1994. Plants of the Pacific 
  Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
  Columbia & Alaska. B.C. Ministry of Forests 
  and Lone Pine Publishing. Vancouver, British 
  Columbia.   
 
Prepared By :  Robert C. Hoffman, USDA NRCS 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center , Oregon 
Citation  
Hoffman , R .C . 2012.  Plant guide for poverty rush  ( Juncus 
tenuis ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Plant Materials Center , Corvallis , OR . 
Published  May 2012 
Edited:  21Mar2012 aym ; 15 October 2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER