Plant Guide 

PRAIRIE JUNEGRASS

Koeleria macrantha 
(Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes 
Plant Symbol = KOMA 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
©Larry Allain. USGS NWRC 
Alternate Names 
Koeleria cristata; Mountain junegrass, junegrass,  
Uses 
Grazing/Livestock – Prairie junegrass is a component 
of many native plant communities. It commonly 
represents up to 5 percent of the community. It 
greens up early in the spring and provides good early 
spring forage and fair late spring forage for livestock. 
Wildlife – Prairie junegrass is considered a fair to 
good forage for elk throughout the year and is 
desirable forage for deer and antelope in the spring 
and early summer. 
Reclamation – Prairie junegrass is used as a 
component of native seed mixtures in revegetation of 
mined lands, heavy use areas and other surface 
disturbed lands. 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species). 
Description 
General: Prairie junegrass is a native, perennial, cool 
season tufted bunchgrass found on rangelands, plains 
and open forestlands. It is commonly 0.5-2 feet tall.  
The narrow leaves form small basal clusters from 
which arise several seedheads. Leaves are basal, flat 
to in-rolled and sharply pointed. The seedheads are 
narrow contracted panicles and have the appearance 
of dense spikes, one per stem. The spikelets are 
normally pale green to purplish in color. Fine hairs 
are found on the reproductive stem just below the 
seedhead. The glumes are sharp and shiny. This is 
one of the first grasses to green-up in the early spring. 
Prairie junegrass is a perennial grass of medium 
longevity found in a wide variety of native plant 
communities. 
Intermountain Flora - drawn by Jeanne R. Janish. University of Washington Press. 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

This species is often mistaken for muttongrass (Poa 
fendleriana) and spike trisetum (Trisetum wolfii), but 
can be distinguished by the hairy panicles and 
smaller spikelets. 
Distribution: The range of prairie junegrass extends 
from Ontario to British Columbia, south to Delaware, 
California and Mexico. For additional information on 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Adaptation 
Prairie junegrass is cold, heat and drought tolerant 
and grows on rangeland meadows, plains, mountain 
foothills and open forestlands. It does best at 12- 20 
inches annual precipitation. It is most commonly 
found at elevations from 4,000- 8,000 feet, but occurs 
up to 11,500 feet in the central Rocky Mountains. 
It is found primarily as a component of native plant 
communities in open and rocky areas. It is best 
adapted to well-drained soils such as silts to loams to 
sandy loams. It prefers 6.5- 8.0 pH soils. It has good 
tolerance to fire. 
Establishment 
Prairie junegrass is not recommended for fall or 
dormant fall seedings. It does best when seeded in the 
spring. Young plants are subject to thinning by frost 
heaving and soil cracking during winter and very 
early spring. 
The native accessions of this species have an average 
of 2,300,000 seeds per pound. The full monoculture 
seeding rate for drill application is 1 PLS pound per 
acre. Use the appropriate percentage of this rate when 
planting native seed mixtures. The seed should be 
planted into a clean, weed-free, firm seedbed at soil 
surface to 1/8-inch depth because seed requires light 
to achieve maximum germination. 
The exclusion of grazing animals until plants become 
well established is recommended. This may require 
up to 2- 3 growing seasons. 
Management 
During the second to third growing season, seedheads 
will flower in mid-April to mid-June. Seed reaches 
maturity in July through August depending on 
latitude and elevation. Fall regrowth can occur if soil 
moisture conditions are favorable.  
Prairie junegrass greens up early in the spring. 
Grazing deferment until plants are 4- 6 inches tall is 
recommended to ensure the health of the plant and to 
reduce over-grazing. It is considered good forage in 
early spring, but as it matures in later spring, it 
becomes tough and less palatable. This grass has 
moderate to high tolerance to grazing. 
Prairie junegrass tends to increase in percent cover 
following fire events and is very resistant to fire. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Prairie junegrass may be vulnerable to some insects 
such as the striped flea beetle which will cause the 
leaf tips to wilt. 
Environmental Concerns 
Prairie junegrass is medium-lived native species, 
spreading primarily via seed. It is not considered to 
be &#34;weedy&#34; or an invasive species, but it can spread 
into adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions.  It does not 
generally spread from original stands, or if it does 
spread, the rate of spread is slow.  
Seed Production 
Seed production of prairie junegrass has been 
successful under cultivated conditions. Row spacing 
of 24 inches under irrigation or high precipitation (> 
16 inches annual precipitation) to 36 inches under 
dryland conditions is recommended.  Seeding rates 
for seed production range from 0.75 pound PLS per 
acre on dryland to 1.0 pound PLS per acre under 
irrigated conditions.  
It should be seeded in locations where weeds are well 
controlled. Prairie junegrass seedlings are not 
vigorous, are slow to establish and are therefore 
vulnerable to mechanical (wheel and foot traffic) and 
chemical damage. Wait until the 3- 5 leaf stage 
before applying herbicides at a low rate (bromoxynil 
according to label) or clipping for weed control. 
Cultivation between rows will be needed for weed 
control and to maintain row culture.  
Seed fields are productive for about 4- 5 years. Field 
moisture during the fall, soil fertility, and plant re-
growth determine the yield the succeeding year.  
Average production of 75 pounds per acre can be 
expected under dryland conditions in 16- inch plus 
rainfall areas.  Average production of 100- 150 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  
Harvesting can be completed by direct combining in 
the hard-dough stage or by windrowing followed by 
combining. Windrowing may help ensure a more 
complete threshing and more uniform in ripening. 
Windrowing also reduces the risk of loss of seed

from wind. Seed is generally harvested from early 
July to late August. Seed must be dried immediately 
after combining (moisture content should be 12 
percent in bins/15 percent in sacks).  
Not all native ecotypes readily produce viable seed. 
Many ecotypes generally go through anthesis, but not 
all will produce viable seed at an economically 
acceptable level. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
‘Barkoel’ prairie junegrass is the only release of this 
species. It originates from Barenbrug, Holland, 
Oosterhout, The Netherlands. It is a selection of 
clones after three years of testing under turf 
conditions. The clones were chosen on basis of good 
winter color and good seed yield. Barkoel is intended 
for use as a cool-season turfgrass and not intended for 
native plantings. Seed is available through Barenbrug 
USA, PO Box 239, Tangent, OR 97389, (503) 926-
5801. 
A native selection that has been tested since 1986 is 
nearing release by the Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center in Meeker, CO.  No 
other releases are presently available.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Alderson, J. and W. C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties 
in the United States. Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, DC. 
Cornforth, B., L. St. John and D. G. Ogle. 2001. 
Technical Note 14: Seed production standards for 
conservation plants in the Intermountain West. 
USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. 15p. 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977. Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
Hitchcock, A.S. (rev. A. Chase). 1950. Manual of the 
grasses of the United States. USDA Misc. Publ. No. 
200. Washington, DC. 1950. 
Ogle, D. G., L. St. John, M. Stannard and L. 
Holzworth. 2006. Technical Note 24: Grass, grass-
like, forb, legume, and woody species for the 
intermountain west. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. 42p. 
Smith, R., S. Smith, R. Haas, and L. Holzworth. 
1998. Native Grass Seed Production Manual, USDA-
NRCS, Bismarck, ND and Ducks Unlimited Canada. 
155 p. 
USDA, NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 061010. (http://plants.usda.gov). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA USA. 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
Loren St. John 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
Mark Majerus 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Bridger, MT 
Derek Tilley 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
Dr. Thomas A. Jones 
USDA-ARS, Forage & Range Research Laboratory, 
Logan, UT 
Steve Parr 
Upper CO Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, CO 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
Edited: 10oct06dgo; 05may06taj; 09may06djt; 11may06ls; 05june05mm, 06oct06sp; 10oct06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.