Plant Guide
KOCHIA 
Kochia scoparia  (L.)  
Plant Symbol = KOSC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Figure 1. P. Allen Casey. 2009. USDA-NRCS. Kochia that exhibits red 
colored stems.  Found on a disturbed site along a gravel road. Riley 
County, Kansas   
 
Alternate Names   
Bassia scoparia ; Bassia sieversiana ; Kochia alata; 
Kochia trichophila;  Kochia trichophylla; burningbush; 
Mexican fireweed; mock cypress; fireweed; mirabel; 
summer cypress; common kochia; Mexican summer -
cypress; railroad weed; belvedere; firebush; poor man’ s 
alfalfa; common red sage  
   
Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
Caution: This plant can be toxic.  
   
Uses   
Wildlife and Livestock:  During early stages of growth, 
Kochia scoparia  is palatable and has high forage value for 
all classes of livestock and  can be hayed or grazed 
(Everitt et al., 1983; Stubbendieck et al., 2003).     
   
Kochia provides cover and the seeds are used as food by 
both songbirds and upland game birds (Stubbendieck et  al., 2003).  The large quantity of high protein seed makes 
kochia 
valuable for poultry feed (Friesen et al., 2009).  
Kochia is also eaten by deer and pronghorn (Stubbendieck 
et al., 2003).   
   
Erosion Control and Bioremediation:   Kochia can be used 
for control of soil erosion. Undersander et al. (1990) 
indicated that it is able to survive in a variety of harsh soil 
conditions, including sandy and alkaline soils.  Kochia 
scoparia  is drought, salinity, and grasshopper tolerant and 
is able to grow in areas with very thin topsoil (Friesen et 
al., 2009).  It is especially suit ed to arid to semi-arid 
regions (Friesen et al., 2009).  It has the ability to 
germinate and grow at anytime during the growing season 
and will provide quick groundcover to protect the topsoil.  
For large inaccessible areas it can be sown using 
airplanes,  making it ideal for revegetation after a fire.   
   
Kochia has been shown to bioaccumulate cesium -137 
(Lasat et al., 1997) and may be able to be used for 
remediation of hydrocarbon contaminated soil (Robson et 
al., 2004).   
   
Ethnobotanic:   Kochia scoparia  has been used in Chinese 
and Korean folk medicine as treatment for skin diseases, 
diabetes, mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, liver disorders, 
and jaundice (Kim et al., 2005; Choi et al., 2002).  In 
Japan and China the fresh fruit is used as a food garnish 
o n some dishes (Yoshikawa et al., 1997) and the seeds are 
ground into flour (Usher, 1974).  In China, Russia, 
Bulgaria, Macedonia, Romania, and Italy kochia is 
planted for making brooms (Zimdahal, 1989; Shu, 2003; 
Nedelcheva et al., 2007; Friesen et al., 20 09).  
   
Kochia seeds contain an oviposition pheromone that can 
be added as an attractant for mosquito pesticides (Friesen 
et al., 2009; Whitney et al., 2004).  The seeds of kochia 
have also been shown to contain other chemicals that 
could have beneficial human uses, such as compounds 
that could be use to treat ulcers, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
some human pathogenic bacteria (Friesen et al., 2009; 
Goyal and Gupta, 1988; Borrelli and Izzo, 2000).   
   
Kochia scoparia  is grown as an ornamental due to its 
dense and conical shape as well as its bright red color in 
the fall (Undersander et al., 1990).  
 
Status   
This plant is or can be noxious and/or invasive in some 
areas.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natur al Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).