Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WINTERFAT 
Krascheninnikovia lanata 
(Pursh) A.D.J. Meeuse & Smit
Plant Symbol = KRLA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Montana State Office, Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center, & Bridger Plant Materials Center 
 Northern Cold Desert Germplasm Loren St. John USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC 
Alternate Names 
White sage, winter-sage, feather-sage, sweet sage, 
lambstail, Eurotia lanata , and Ceratoides lanata 
 
Uses 
Rangeland/Grazing  – Winterfat is superior winter 
browse for livestock and wildlife. It is rated as 
excellent to good browse for cattle, sheep, and goats 
and fair browse for horses. It is one of the most 
valuable rangeland browse plants for maintaining the 
weight of adult animals on winter grazing ranges 
because of the high (>10  percent) crude protein 
content in winter. 
 
Wildlife  – Winterfat is considered very good browse 
for wildlife and is extensively utilized by rodents, 
rabbits, antelope, deer, elk, and bighorn sheep.  
 
Erosion Control  – Winterfat is a good erosion control 
plant when planted in a mi xture to provide greater 
plant density. It has a deep taproot and an extensive 
fibrous root system near  the soil surface, which helps  stabilize soils. It germinates readily and provides 
fairly rapid growth under favorable growing 
conditions.  
 
Reclamation
: Winterfat is an important pioneer 
species and establishes fairly easily on drastically 
disturbed sites or poorly developed soils such as 
those commonly found on mine lands.  
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Winterfat is an erect to spreading, low-growing, long-
lived half-shrub native to the western United States. 
It is a cool season plant, typically with a central 
woody stem arising from a woody crown. Annual 
secondary stems, 8 inches to 4 feet and sometimes 
taller, are herbaceous on  dwarf forms and herbaceous 
to woody throughout on taller forms, wooly and 
branched. Winterfat has an extensive fibrous root 
system and a deep penetrating taproot. 
 
Leaves are simple, alternate, mostly linear, and 
revolutely margined (rolled back from the margin). 
The inflorescence is a spik e.  Plants are monoecious 
with staminate flowers above the pistillate ones or 
occasionally they are dio ecious.  Pollination usually 
occurs between plants, but self-pollination may occur 
on monecious plants.  Wind is the principal mode of 
pollination.  The seed is a utricle and the seed coat is 
thin and covered with fine white, silky pilose hairs to 
½ inch long. 
 
Distribution 
This plant is widely distributed from Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba, Canada to western Nebraska, 
Colorado, west Texas, California and Washington. 
 
Adaptation 
Winterfat is most common in the 7 to 16 inch annual 
precipitation zones, but has been found in areas with 
less than 6 inches of annual precipitation and in areas 
with greater than 20 inch es annual precipitation. 
Winterfat is found from near sea level to 10,000 feet 
elevation. It occurs in salt desert shrub, pinyon 
juniper, sagebrush grass and near the edges of some 
forested plant communities.

Winterfat grows well on a wide range of soil textures, 
although it prefers more basic or limy soils. It 
tolerates moderate to highly saline conditions, but is 
not tolerant of acidic soils. It does not tolerate 
flooding or extended wet conditions. Refer to soil 
surveys and ecological site descriptions for additional 
guidance. It generally has good cold tolerance with 
some accessions (see Northern Cold Desert 
Germplasm and Open Range Germplasm) being 
more tolerant.  
 
Active growth begins in early to mid spring, 
flowering occurs from mid spring to early summer, 
and seed maturity is reached by mid to late fall. 
 
Establishment 
Planting: Winterfat seed does not remain viable for 
extended periods and use of seed no older than two 
years is recommended. Winterfat seed may lose as 
much as 50 percent or more viability during the first 
year of storage.  It is very important to have current 
germination test results for seed that is to be planted.   
 
Dormant fall - winter or very early spring plantings 
result in the best stands. Studies indicate that 
winterfat seedlings can survive freezing temperatures 
and do well at cool temperatures, but growth is very 
slow during hot summer periods. 
 
Winterfat utricles are covered with fine silky hairs 
that will not flow through a drill. . Debearded seed 
flows readily through a drill, but this seed (with hairs 
removed) may be viable for a shorter period of time 
than non-debearded seed. 
 
Winterfat should be seeded on the soil surface to no 
deeper than ¼ inch. Broadcasting seed on snow or 
broadcasting on a moist firm soil surface followed by 
a packing operation results in the best stands. Drilling 
seed from 1/16 to ¼ inch deep using a drill with good 
depth control and packer wheels into firm soil also 
results in satisfactory stands.  
 
When drill seeded alone to reclaim winterfat 
monoculture plant communities, 15 Pure Live seeds 
(PLS) per square foot (5.0 pounds PLS per acre) is 
recommended.  If broadcast seeded, the seeding rate 
should be increased to 21 PLS seeds per square foot 
or 7.0 pounds PLS per acre.  
 
When seeded as a component of a mix, 0.025 to 0.5 
pound PLS per acre drilled or 0.05 to 1.0 pound PLS 
per acre broadcast is recommended. Seeding in 
alternate or cross rows promotes optimum 
establishment of winterfat. A seeding rate of 1/40  (0.025) pound PLS per acre will result in 
approximately 400 plants per acre under favorable 
establishment and growing conditions.  
 
If winterfat is seeded in areas where annual weeds 
such as cheatgrass, medusahead rye, and/or tumble 
mustard are prevalent, it should be seeded in a 
mixture of adapted, vigorous native grasses following 
control practices such as tillage or herbicide 
treatment for the annual weeds.  
  
Management 
Winterfat has excellent tolerance to browsing during 
the winter. However, over-browsing has greatly 
reduced or eliminated it in 
some areas. No more than 
25 percent of the annual season growth should be 
removed during the active growing period (less 
during active spring growth period) and no more than 
50 percent of the annual season growth should be 
removed during dormant periods. 
 
New plantings should be excluded from browsing by 
livestock and wildlife until plants are well established 
and producing seed.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Winterfat is native, long-lived, and spreads by seed 
distribution. It is not considered "weedy", but could 
slowly spread into adjoining vegetative communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions. 
This species is well documented as having beneficial 
qualities and no negative impacts on wild or domestic 
animals. 
 
Seed Production 
Seed production fields can be established from 
transplants or by direct seeding. Establishing plants 
in a greenhouse and transplanting to the field will 
result in the most satisfactory stands for seed 
production. Plant spacing under transplant conditions 
should be 4 - 5 feet within row and a minimum of 5 
feet between rows. Transplanting into weed barrier 
fabric can also improve plant establishment and seed 
production, weed control, and moisture conservation. 
Transplanting is recommended in the spring prior to 
hot summer temperatures.  . Full seed production is 
usually reached the second  to third year following 
transplanting. 
 
Plantings can also be established by direct seeding. A 
minimum of 15 to 20 PLS seeds per linear foot of 
drill row should be planted.  Hand seeding in late fall 
or very early spring may also be an option.  Plant 5 to 
10 seeds in a close group at desired spacing and thin 
to 1 or 2 plants after emergence. Full seed production

may be reached the third to fourth year following 
direct seeding. 
 
Winterfat requires an equivalent of 10 to 12 inches 
annual precipitation for seed production.  Irrigation 
may only be needed for establishment.  Expected 
seed yields may range from 200 to 400 pounds per 
acre.  Fertilization is not generally recommended 
unless soil tests indicate severe nutrient deficiencies.  
Rabbits and rodents can damage stands and may 
destroy seedlings.  Insects such as grasshoppers and 
Mormon crickets infrequently damage stands beyond 
recovery. 
 
Harvesting seed is best accomplished by hand 
stripping. Mechanized harvesting has been used, but 
seed requires additional conditioning to properly dry 
and clean excessive trash (leaves, stems, other inert 
matter).  Harvested seed is usually threshed by 
debearding or run through a hammermill to remove 
the fine silky hairs that cover the seed followed by 
screening.  This process greatly enhances the ability 
of the seed to flow through planting equipment.  
Removing the white hairs that surround the seed can 
injure the seed resulting in reduced viability, seedling 
vigor, and stand establishment.  One must be 
extremely careful when th reshing seed to limit the 
amount of mechanical action on the seed to minimize 
seed damage. Unthreshed seed is recommended for 
best stand establishment if hand seeding directly or 
for transplants. 
 
Viability of winterfat seed rapidly decreases after 
storage for 1 to 2 years even under the best storage 
conditions. Germination of fresh seed can be as high 
as 85 to 95 percent. Germination of seed 3 years or 
older is commonly below 25 percent.  It is extremely 
important to have a current germination test for seed 
that will be planted. Seeds per pound will vary by 
accession, but averages 125, 000 with bracts intact. 
Seed conditioned with a hammer-mill to remove 
bracts averages 200,000 seeds per pound.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and Registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
‘Hatch’ winterfat was released in 1985 by the 
USDA-NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials Center in 
cooperation with New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, and 
Idaho Agricultural Experiment Stations, USDA-
Forest Service, and Utah  Division of Wildlife 
Resources. ‘Hatch’ was sel ected for improved seed  production, germination, seedling vigor, and big 
game wildlife preference. 
 
‘Hatch’ originated from the Ha
tch, Utah area at a site 
with 11 to 12 inches annual precipitation, 7300 feet 
elevation, and a mixed pinyon-juniper to mountain 
big sagebrush plant community. It performs well in 
New Mexico, Arizona, western Colorado, southern 
Utah, and southern Nevada. It is best adapted to 
upland sites and less adapted to arid desert shrub 
sites. Field plantings in the northern regions of the 
Great Basin and Intermountain West generally fail 
due to poor cold tolerance.  
 
Northern Cold Desert Germplasm  Selected Class 
winterfat was released in 2001 by the USDA-NRCS 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center and Idaho 
Agricultural Experiment Station. Northern Cold 
Desert Germplasm winte rfat was selected for 
improved cold hardiness and is better adapted to the 
northern regions of the natural range of winterfat.  
 
Northern Cold Desert Ge rmplasm winterfat is a 
composite of five accession s of winterfat. These 
accessions were selected fr om a collection of 45 
accessions evaluated and found  to be significantly 
more cold tolerant than others in the study. Source 
locations include a site southeast of Price, Utah; a site 
near Castledale, Utah; a site six miles east of Kanab, 
Utah; a site along Northfork Road in Washington 
County, Utah; and a site in Rio Blanco County, 
Colorado.  
 
The Northern Cold Desert Germplasm winterfat is an 
erect shrub that can grow to  3 feet tall with a 2 feet 
diameter canopy cover. It is better adapted to the 
colder, northern portions of the Great Basin and 
Intermountain West than Hatch. It tolerates very dry 
conditions in the 7 – 14 inch annual precipitation 
zone. It is highly tolerant of alkaline/saline soils and 
soils derived from limestone parent materials. Uses 
include rangeland restoratio n, erosion control, and 
browse for livestock and wildlife. 
 
Open Range Germplasm  winterfat is a Tested Class 
germplasm released in 2002 by Bridger, Montana 
Plant Materials Center. It is a composite of three 
superior accessions from near Terry in Prairie 
County, Montana; near Bridger in Carbon County, 
Montana; and near Rawlins in Carbon County, 
Wyoming. Open Range Germplasm is adapted for 
use throughout the Northern Great Plains region 
including north-central U.S. and south-central 
Canada.

Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Stevens, R., B. Giunta, K. Jorgensen, & A. Plummer 
1977.  Winterfat (Ceratoides lanata).  Publication No. 
77-2 Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Federal 
Project W-82-R 1977.  41pp. 
 
Stevens, R., K. Jorgensen,  S. Young, & S. Monsen, 
1996.  Forb and shrub seed production guide for 
Utah.  Utah State Univers ity Extension AG 501.  
51pp. 
 
Wasser, C. 1982.  Ecology and culture of selected 
species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
West.  USDI Fish & Wildl. Serv. FWS/OBS-82/56. 
347 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho  
 
Loren St. John , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Larry Holzworth , USDA NRCS Montana State 
Office, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Susan R. Winslow , USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Bridger, Montana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho  
 Edited 05dec00 jsp; 16aug02 srw; 16aug02 lkh; 24sept02 lsj; 24sept02 dgo;  11feb03 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.