WHITE LUPIN 
Lupinus albus L.  
Plant Symbol = LU AL22 
Contributed by :   USDA NRCS Big Flats Plant Materials 
Center, Corning New York  
  
Photo credit to www.flowerpictures.org  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  white lupine, sweet lupine  
Scientific Names:  Lupin us graecus Boiss. &  Sprun . 
Lupinus jugoslavicus  Kazim. &  Now ., Lupin us termis 
Forsk  
The seeds and green parts of white  lupine contain 
alkaloids  which are toxic to humans and livestock.  
Care must be exercised when consuming this plant. 
Soaking in running water, for up to three days, 
boiling, or selecting ‘sweet’ cultivars is required to 
remove the harmful toxins.  Use low alkaloid cultivars 
when using w hite lupine  for either food or livestock 
feed . 
 
Description  
General :  White lupine is a non -native, annual legume, 
reaching heights up to 47 inches.  It has a strong taproot 
penetrating over 2 feet into the soil (Brebaum and Boland, 
1995).  Leaves are alternate and compound with 5- 9 
leaflets, nearly smooth above and hairy beneath.  
Individual plants produce several orders of inflorescences 
and branches, resulting in clusters of long, oblong pods, 
each cluster having 3 -7 pods, and each pod containing 3 -7 
seeds.  White lupine flowers in May -June.  The flowers 
are white to violet with the upper lip being entire and the 
lower lip entire or slightly 3 -toothed (Jansen, 2006).  
  White lupine is primarily cross pollinated crop, but self
-
pollination of 50 -85% has been  reported (Brebaum and 
Boland, 1995).   
 
White lupine seed s are generally classified as sweet or 
bitter depending on the alkaloid content, which ranges 
from 0.01 to 4% (Bhardwaj and Hamama, 2012).  The 
bitter seeds contain the quinolizidine alkaloids  lupanine 
and  sparteine.  The presence of these alkaloids limits the 
use of lupine seed as food and feed.  The Australian 
standard is 0.02% as the upper alkaloid content limit for 
sweet  lupines (Cowlings et al., 1998).  
 
White lupine has an indeterminate growth ha bit arising 
from its sequential branching pattern (Munier -Jolain et 
al., 1996).  Flowering starts at the main stem and develops 
10 -14 days later on primary branches (Brebaum and 
Boland, 1995).   During flowering, water requirements are 
high.  High temperatu res and water stress may cause 
flowers to die.  Very early seeded lupine may undergo 
vernalization reducing the number of nodes, flowering 
date, maturity date, heights and yields (Brebaum and 
Boland, 1995).  
Distribution :  
White lupine is thought to have or iginated in southeastern 
Europe and western Asia (Jansen, 2006).  Chile is the 
world’s largest producer of lupines with ~62,000 acres in 
cultivation and annual production of ~40,000 tons (von 
Baer et al., 2009).  
 
White lupine , wild and cultivated types ,  are  highly 
variable (Jansen, 2006).  The wild type (subsp. graecus ) 
(Jansen, 2006) is found in southeastern Europe and 
western Asia.  The petals are dark violet and seed pods 
shatter at maturity.  Seed are small and mottled brown 
with an impermeable seed coat.    
 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Prof ile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :   
White  lupine is found in different habitats throughout the 
world.  It grows at mean monthly temperatures of 59 -
77°F.  Higher temperatures and drought stress hinder 
flowering and pod setting.  Whi te lupine is cold-tolerant, 
but temperatures of 21 to 18°F are harmful at 
germination.  Rainfall of 15 -39 inches during the growing 
season is optimal.  It  shows good frost resistance, but this 
will vary by genotype and climate.  
Adaptation  
White lupine  is  adapted to  climates ranging from northern 
Europe and Russia, to the arid Australian plains , to the 
Andean highlands.   S pring and fall  sown types are grown, 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide

but only the spring types are adapted to the northern 
Midwestern United States and northeastern Unit ed States. 
 
White lupine prefers disturbed sites, poor soils, and areas 
with  reduced  competition.   It grows  well in acidic soils, 
but  tolerates  mildly  alkaline  soil s and slightly calcareous 
soils .  Soil pH of 6.5 or less is suitable .   Soil acidity is less 
critical for  lupine production than for other legumes such 
as alfalfa and soybean (Brebaum and Boland, 1995).   
Growth is hampered on heavy clay, waterlogged and 
alkaline soils.  Some cultivars of white lupine are more 
tolerant to salinity and heavy soils t han other crops 
(Jansen, 2006).   
Uses  
Approximately 5 million acres of lupine species are 
cultivated worldwide (Jansen, 2006).  Sixty percent for 
seed production and 40% for forage and green manure.  
White lupine is a promising annual legume crop for 
human  consumption, green manure, cover crops and 
forage production (Jansen, 2006).  
 
Livestock feed : Sweet cultivars  of lupine  are used for 
livestock and human consumption.   The seed composition 
and high protein c ontent make the sweet cultivars  highly 
suitable f or livestock diets ,  in intensive farming systems.    
 
White  lupine can be  used for late winter and early season 
grazing  as fresh or dry fodder (Jansen, 2006). It can be 
fed as whole or ground seed, whole plant silage, and as 
hay.  From 65% to 80% of the lupine protein is rumen 
degradable.  This rapid protein degradation results in 
inefficient nutritional utilization, which may cause  low 
dry matter consumption, low mil k production and milk 
protein and  should not be the only source of protein feed 
to ruminants  (Brebaum and Boland, 1995).  Dairy and 
livestock farmers in central Minnesota and Wisconsin 
have successfully incorporated lupine in their feeding 
programs (Putnam, 1993).    
 
The anti -nutritional quinolizidine alkaloids in white 
lupine seed are responsibl e for poor feed utilization 
(Zdunczyk et al., 1998).  Introduction of fodder lupine 
varieties with alkaloid content of less than 0.01% limit the 
anti -nutritional effect of alkaloids on palatability, 
consumption and feed utilization. Since most alkaloids  in  
white lupine are water -soluble, the alkaloid levels can be 
decreased by soaking them in running water, brine, or 
scalding  (Erbas et al., 2005).  
 
Azo et al. (2006) studied the use of white lupine in 
organic production and lupine/cereal mixtures.  They 
foun d that bi -cropping lupine with cereals was successful 
and gave good forage yields.  The combination of ‘Dieta’ 
white lupine and spring wh eat or spring triticale, was 
most successful in yield and protein content.  Also, harvest 
dates are as crucial as seedin g rates for lupin/cereal forage 
because time of harvest determines the stage of maturity  and therefore, forage quality
. Harvesting between 116-
130 days is recommended.  (Azo et al. 2012).   
McKenzie and Spaner (1998) suggest that white lupine 
can be used as  an alternative legume in oat -legume green 
chop mixtures on mineral soils in Newfoundland.    
 
Bhardwaj et al (2010), studied the potential to use white 
lupin as a forage crop in the Mid- Atlantic region of the 
U.S.  They found in their preliminary  evaluation that 
white lupin has an average of 18.7% crude protein content 
and has potential as a forage crop in this region and 
compared quite well with alfalfa.  
 
Green Manure/Cover Crop : 
White lupine has a long history in the US as a green -
manure nitrogen source.   By the 1940s, it was so 
prevalent in the southern coastal plain the area was 
nicknamed the ‘Lupine Belt’ (Bhardwaj et al., 2004)  
(Mask et al. 1993) .  At one time, over 2,500,000 acres of 
blue, yellow, and white lupine were grown as a green 
manure for cotton in the  South. Today. U tilization of 
white lupine use  is increasing  once again  in the southern 
US . White lupine was shown to fix 140 -175 lb N/acre in 
trials in Minnesota (Putnam, 1993).    
 
White  lupine has a positive effect on succeeding crops 
due to its ability to fix nitrogen, enhance  the availability 
of phosphorus ,  and improve  soil health .  By comparing a 
10 -year white lupine -wheat rotation to continuous wheat, 
Chan and Heenan (1993) found that wheat  yield was 
always higher in the lupine rotation, regardless of 
supplemental nitrogen fertilization.  The lupine rotation 
also resulte d in higher soil organic matter , improved 
macroaggregate stability, and a slower decline in soil pH 
than under continuous w heat production.   
 
White lupine can be a phosphorus efficient plant and 
could help reduce the need for P fertilizer and enhance 
yields. It forms cluster roots in response to phosphorus 
starvation (Cheng et al., 2011).  Such an adaptation leads 
to a striki ng increase in root surface area available for 
phosphorus uptake from the rhizosphere.  Gardner and 
Parberry (1983)  found exposure to low levels of soil 
phosphorus enhanced the uptake of phosphorus by white 
lupine.  They also concluded that the ability of  white 
lupine to utilize existing soil and added phosphorous 
decreased as pH increased.

Human Consumption: Sweet white lupine seeds have 
been used for human consumption for many years.   
“ Sweet lupine” is defined as having less than 0.02% 
alkaloid content  (Jansen, 2006). The first sweet forms of 
white lupine with low alkaloid concentrations were 
developed in the 1930s in Germany (Brebaum and 
Boland, 1995).    
 
The fiber -rich flour made from white lupine seeds  are 
used by humans.  The flour is a good source of macro-  
and micro -nutrients, protein, fat, carbohydrates, minerals, 
and vitamins (Yanez, 1996).  It is used to enrich pastas, 
cake mixes, cereals, and other baked goods (Birk, 1993).  
Sweet white lupine flour  also is added to emulsify meat 
products to increase nutritional value,  aroma and to 
modify texture (Erb as et al., 2005). 
 
The average price of l upine seed is about $185/ton.   
 
Fish food :   
White lupine is being used for fishmeal in turbot, red 
seabream, an d rainbow trout for its high protein and lipid 
content (Tabrett et al., 2012).    
 
Abandoned mines:   
Rocio et al. (2013) looked at white lupine as a potential 
crop to be planted on abandoned mercury mines in 
Europe.   It has a relatively high tolerance to  a number of 
contaminants and can act as a good phytostablizer.    
 
Alternative uses :   
In Germany, a method for extracting alkaloids from bitter 
lupines has been developed and researched to determine 
possible uses as a fertilizer and for its biocidal effec ts.  
The alkaloid extracted may have insecticidal properties 
that could reduce or prevent insect damage when applied 
to vegetable plants (Brebaum and Boland, 1995).    
 
In traditional medicine, white lupine has varied uses.  
Lupine  seeds are used to cure  worms, reduce  boils and 
skin ailments (Jansen, 2006) , repel insects, enhance sugar 
tolerance in diabetics,  and heal sores (Duke, 1981) . In 
England , white lupine meal mixed with goat gall and 
lemon juice forms an ointment (Duke, 1981).  Ethnobotany
 
White lu pine crops were important  to many 
Mediterranean civilizations and was domesticated in the 
Old and New World (Putnam, 1993).  The large seed was 
reportedly used as play money during the Roman times, 
and was mentioned by the poet Virgil in 70 BC  and by 
playw rights in 1500 BC.  
 
The history of lupine cultivation in the Old World is 
associated with ancient Egyptian civilization, more than 
2,000 years ago (Zhukovsky, 1929 ).  It is more likely that 
white lupine was originally cultivated in ancient Greece, 
where  the greatest biodiversity was concentrated and 
wild -growing forms have been preserved  (Kurlovich, 
2002) .  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endange red species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Establishment  
There  are winter and spring forms of white  lupine and the 
cultivar will determine when to plant for greatest seed  and 
plant production.    
 
In general, white  lupine needs a growing season of at least 
five months, with no moisture stress.  Areas with mild 
winters , plant seed from  mid -September to late October 
and  planting as late as December has  produced adequate 
stands (Duke, 1981).  Seed should be sown at a rate of 50-
160 lb/acre  and inoculated  with Bradyrhizobium  lupine.  
A grain drill can be used to plant seed  at a depth of 1-2 
inches.  White lupine may also be successfully est ablished 
with a broadcast seeding.   Preparing a weed -free seeded is 
crucial for  establishment  and after seeding, f irm the soil 
with a cultipacker or other means to ensure adequate seed 
to soil contact (Brebaum and Boland, 1995).   
C ool temperate weather conditions are important during 
the v egetative stag e.  Temperatures lower than 50ºF  and 
short days are required to induce flowering.   Seed 
prediction  declined about 47 lb/acre per day in later 
seeded plants.  However, very early plantings can induce 
vernalization . This will reduce height, nod e number, and 
yield due to early cold effects on the seedlings (Putnam, 
1993).  Thermosensitivity in white lupine remains an 
important agronomic factor in a spring -sown crop and the 
window for optimum seeding date is relatively narrow.

Irrigation increased white lupine seed yields over three 
years of research trials in Minnesota, primarily through 
increased pod number.  Seed crude protein concentration 
declined at high irrigation rates, and irrigation was cost -
effective in most years on sandy soils (Putn am, 1993).   
 
Early sowing dates produce longer growth periods and 
higher yields.  However, crops sown very early may be 
more affected by weed competition, low temperatures or 
by pests and diseases.  Early autumn sown crops have a 
shorter emergence period,  greater vegetative growth, 
more lateral branches, a longer flowering period, greater 
dry matter yield, and greater grain yield than crops sown 
in the winter (Lopez -Bellido et al., 1994).  
Management  
White lupine is sensitive to phosphorus deficiency.  
Depe nding on soil test results, an application of 250 -1000 
lb/acre of superphosphate may be required to prevent 
yield reduction.  Poor sandy soils may require 25 -50 
lb/acre potassium and in some areas potassium and sulfur 
are applied (Duke, 1981).  The roots of the plant can 
increase phosphorus availability by acidifying the 
rhizosphere.  This property may be beneficial to which 
associated plants (Jansen, 2006).    
Pests and Potential Problems 
S weet and bitter  lupines can cause livestock poisoning.   
Lupine osis can occur  w hen white  lupine is fed as dried 
forage.  This disease is caused by toxins produced by the 
fungus  Diapore toxica  that colonize  lupine plants.  It 
primarily  occurs in sheep, but can occur in other 
livestock .  It  is characterized by severe liver damage, 
result ing in loss of appetite and condition, lethargy, 
jaundice, and often death.  Lupineosis may be avoided by 
using  Diapore  resistant culti vars such as ‘Kiev’ and 
‘Ultra’  (Jansen, 2006).    
 
Fungal pathogens such  as Ascochyta  sp ., Fusarium 
avenaceum, Fusarium oxysporum , and Pleiochaeta setosa  
are important pathogens on lupines (Brebaum and Boland, 
1995).  Brown spot ( Septoria glycines) is widely 
distributed and a problem on autumn- sown white lupine 
plants.  Fungal  diseases may be controlled with the proper 
use of an appropriate fungicide.  Anthracnose 
( Colletotrichum  sp.) resistance has been found in some 
cultivars (Jansen, 2006).  Romer et al. (2000) found the 
most efficient way to control anthracnose is through se ed 
treatment.    
 
Bean mosaic virus is the major viral disease affecting 
white lupine and is transmitted by aphids and seed.  White 
lupine is immune to cucumber mosaic virus, a major 
disease of other lupine species.    
 
Aphids are also a problem for white  lupin and are mostlt 
found during budding and early pod stages.  Their direct 
feeding effects will reduce crop yields and leads to no 
flower or pod formation.  Aphids in lupin can also  transmit 
diseases which will also have a  detriment to the 
crop yields.   The extent of yield reduction is related to the 
variety used and precipitation amounts (Berlandier, 1999).  
 
Other pests that affecting white lupine are bean seedling 
maggots (causing seedling to wilt and die), beetle and 
moth larvae (kill seedling), slugs (attack leaves), thrips 
(attack flowers and leaves), mired bugs (attack young 
seed pods), and budworms (feed on pods and seeds).    
 
The most effective management practices for disease and 
pest control in white lupine are crop rotations and the use 
of disease -free seed.    
Control  
White lupine is slow to develop a closed canopy, which 
may result in weed competitio n (Bre baum and Boland, 
1995).  Folgert  et al. (2010) found cultivation and 
companion crops such as black oats successfully reduced 
weed competition without injury or yield loss.  
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed  specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
White lupine can produce high seed yields. They are 
indeterminate plants and managing  main stem racemes 
results in impr oved yield (Clapham  et al. 2000).  
   
There are approximately 500 -6,000 seeds/lb and 62 
lb/bushel of white lupine.  The wide range is related to the 
cultivar used and area grown.   Seed can be stored for 2- 4 
years under normal conditions, and longer storage is  
possible at lower temperatures.   
 
White lupine seed yields vary with climatic conditions.  
The major producers of white lupine seed are Australia, 
Europe, South Africa, Russia, and the US.  Seed s are best 
harvested in cool weather to prevent shattering po ds and 
damaging seeds  (Huyghe, 1997) .  For seed production in 
the US and Europe, chemical defoliants are used before 
harvest.  Seed yields range from 700 -5,300 lb/acre 
(Brebaum and Boland, 1995). United States, yields 
fluctuate from 900 -2,000 lb/acre.    
 
Bhardwaj et al. (2004) found that white lupine seed yield , 
in Virginia , was dependent on planting date and row 
spacing.  In the mid- Atlantic region of the US planting 
should be before the third week in October with a row 
spacing of 1.5 feet.   
 
In southern Minnesota and Wisconsin, seed planted in 
April will be ready for harvest during August and

September in northern areas.  Moisture content of the seed 
at harvest should be 15-18%, to reduce damage (Putnam 
et al. 1992).  Harvesting lupine with conventional 
combines  is possible because the crop is not susceptible to 
lodging, has non -shattering pods, and the seeds are 
primarily located near the top of the plants.   
 
Lupine Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
(and area of origin)  
White lupine is not commonly available from nurseries, 
garden stores and other plant dealers and distributors.   
Major germplasm sources are in France, United Kingdom, 
Australia, and Spain ( Huyghe, 1997).  White lupine 
breeders are selecting for accessions  that grow rapidly, 
are alkaloid -free, disease resistant, high -yielding, 
alkaline -tolerant, frost tolerant, dwarf cultivars, and well 
adapted to specific local ecological conditions (Jansen, 
2006).    
 
It appears that bitter cultivars tolerate cold and disea se 
stress better than sweet ones.  High levels of cross 
pollination may limit the release of sweet white lupine 
cultivars in regions where bitter, weedy or cultivated 
types are present.  Pollen of the latter would reintroduce 
the bitter character in sweet  varieties, since the bitter gene 
is dominant (Jansen, 2006).    
 
Some of the well -known cultivars of white lupine are 
‘Eldo’, ‘Kiev’, ‘Multolupa’ and ‘Ultra’ (Jansen, 2006). 
Numerous other breeding lines and cultivars of sweet 
white lupine exist ; Germany (‘Blanca’, ‘Gela’, ‘Plugs -
Gela’, ‘Astra’);  Poland (‘Kali’, ‘Wat’, ‘Kalina’), and 
France (‘Lublanc’, ‘Lucky’).   In Ontario, Canada, the 
cultivar  ‘Novella ’ is currently registered.    
 
C ommercial  lupine seed suppliers are located in  Australia, 
Chile, Germany, S outh Africa, and the United Kingdom .   
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area . 
 
Literature Cited  
Azo, W.M., G.P.P. Lane, W.P. Davis and  N.D. Cannon. 
2012. Bi- cropping white lupins ( Lupinus albus L.) with 
cereals for wholecrop forage in organic farming: The 
effect of seed rate and harvest dates on crop yield and 
quality. Biological Agriculture & Horticulture 28(2):86 -
100.  
 
Berlandier, F.A.1999. Aphids in lupin crops: their biology 
and control. Agr iculture Western Australia: Farmnote 44.  
 
Bhardwaj, H.L., Starner, D.E., and E. van Santen. 2010. 
Preliminary evaluation of white lupin  (Lupinus albus L.) 
as a forage crop in the mid -Atlantic region of the United 
States of America. J. of Agricultural Scien ce 2(4):13-17.  
  Bhardwaj, H.L., A.A. Hamama, and E. van Santen.2004. 
White lupin performance and nutritional value as affected 
by planting date and row spacing. J. of Agronomy. 
96:580
-583.  
 
Bhardwaj, H.L. and A.A. Hamama.2012. Cultivar and 
growing location  effects on white lupin immature green 
seeds. J. of Agricultural Science 4(2): 135 -138.  
 
Bhardwaj, B.L.2002. E valuation of lupin as a new 
food /feed crop in the US Mid -Atlantic region.  From 
trends in new crops and new uses, J.Janick and A 
Whipkey (eds) ASHS  Press, Alexandria, VA.  
 
Birk, Y. 1993. Anti -nutritional factors (ANFs) in lupin 
and other legume seeds: Pros and cons. p. 424 –429. In: 
Martins and da Costa (eds.), Advances in lupin research. 
Proc. 7th Int. Lupin Conf. held at Evora, Portugal, 18– 23 
April , 1993 
 
Brebaum, S. and G.J. Boland.1995. Sweet white lupin: A 
potential crop for Ontario. Can.J. Plant Sci.821 -841.  
 
Chan, K.Y., Heenan, D.P.  1993. Surface hydraulic 
properties of a  red earth under continuous cropping with 
different management  pract ices.  Aust. J. Soil Res. 31, 13 -
24.  
 
Cheng, L. B. Bucciarelli, J. Shen, D. Allen, and C.P. 
Vance.2011. Update on white lupin cluster root 
acclimation to phosphorus deficiency. Plant Phys. 
156:1025- 1032 
 
Clapham, W.M., J.B. Willcorr, and J.M. Fedders. 2000. 
Effec ts of seed maturation temperature on seed yield 
characteristics  and subsequent generations of lupin. Crop 
Sci.40:1313- 1317. 
 
Cowling, W.A., B.J. Buirchell and M.E. Tapia. 1998a. 
Lupinus  spp. Promoting the conservation and use of  
underutilised and neglected  crops. 23. Institute of Plant  
Genetics and Crop Plant Resources,  
G atersleben/International Plant Genetic Resources  
Institute, Rome, Italy. 105 pp.  
 
Duke, J.A. 1929. Handbook of legumes of world 
economic importance. Plenum Press, New York.  
 
El -Shazly, A., A -M.M. Ateya, and M. Wink. 2000. 
Quinolizidine alkaloid profiles of  Lupinus various 
orientalis, L. albus albus, L. hartwegii, and L. densiflorus .  
 
Erbas, M., M. Certel, and M.K. Uslu.2004. Some 
chemical properties of white lupin seeds ( Lupinus albus 
L.) Food Chemistry 89:341 -345.  
 
Folgart,A., A.J. Price, E. v an Santen, and G.R. 
Wehtje.2010.  Organic weed control in white lupin

(Lupinus albus  L.) Renewable Ag. And Food Systems 1-
7.  
 
Gardner W .K ., Barber D. A., Parberry D .G .1983.  The 
acquisition of phosphorus by  Lupinus albus L. The 
probable mechanism by  which phosphorus movement in 
the soil/root interface is enhanced.  Plant Soil70: 107 -124 
 
Huyghe, C.1997. White lupin ( Lupinus albus L.) Field 
Crops Research 53:147 -160.  
 
Jansen, P. C. M., 2006 . Lupinus albus (L.) Record from 
Protabase. Brink, M. & Belay, G. (Editors). PROTA 
(Plant Resources of Tropical Africa / Ressources 
végétales de l’Afrique tropicale), Wageningen, 
Netherlands .  
 
Kurlovich, Boguslav S.2002.  Lupins: Geography, 
classification, genetic r esources and breeding. St. 
Petersburg, Publishing house "Intan",  ISBN 5-86741 -034-
X  ; 468 pages.  
 
Lopez -Bellido, L. M. Fuentes, J.C.B. L hamby, and J.E. 
Castillo.1994. G rowth and yield of white lupin ( Lupinus 
albus ) under Mediterranean conditions : effect of sowing 
date. Field Crops research 36:87 -94.  
 
Mask, P.L.,D.W. Reeves, E. van Santen, G.L. Mullins, 
and G.E. Aksland. 1993. White lupin: An alternate crop 
for the southern coastal  plain. In J. Janik and J.E. 
Simon(eds.), New crops. Wiley, New York. 277 -278.  
 
McKenzie, D.B. and D. Spaner.1998. White lupin: An 
alternative to pea in oat -legume forage mixtures grown in 
Newfoundland. Can.J. Plant Sci. 43-47.  
 
Munier -Jolain, N.M., B. Ney,  and C. Duthion.1996. 
Analysis of branching in spring- sown white lupins 
( Lupinus albus  L.)L The  significance  of the number of 
axillary buds. Annals of Botany 77:123- 131. 
 
Putnan, D.H.1993. An interdisciplinary approach to the 
development of lupin as an alte rnative crop. In: J.Janik 
and J.E. Simon (eds.) New Crops. Wiley, New York. 266 -
277.  
 
Putnam, D.H., S.R. Simmons, and L.L. Hardman. 1993. 
Vernalization and seeding date effect on yield and yield 
components  of white lupin. Crop Sci.33:1076- 1083. 
 
Putnam, D. H., E.S. Oplinger, L.L. Hardman, and J.D. 
Doll. (1989, November). Lupine. Alternative Field Crops 
Manual. Retrieved from 
www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/lupin.html.   
Rocio, M., E. Esteban, P. Zornoza, and M.J. Sierra. 2013. 
Could an 
abandoned  mercury mine  area be cropped? 
Environ. Res.(in press)  
 
Romer, P, K. Masutt, J. DeJesus Pereira Da Rocha, and 
M. Joao Costa Rocha. Further trials to control 
Anthracnose ( Colletotrichum sp .) in white lupins 
( Lupinus albus ) with chemicals. Proceeding 9
th 
Int ernational Lupin  Conference. 25-27. 
 
Tabrett, S. D. Blyth, N. Bourne, and B. Glencross.2012. 
Digestibility of  Lupinus albus lupin mean  in barramundi 
( Lates calcarifer ). Aquaculture 364:1 -5.  
 
Von Baer, E., I. von Baer, and R. Riegel. 2009. Pecosa -
Baer: A ne w cultivar of white lupin with determined 
bushy growth habit, sweet grain and high protein content. 
Chilean J. Agri. Res.69:577 -580.  
 
Yanez, E. 1996. Sweet lupin as a source of macro and 
micro nutrients in human diets. Proc. 8th Int. Lupin Conf., 
Pacific  Grove, California. 11 –16 May, 1996. Univ. 
California, Davis  
 
Zdunczyk, Z. J. Juskiewicz,  S. Frejnagel, and K. 
Gulewicz.1998. Influence of alkaloids and 
oligosaccharides from white lupin seeds on utilization of 
diets by rats and absorption of nutrients in t he small 
intestine.  Animal Feed Sci. Tech.72:143 -154.  
 
Prepared By :  Shawnna Clark  USDA NRCS Big Flats 
Plant Materials Center, Corning, New York.  
Citation  
Clark, Shawnna. 2014. Plant Guide for White Lupine 
( Lupin us albus  L.). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Big Flats Plant Materials Center. 
Corning, New York.  
Published : August 2014 
Edited:  28Jan2014  aym , 20Aug2014 sec  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materia ls Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov.    PLANTS is not 
responsible for the content or availability of other Web 
sites.  
 
 
Helping People Help the Land:  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER