Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LEOPARD LILY 
Lilium pardalinum  Kellogg 
Plant Symbol = LIPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Tiger lily, panther lily 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: There are five subspecies of leopard 
lily and probably all were utilized by various Native 
American cultural groups.  The bulbs were pried 
loose from the earth with a digging stick, and baked 
or steamed by the Atsugewi, Yurok, Hupa, Karuk, 
Wailaki, Yana, and Sierra Miwok of California.  A 
number of native people still dig the bulbs today.  
Tribes in northwestern  California, for example, 
harvest the bulb in August or the fall, being careful to 
only take the large ones and replant the smaller bulb 
scales for later harvest.  Traditionally, the Karuk 
baked the bulbs in an earth oven.  The Sierra Miwok 
wore the flowers as wreaths.  The bulbs are also eaten 
by small and large mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This perennial 
herbaceous plant grows along stream banks and moist  meadows below 2,000 m elevation.  It has five 
subspecies (
pardalinum,  pitkinense  (rare), shastense , 
vollmeri , and wigginsii ).  The stems are from 3 to 7 
feet tall and the leaves appear  in 1 to 8 whorls up the 
stem or are scattered. The leaves are linear to 
lanceolate, 1-2 dm. long.  The branched rhizome is 
thick and fleshy and densely covered with two-
jointed, sometimes three-or four-jointed bulb scales 
which are clonal.  The bell-shaped flowers are one to 
many on long spreading pedicels.  The flowers are 
pale to bright orange-red  with a lighter orange center 
and purple spots on the lower half.  The flowers are 
arranged in a terminal raceme.  The capsule is 
narrowly oblong, acutely angled and one and one-
half inches long and contain flat seeds. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The plant is found along the coast of California 
in the coastal coniferous forests and in the mixed 
evergreen forests of the Coast Ranges and mixed 
conifer forests of the Sierra Nevada.  
 
Establishment 
Populations in the wild are declining because of 
habitat destruction and over-collection.  Thus, do not 
collect these plants in the wild.  If starting the plants 
from seed, plan on growing them for four years prior 
to out-planting.  The seeds do not need stratification 
and can be planted in five or six-inch pots, one-
quarter inch apart.  Place th e seeds on top of the soil, 
sprinkle soil on top and put one-quarter inch gravel 
on top of the soil.  The seeds should be planted in 
well-drained soil and kept mo ist year round.  Let the 
rain water the pots in winter.  They should never be 
allowed to dry out.  If there is not sufficient rain, 
supplement with hand watering.  Put the pots outside 
in partial shade.  The seeds will sprout by about 
March.  After two years, separate the plants and 
space them four inches apart.   Fertilize the plants in a 
weak solution once a month during the active 
growing period.  Out-plant the plants after the third 
or fourth year in partial shade and keep them moist 
year round.  They should be planted two to four 
inches deep. 
 
If establishing the plants from bulbs, the secret to 
good survival is to get good live roots on the bulbs.  
Plant them at whatever ti me of year you can obtain 
the bulbs, directly in the ground, two to four inches 
apart.  Water them as noted above.

Management 
Weed around the plants regularly and protect them 
from herbivory by small and large mammals.  Deer 
for example, eat the flowers  and bulbs.  If the bulbs 
get too thick, separate them every several years, 
otherwise they may get choked. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department  of Agriculture.”  The 
leopard lily is available from many nurseries. 
 
References 
Coy, G.B. 1959.   Edible wild plants .  Yosemite 
Nature Notes 38(10):154-156. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.    Subsistence.  pp. 64-97 IN 
Handbook of North American Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin .  Warren L. D'Azevedo [Ed.].  Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Garth, T.R. 1953.   Atsugewi ethnography . University 
of California Publications in American Archaeology 
and Ethnology 14(2):129-212. 
 
Heffner, K. 1984.   Following the smoke:  
Contemporary plant procurement by the Indians of 
Northwest California .  Unpublished report, Six 
Rivers National Forest, Eureka, California. 
 
Sapir, E. & L. Spier. 1943.   Notes on the culture of 
the Yana .  Anthropological Records 3(3):239-298. 
 
Schenck, S.M. & E.W. Gifford 1952.   Karok 
ethnobotany .  Anthropological Records 13(6):377-
391. 
 
Skinner, M.A. 1993.   Lilium.  pp. 1198-1201 IN: The 
Jepson manual:  Higher plants of California.  J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Skinner, M.W. 2001.  Lilium .  IN: Flora of North 
America .  Vol. 26.  Liliaceae and Discoreaceae .  
Oxford University Press, New York. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.