Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CARDINAL FLOWER
Lobelia cardinalis L. 
Plant Symbol = LOCA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternative Name 
Indian pink 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Iroquois had many medicinal uses 
for cardinal flower.  The root was boiled together 
with the root of  Cichorium intybus  and the liquid was 
used to treat fever sores.   The mashed roots, stems, 
leaves, and blossoms were made into a decoction and 
drank for cramps.  The plant was also used as an 
emetic for an upset stomach from eating something 
bad.  The plant was added to other medicines to give 
them more strength.  The Delaware used an infusion 
of the roots to treat typhoid.  The Meskwaki used this 
plant as a ceremonial t obacco, throwing it to the 
winds to ward off a storm.  The Pawnee used the  roots and flowers of cardinal flower in the 
composition of a love charm.   
 
Wildlife
: Hummingbirds are attracted to the nectar.  
Deer browsing often damages young plants. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
©  William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution,  Department of Botany @PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Bellflower Family (Campanulaceae).  This 
herbaceous perennial is 5 to 15 cm. tall with 
unbranched stems.  The alternate leaves are toothed 
and oblong to lance-shaped  and pointed at both ends.  
The irregular, two-lipped flowers are tubular with the 
upper portion two-lobed and the lower spreading and 
divided into three parts.  The fire engine red flowers 
appear in long terminal  racemes and they are from 
30-45 mm.  The anthers are at the end of a slender 
red filament tube extending out over the lower lip of 
the corolla.  The corolla has a slit on each side near 
the base.  The seeds come in a two-celled, many-
seeded capsules opening at the top.  They are small, 
less than 1 mm. and numerous. 
 
Distribution 
This plant is found in wet soil from New Brunswick 
to Minnesota, south to the Gulf of Mexico.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.    
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Cardinal flower is  comparatively easy to 
grow.  The capsules can be collected in autumn, 
usually October.  The stalks are cut below the 
capsules, and placed upside down in a per sack.  
Once, home, the bag is opened so that the capsules 
are exposed to the air for a few days.  Shake the bag 
to release the seeds.  Cr ushing the capsules with a 
rolling pin and picking out the seeds from the litter 
can retrieve the capsules that have remaining seeds.  
The seeds can then be planted right away. 
 
Propagation by seeds : The seeds will germinate 
without cold stratification, but they need light, so sow 
the seeds in a flat with a damp fine grade peat light 
mix.  Keep the flats moist and under lights or in a 
greenhouse.  They should green up in a few weeks.  
Transplant them in 4-6 weeks into individual pots

such as 70 cell plug trays, use the same potting mix 
and keep fertilizing.  The seedlings are tiny at first, so 
fertilize them every other week with a liquid 
fertilizer.  After another 4 weeks they can be put out 
in the garden or transplanted into larger pots of 4 to 6 
inch diameter.  Plant the plants in an outdoor spot 
that is in full sun or very light shade and never dries 
completely.  Space the plants 8 to 12 inches apart.  
Add plenty of peat moss when planting and mulch 
well to keep the soil cool and moist.  Protect the 
plants from deer.  Cardinal flower will take two years 
to bloom, forming a large rosette the first year.  
Allow the plants to self-sow .  They are heavy feeders, 
so compost or a shot of granular fertilizer when they 
begin growth is recommended. 
 
Propagation by cuttings : Take two node stem 
cuttings (4-6 inches) before the flowers open and 
remove the lower leaf and half the upper leaf.  Treat 
the cutting with hormodin 2  or roottone and place the 
cuttings in a sand and perlite medium, cover lightly, 
water, and remember to keep the medium moist.  
Roots will form in 2-3 weeks, but the cuttings need to 
force a good new crown from the lower node to 
successfully over-winter. 
 
Management 
When well established, clumps of this plant can be 
divided in the fall or spring by separating the rosettes 
or basal offshoots from the mother plant and 
replanting these divisions and watering them 
immediately.  In the winter , keep the leafy offshoots 
at the base of the drying  stems of old plants free of 
leaf litter to allow them full exposure to the air and 
sunshine.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  Seeds and 
plants of selected  Lobelia cardinalis  cultivars are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown. 
 
References 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region .  University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and  adjacent Canada
.  Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Phillips, H.R. 1985.   Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.  The University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Tantaquidgeon, G. 1972.   Folk medicine of the 
Delaware and related Algonkian Indians.  
Pennsylvania Historical Commission 
Anthropological papers, Number 3.  Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Species Author & Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.