Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TAMARACK 
Larix laricina (Du Roi) K. 
Koch  
Plant Symbol = LALA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
American larch, eastern larch, Alaska larch, 
hackmatack  
 
Uses 
The commercial value of ta marack wood is limited 
because of insect and disease problems and its 
relatively poor pulping properties.  The wood is used 
principally for pulp products, especially the 
transparent paper in window envelopes, but slow-
growing trees develop wood with high resin content, 
making it decay resistant and useful for posts, poles, 
railroad ties.  It also has been used for rough lumber, 
fuelwood, and boat construction.  The back contains 
a tannin that has been used for tanning leather.   Various wildlife eat the seeds, seedlings, and bark 
and birds use the trees for nesting.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 20 meters tall, strongly self-pruning, with 
a straight, slender trunk and narrow, open, pyramidal 
crown that occupies one-third to one-half the bole 
length 25-30 years; branches whorled, horizontal or 
slightly ascending; short (spur) shoots prominent on 
twigs 2 years or more old.  Bark of young trees is 
gray, smooth, becoming reddish brown and scaly.  
Leaves are deciduous, needlelike, 1-2 cm long, pale 
blue-green, produced in clusters on short shoots or 
singly along the long shoots, yellowing and shed in 
the fall.  Seed cones are 1-2 cm long, upright; seeds 
winged, the bodies 2-3 mm long.  The common name 
is the Algonquian Indian name for the plant.   
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species : the Alaskan populations 
of  Larix laricina  have been described as a different 
species ( Larix alaskensis  = Larix laricina  var. 
alaskensis ) on the basis of narrower cone scales and 
bracts, but the variability is now generally recognized 
as within the range of other populations of the 
species.  Genetic differences in photoperiodic 
response, germination, and growth patterns have been 
documented among trees taken from various parts of 
the species range.  Artificial hybrids have been 
created between tamarack ( L. laricina) and two 
related species: Japanese larch ( L. leptolepis) and 
European larch ( L. decidua).   
 
Tamarack differs from the other two native species of 
larch (Larix species) in its shorter leaves (of short 
shoots), shorter seed cone s with fewer scales, longer 
scales than bracts at ma turity, and broader, more 
northern distribution.  The larches are the only 
deciduous conifers besides the bald cypress species.   
 
Distribution 
Across North America, from St. Pierre and Miquelon, 
Newfoundland, and New Brunswick, north and west 
to Keewatin, Mackenzie, British Columbia, and 
Yukon, with disjunct populations in northern Alaska; 
in northeastern United States from Maine to West

Virginia and Minnesota.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Tamarack grows in boreal forests in wet, 
poorly drained sphagnum bogs and muskegs, also on 
moist upland mineral soils, the drier sites in the 
northern part of its range, at elevations of 0-1200 
meters.  Because it can withstand high soil moisture, 
high acidity, and low soil temperature, it is more 
abundant on peatlands than  trees characteristic of 
surrounding uplands.    
 
Planting : Tamarack trees may bear viable seed at 12-
15 years of age, but open-grown trees 50-150 years 
old produce the best cone crops.  Good seed crops are 
produced at intervals of 3-6 years.  Germination 
percentages in nature often are very low, because of 
predation by rodents and damage by fungi or 
bacteria.   
 
The best seedbed is warm, moist mineral soil or 
organic soil with no brush but a light cover of grass 
or other herbaceous vegetation.  For best growth, 
seedlings need full light and a constant water level.  
Early seedling mortality may be caused by damping-
off, drought, drowning, and inadequate light.   
 
Under favorable conditions, tamarack is the most 
rapidly growing boreal conifer until it reaches about 
40-50 years old.  Most  trees show features of 
senescence by 150-180 years of age, but some are 
known to have reached 23 0-240 years, and one is 
known to be over 335 years.   
 
Management 
Tamarack is a shade-intolerant pioneer.  It is 
generally the first forest tree to invade filled-lake 
bogs and burned sites in boreal forest, but it is 
overtaken in succession by black spruce and various 
other species.  As a consequence, commercial 
production of tamarack requires site preparation, such 
as slash disposal and herbicide spraying, and some 
form of even-age management.  Trees should be 
planted at wide spacings.   
 
Tamarack is highly susceptible to fire damage 
because of the thin bark , even light burns on 
peatlands are destructive b ecause of the shallow root 
system.  Flooding from wetland road crossings and 
beaver dams can kill tamarack stands. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Defoliation by the larch sawfly and the larch 
casebearer often cause extensive mortality, but  imported parasites of these insects apparently are 
becoming established and may help to control 
outbreaks.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brown, K.R., D.B. Zobel,
 & J.C. Zasada 1988.  Seed 
dispersal, seedling emergence and early survival of 
Larix laricina (DuRoi) K. Koch in the Tanana Valley, 
Alaska .  Can. J. For. Res. 18:306-314.   
 
Johnston, W.F. 1990.   Larix laricina.  Pp. 141-151, 
IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North 
America . Volume 1.   Conifers .  USDA Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Parker, W.H. 1993.   Larix.  Pp. 366-368, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Parker, W.H. & T.A. Dickinson 1990.   Range-wide 
morphological and anatomical variation in Larix 
laricina.   Canad. J. Bot. 68:832-840.   
  
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 05dec00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.