Plant Guide
ALTAI WILDRYE 
Leymus angustus (Trin.) Pilg. 
Plant Symbol =  LEAN3 
 
Contributed by  USDA NRCS Idaho  and North Dakota  
Plant Materials Program  
 
'Prairieland’ Altai wildrye.  Loren St. John, USDA -NRCS, 
Aberdeen, ID PMC.  
Alternate Names 
Aneurolepidium angustum  (Trin.)  Nevski,  Elymus 
angustus  Trin. (PLANTS Database).  
 
Uses  
Grazing:  Altai wildrye is well suited for pasture forage 
production.  It has a long period of growth that begins  
early in the spring and continues into late fall.  The mostly 
basal leaves mak e the forage difficult to harvest as hay 
(Smoliak, et. al,  1990) . 
 
Wildlife:  Altai wildrye provides good wildlife cover 
be cause of its tall stature and standing residue but is not 
readily used by foraging wildlife .  It has limited value as a 
seed source  for wildlife and birds or  use by native 
pollinators (Sedivec, et. al, 2007).  
 
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).   Description
 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Altai wildrye is an 
introduced, drought resistant , perennial grass that can 
grow to approximately 40 inches tall.  The coarse,  wide , 
erect , basal leaves vary from light green to blue.   The 
plant is generally a bunch type but has  short rhizomes.  
The r oot system can penetrate 10 -13 feet deep and can u se 
soil moisture to that depth more efficiently than  most 
other grasses.  
 
Culms are solitary or tufted, 60 -100 cm (24 -40 in) tall, 
glabrous, or pubescent below nodes and the  seedhead.  
Leaf sheath is  grayish green, usually shorter than the 
internodes, smooth or slightly scabrous.  The l igule is 0.5-
1 mm  (0.02-0.04 in) long, membranous  with and an 
obtuse apex.  Leaf blade is glaucous, rolled, 15- 25 cm (6 -
10 in)  long and 0.5 -0.7 cm (0.20- 0.28 in) wide, stiff and 
mostly smooth on both sides.  The spike is erec t, 15-20 
cm  (6-10 in) long by 0.7- 1 cm (0.28-0.39 in) diameter.  
There are 2 -3  spikelets per node with 2 or 3 florets per 
spikelet.  Glumes cover the base of the first lemma, 10 -13 
mm  (0.39- 0.51 in) lo ng, linear -lanceolate and 1 -veined.  
Lemma is lanceolate , with 5-7 faint veins.  The first 
lemma is 10 -14 mm  (0.39-0.55 in) long including an awn.  
The palea is slightly shorter than the lemma and is ciliate 
along the keels (Flora of China).   The seed is very large, 
three times the size of Russian wil drye (Kruger). 
 
Distribution : 
Altai wildrye is native to China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Mongolia, Russia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, southwest 
Asia and Europe (Flora of China).  For current 
distribution  in North Amer ica, consult the Plant Profile 
page for t his species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Altai wildrye is well adapted to loam to clay -loam soils 
receiving 14 -18 inches or  greater mean  annual 
precipitation  (or irrigated ).   It has comparable seedling 
emergence and tolerance to salinity as Russian  wildrye 
(Kruger), (McElgunn and Lawrence, 1973) and can be 
utilized to reclaim saline sites.  
 
 
Establishment  
Altai wildrye seedlings grow  and establish slowly and as 
compared to many other grasses and are poor competitors 
with weeds .  Go od seedbed preparat ion is critical to stand 
establishment.  It is important to have a clean,  firm 
seedbed.  Weeds should be destroyed by cultivation or 
with herbicides before seeding.  After e mergence, weed 
control will need to continue to ensure plant 
establishment.  Once A ltai wildrye is established, it is 
very competitive with most weeds (Smoliak, et. al, 1990).