Plant Guide
BREAKS BLADDERPOD 
Lesquerella rubicundula Rollins  
OR 
KODACHROME 
BLADDERPOD  
Lesquerella tumulosa  (Barneby) 
Reveal 
Plant Symbol = LERU4  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 
Figure 1. Kodachrome bladderpod (Lesquerella tumulosa). USDI FWS 
(2010).  
 
Alternate Names  
L. hitchcockii ssp . tumulosa 
L. rubicundula  
Physaria tumulosa  
P. rubicundula var. tumulosa  
Tum bladderpod  
 
Uses  
There  are no known human or wildlife associated uses 
associated with Kodachrome bladderpod.  
 
Taxonomy  
There have been numerous taxonomic changes and 
suggestions made regarding Kodachrome bladderpod 
specifically, and the genus Lesquerella  as a whole. In 
2002,  Lesquerella  was  subordinated  within the genus 
Physaria  by Al -Shehbaz and O’Kane  (2002) .  Other  taxonomists have not followed this realignment, or follow 
it hesitantly
, noting that there is little difficulty in 
separating the two groups at generic level (Welsh et al 
2003).   
 
Kodachrome  bladderpod was  originally described as L. 
hitchcockii  ssp.  tumulosa  by Barneby (1966). It was later 
elevated to species status by Reveal (1970), and in 1973, 
Rollins and Shaw placed  L. tumulosa  in L. rubicundula. 
More recently, Welsh and others have followed Al -Shbaz 
and O’Kane (2002)  in placing Lesquerella  in the genus 
Physaria , but have assigned Kodachrome  bladderpod 
varietal status within P. rubicundula  creating the new P. 
rubicundula  var. tumulosa  (2003).  The PLANTS 
Database  (2010) currently follows Rollins (1993) and 
places  L. tumulosa  within L. rubicundula. P ublication of 
the anticipated volume 7 of Flora North America may 
create further changes or could greatly help in settling the 
matter.  This plant guide focuses primaril y on L. tumulosa, 
its status as an endangered species and on management 
objectives for its recovery and protection.  
 
The previously mentioned  taxonomic changes may have 
significant implications for this taxon’s status as an 
endangered species. Lesquerella  rubicundula and L. 
hitchcockii  are  both limited to a small area  in Utah and 
Nevada,  but  neither is as restricted in area  as L. tumulos a. 
T herefore  if L. tumulosa  is synonomized with L. 
rubicundula  or L. hitchcockii , it would likely not be 
considered to be endangered.  
 
Status  
Kodachrome bladderpod was officially listed as an 
e ndangered species in 1993 (USDI FWS). There is 
currently no comprehensive recovery plan created for the 
species, but a revised recovery outline is being used until 
a final recovery plan has been approved (USDI FWS 
2009).   
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Mustard famil y (Brassicaceae or Cruciferae). 
Kodachrome blad derpod is a small, perennial mound 
forming forb reaching approximately 4 cm tall. The 
leaves are stemless, 3 to 12 mm (0.1 to 0.5 in) long and 1 
to 2 mm (0.04 to 0.08 in)  wide with stellate (star -like) 
hairs. The  flowers have four yellow petals from 5 to 7 mm 
(0.2 to 0.3 in) in length  (Welsh et al. 2003). The fruit is an 
egg -shaped silicle (capsule) approximately 3 to 5 mm (0.1 
to 0.2 in) long containing 4 to 8 seeds.