Plant Guide
BOG LABRADOR  
TEA  
Ledum groenlandicum  Oeder  
Plant Symbol =  LEGR 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Team, Greensboro, NC  
 
Bog Labrador tea in Ahlstrom's Prairie, Olympic National Park.  
Photograph by M. Kat Anderson, 2007.  
Alternate Names 
Rhododendron groenlandicum  (Oeder) Kron & Judd  
Labrador tea, Indian tea, Hudson Bay tea, James tea, 
marsh tea, swamp tea  
Uses  
B og Labrador tea leaves  are fragrant and were used 
as a beverage and medicine by many tribes such as 
the Quinault and Makah in  western Washington, the 
Potawatomi in the Great Lakes region, and the 
Iroquois  in the Northeast. This tea was as popular 
among tribes as green tea, chai and black teas are to 
Western culture today  (Gunther 1973; Smith 1933; 
Hedrick 1933). First Nations in Canada also picked 
the leaves for a warm drink and medicine (Turner 
2004).  
 
CAUTION:  Bog Labrador tea may be toxic in 
concentrated doses. It contains toxic a lkaloids 
known to be poisonous to livestock, especially 
sheep (Pojar and  MacKinnon 1994).  
   
The beverage was quickly adopted by Europeans 
because of its pleasant flavor, aroma and salutary 
effects (Franklin 1823; Umfreville 1954). I t warmed 
the insides of  many a non-Indian explorer, trapper,  and early settler. The Indians graciously taught them 
how to use it and it was called “Indian tea plant” by 
some non
-Indians. The leaves were even used as a 
substitute for tea during the Revolutionary War 
(Hedrick 1972) .  Today there is a demand for the 
plant’s essential oil for aromatherapy (Rogers 1997) 
and the plant is planted in gardens as an ornamental 
shrub.  
 
Large quantities of leaves were p icked in spring 
before flowering by some native families  while 
others  pick ed them year round (Anderson 2009). The 
Ojibwa gathered the leaves from spring to autumn for 
a beverage tea (Smith 1932). The leaves were used 
either fresh or dried for future use. There were a 
number of ways to prepare tea , including adding a 
handful of l eaves to boiling water and letting it 
simmer for several minutes or adding a handful of 
leaves to cold water, bringing it to a boil and 
simmering it for much longer (Stewart 2002). The 
Ojibwa, for  example, tied fresh or dried leaves in a 
packet using a thi n strip of basswood bark before 
placing in water to boil. The quantity was a large 
handful to a quart of water. It was drunk while hot 
and sweetened with maple sugar (Buttree 1932).   
 
Re -enacting an ancient custom, the Hoh, Quinault, 
Quileute, Klallam, and  Makah still gather and steep 
the leaves and drink the resulting tea as a refreshing 
beverage (Anderson 2009; Gill 1984).  Today, 
d ifferent Native American families keep a pot of this 
tea on the stove, ready for serving anytime (Stewart 
2002).  Pat Boachup, Makah, (pers. comm.) says: “I 
still gather the leaves of the Indian tea every year. We 
pick off the leaves that have molded or spoiled. We 
collect the good leaves and put them in a warm place 
to dry. If the leaves stay in a plastic bag they will turn 
black . They are put in a paper bag next to a wood 
stove to dry. Then after they are dry you can put them 
in a plastic bag. I take a handful of leaves —enough to 
cover the top of the pot —and put them in the pan or 
pot with water. Take a fork and push down the 
lea ves. When it starts boiling turn it down and steam 
it for 15 to 20 minutes.  When it turns a rich orange 
it’s ready. If steamed too long, it turns dark. I drink it 
most of the time hot with sugar. I gather four or five 
grocery bags of dried leaves from two  sites every 
year. You can pick it all year round, but I usually go 
in the fall in September and October. I make sure I 
leave some leaves so as not to kill the plant.”

Bay Containing a Full Description of that 
Settlement, and the Adjacent Country; and 
Likewise of the Fur Trade. The Ryerson Press, 
Toronto, Canada.U’mista Cultural Society, J.  
Walkinsha w, L.H. and M.A. Wolf. 1957. Distribution   
of the palm warbler and its status in Michigan. The 
Wilson Bulletin 69(4):338 -351.  
Young, J.A. and  C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody  
Plants in North America. Dioscorides Press. 
Portland, OR.  
 
Prepared By :  M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC  
Citation  
Anderson, M. , 2011.  Plant Guide for bog Labrador 
tea  ( Ledum groenlandicum ). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, National Plant Data 
Team . Greensboro, NC . 
 
Acknowledgement s 
The author would like to thank Doug Goldman and 
Roger Latham for editing this Plant Guide and 
providing citations.  
Published  February 2012 
Edited:  15Feb2011 jw 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office o r 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER