Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPICEBUSH 
Lindera benzoin  (L.) Blume 
Plant Symbol = LIBE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Northern spicebush, Benjaminbush 
 
Uses 
Over 20 species of birds,  as well as deer, rabbits, 
raccoons, and opossums have been recorded as 
browsing the leaves or eating the fruits.  The fruits 
are a special favorite of  wood thrushes.  The 
spicebush swallowtail,  Papilio troilus (L.), lays its 
eggs on spicebush and other plants in the Laurel 
Family – sassafras, redbay, and camphortree.    
 
There apparently are no commercial uses of 
spicebush, but the essential oils of leaves, twigs, and 
fruits have lent themselves for minor use for tea, and 
dried fruits have been used in fragrant sachets.  
Native Americans used dried fruits as a spice and the 
leaves for tea.  Extracts ha ve been used for drugs, 
including anti-arthritic, diaphoretic, emetic and 
herbal steam.  The benzoin of drug trade is produced 
by species of  Styrax (Styraceae).   
 
Because of its habitat in rich woods, early land 
surveyors and settlers used spicebush as an indicator 
species for good agricultural land.  
 
Spicebush plants make nicely shaped shrubs with 
deep green leaves and, if in at least partial sun, the 
leaves turn bright yellow in the fall.  It is a good  choice for plantings in shady locations but can also 
grow in full sun.  Moist soil is best. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
 ©
 William S. Justice Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Description 
General : Laurel Family (Lauraceae).  Native shrubs, 
growing mostly 1-3(-5) meters tall, sometimes a 
small tree; reproducing asexually by root sprouting 
(most spicebush patches and thickets are probably 
clonal).  Leaves are thin,  deciduous, glabrous or 
sparsely pubescent on the  lower surface, obovate to 
oblong or elliptic, 6-14 cm long, pointed at both ends, 
entire, on petioles 5-12 mm long, usually largest at 
the branch tips, decreasing in size down the branch.  
Flowers appearing before the leaves, in clusters on 
nodes of last year’s growth, either staminate (pollen-
producing), with 9 fertile stamens, or pistillate (with 
a fertile ovary and 12-18 rudimentary, infertile 
stamens), both types with 6 short, yellowish sepals, 
the female and male on different plants (the species 
dioecious).  Fruit is a short-stalked, ellipsoid, shiny-
red berry 6-10 mm long, with a single seed.  The 
common name refers to the sweet, spicy fragrance of 
the stems, leaves, and fruits when bruised.   
 
Variation within the species : Lindera benzoin  var. 
pubescens  (Palmer & Steyermark) Rehd. is the more 
southern form of the species, absent from the 
northernmost states of the  species range, with twigs 
and lower leaf surfaces hair y (vs. glabrous in var. 
benzoin).  Var.  benzoin does not occur in the states 
directly bordering the Gulf of Mexico.   
 
Two closely related species (the only other species of 
the genus in North America) occur in the 
southeastern US, where they  are rare throughout their 
range ––  Lindera melissifolia  (Walt.) Blume, 
pondberry or southern spicebush, and  Lindera 
subcoriacea  B.E. Wofford, bog spicebush.  Allozyme 
studies of populations of spicebush and pondberry 
show that both species have low levels of genetic 
diversity.    
 
Distribution  
Spicebush occurs over all of the eastern US, from 
east Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas eastward to the 
Atlantic states as far north as Maine (and Ontario),

not reported from Wisconsin.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Adaptation: Spicebush is primarily an understory 
species, sometimes forming thickets, of rich, mesic 
sites on acidic to basic soils.  Common habitats are 
low woods, swamp margins, and streamsides.  
Flowering: March-April; fruits maturing August-
October (-November).   
 
General : Seeds are dispersed as animals and birds eat 
the fruits.  Seeds germinate in the litter layer in the 
spring or they may remain viable in the seed bank for 
many years.  Much of the reproduction is clonal 
through root sprouting.    
 
Management 
Spicebush successfully grows and reproduces in a 
wide range of light conditions.  Although it does 
grow and reproduce under completely closed canopy, 
openings in the canopy increase growth rate.   It is 
considered difficult to transplant but has few serious 
disease problems.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Carter, M. & P. Feeny 1999 .  Host-plant chemistry 
influences oviposition choice of the spicebush 
swallowtail butterfly .  J. Chem. Ecol. 25:1999-2009.  
  
Cipollini, M.L. & D.F. Whigham 1994 .  Sexual 
dimorphism and cost of reproduction in the dioecious 
shrub Lindera benzoin (Lauraceae) .  Amer. J. Bot. 
81:65-75.    
 
Cipollini, M.L., Wallace- Senft, D.A., & D.F. 
Whigham 1994.  A model of patch dynamics, seed 
dispersal and sex ratio  in the dioecious shrub 
Lindera benzoin (Lauraceae) .  J. Ecol. 82:621-633.   
 
Godt, M.J.W. & J.L. Hamrick 1996.   Allozyme 
diversity in the endangered shrub Lindera 
melissifolia (Lauraceae) and its widespread congener  Lindera benzoin
.  Canad. J. Forest Res. 26:2080-
2087.   
 
McCartney, R.D., K. Wurdack, & J. Moore. 1989.  
The genus Lindera in Florida .  Palmetto 9:3-8.  
 
Tucker, A.O., M.J. Maciarello, P.W. Burbage, & G. 
Sturtz 1994.   Spicebush (Lindera benzoin (L.) Blume 
var. benzoin, Lauraceae): A tea, spice, and medicine .  
Econ. Bot. 48:333-336.    
 
Wofford, B.E. 1983.   A new Lindera from North 
America .  J. Arnold Arbor. 64:325-331.   
 
Wofford, B.E.  Lindera.  Pp. 27-29, IN  Flora of North 
America, North of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.   
<http://www.fna.o rg/Libraries/plib/WWW/Magnoliid
ae/T40007134.html>   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.