Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWEETGUM 
Liquidambar styraciflua  L. 
Plant Symbol = LIST2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate names 
Sweet gum, American sweet gum, red gum, bilsted, 
star-leaved gum, alligator-tree 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The sweetgum tree was used by the 
Cherokee, Choctaw, Koasati, Rappahannock and 
other Native American tribes for various purposes.  
The hardened gum, or rosin from the tree was used as 
chewing gum.  A piece of the bark was knocked from 
the tree.  After one week, the sap from the wound 
was hardened and could be collected and used for 
chewing gum.  Tea was made from both the fruits 
and the bark.  The hardened sap was rolled up and 
then placed in a dog’s nose to treat distemper.  A 
salve was made by mixing the plant with animal 
tallow for application to wounds, cuts, sores, bruises, 
and ulcers.  The plant was boiled until a scum rose to 
the top.  This scum was then mixed with the roots of 
Obolaria virginica and used as a dressing for cuts 
and bruises.  The roots were boiled into a strong tea 
to treat skin sores that were possibly caused by small 
worms under the skin.  A “drawing plaster” was 
made from the gum.  Ten to a dozen drops of the sap 
were taken before meals to reduce fevers.  The sap 
and inner bark were used to treat diarrhea and 
dysentery.  The bark was used to make an infusion 
that was used as a sedative for nervous patients and 
for patients who were well in the day but sick during 
the night.  The plant was used to treat colic, internal 
diseases and to “comfort the heart.”  
 
Wildlife : Goldfinches, purplefinches, mallard ducks, 
bobwhite quails, Carolina chickadees, yellow-bellied 
sapsuckers, white-throated sparrows, towhees, 
Carolina wrens, squirrels,  and chipmunks eat the 
seeds of sweetgum trees.   Beavers use the wood for 
constructing dams.   
 
Other:  Liquidambars are valued for their timber and 
for the aromatic sap, called styrax.  The timber 
provides pulp, veneer and lumber.  The wood is used 
in cabinetry, home interiors,  boxes and utensils.  The 
balsamic sap is used as an ingredient in both 
medicine and perfume.   
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials Center
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Sweetgum is a deciduous tree that is a 
member of the Hamamelidaceae, or witch-hazel 
family.  It is named after the sweet balsamic sap 
which, when exposed, hardens into a fragrant gum.  
The trees can reach 30 to 40 meters in height and 
spread from 15 to 20 meters.  The mature bark is 
rough, deeply furrowed and grayish brown.  Young 
twigs are rusty red and frequently develop wings of 
corky bark.  The star-shaped leaves, somewhat 
resemble maple leaves, except that they are arranged 
alternately instead of opposite.  The leaves are 18 cm 
wide with long, thin petioles (6-15mm).  Actively 
growing leaves are fragrant when crushed.  They are 
palmate in shape with five to seven lobes and saw-
toothed margins.  Glossy-green in summer, the leaves 
turn bright yellow to deep red in the fall.  The 
undersides of the leaves are pale green with a coating 
of fine white hairs.  The small, greenish 
inconspicuous flowers have no true petals.  The 
woody, ball-shaped, pendulous, burr-like fruits (3-4 
cm) contain numerous, small seeds (1 cm) that are 
winged at one end.  The s eeds are contained in beak-
like capsules to protrude from the surface (1 to 2 per 
capsule).   
 
Distribution : Sweetgum is common in the Coastal 
Plain and Piedmont sections of the Southeastern 
United States.  For current  distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.

Habitat: Sweetgum trees occur in moist or wet 
woods, tidal swamps, along streambanks, in clearings 
and old fields, and in low swampy bottomlands 
where they often form pure stands.   
 
Establishment 
Sweetgum is a hardy, ornamental tree that is valued 
for its shade as well as its lumber.  They make 
attractive specimen trees all year and especially in the 
fall when the leaves turn brilliant colors before 
dropping in the fall.  Young trees transplant best in 
the spring into well-watered soils.  The roots are slow 
to develop.  The trees may be planted in sun or part 
shade in soils that are medium to well drained and of 
medium to high fertility.  The trees need medium to 
high moisture availability and are not suitable for dry 
areas.  New trees volunteer readily from the seeds, 
however they generally do not germinate until the 
second year.  The seeds are  ripe when the fruit begins 
to lose its green color.  Spre ad the fruits out to dry.  
When dry, they will open and release the seeds.  
Germination can be considerably increased if the 
seeds are prechilled for 15 to 90 days. 
 
Management 
The trees are relatively trouble-free and generally do 
not require pruning.  The fruits can look somewhat 
messy in fall and winter wh en they drop, especially 
onto a manicured lawn where they can also make 
mowing difficult.  Avoid planting near a patio or 
sidewalk where the fruits can be painful when 
stepped on with bare feet.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians . Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Barbour, M.G., & W.D. Billings, Editors 2000.  
North American terrestrial vegetation , Second 
Edition.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.  708 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.  493 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants. 
Fifth Edition.  Stipes Publishing, Champaign, Illinois.  
1187 pp. 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft 1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, & G.A. Stokes 1994.  
The historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana .  Louisiana 
State University Press, Bato n Rouge, Louisiana.  324 
pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001). 
 
Rogers, D.J. & C. Rogers 1991.   Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1937.  Catawba medicines and curative 
practices.  Publications of the Philadelphia 
Anthropological Society 1: 179-197. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp.

Swanson, R.E. 1994.  A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes .  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst.  328 pp. 
 
Whitcomb, C.E. 1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants . Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma.  
740 pp. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Plant Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 04oct01 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.