Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROUNDHEAD LESPEDEZA  
Lespedeza capitata  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = LECA8  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
roundheaded bush clover, bushclover 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Omaha and Ponca used the stems 
for a moxa to treat cases of neuralgia and 
rheumatism.  The Comanche boiled the leaves for a 
beverage tea.  The Meskwaki used the root as an 
antidote for poison.  The Iroquois used the whole 
plant of  Lespedeza  (unidentified to species level) in 
combination with  Euonymus obovata  for stricture 
caused by something wrong with the blood.  
 
Wildlife : Roundhead lespedeza seeds are an  
 
important food source for the bobwhite quail. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Bean Family (Fabaceae).  This herbaceous, 
native, perennial has erect stems that are 6-15 dm, 
and simple and branched above.  The petioles are 2-5 
mm, shorter than the stalk of the terminal leaflet.  
The plant has numerous small trifoliolate leaves.  The 
leaflets are 4.5 x 1.8 cm, variable in shape and 
pubescence.  The flowers are ochroleucous and are 
arranged in spikes or heads.  The calyx lobes are all 
separate and the wings exceed the keel.  Each flower 
is subtended at the base by small bractlets.  The fruits 
are indehiscent, and 1-seeded.   
 © Kenneth Sytsma University of Wisconsin @ Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  This plant is found in dry, open 
woods, sand dunes, and prairies.  It ranges from 
Maine and southern Quebec to Minnesota and South 
Dakota, south to Georgia, west Florida, and Texas. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seeds : Clean the seed and scarify 
each seed coat with sandpaper.  If you are storing the 
seeds before planting, put them  in cold storage.  Plant 
the seeds in a bedding mix with a light layer of 
vermiculite on top.  Sow the seeds in flats and water 
them, keeping them moist.  Do not over water them.   
The seeds will germinate in approximately two 
weeks. After two more weeks, the seedlings will be 
ready to transplant into pl ugs.  These plants can be 
transplanted once again in several weeks to larger 
pots.  In the middle of May, after the danger of frost 
has past, the plugs can be directly transplanted into a 
well-drained soil in full sunlight and watered.  Make 
sure the plants are moist for several weeks until 
established. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
LECA8 is available through selected native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Please check the Vendor 
Database, expected to be on-line through the

PLANTS Web site in 2001 by clicking on Plant 
Materials. 
 
References 
Carlson, G.G., & V.H. Jones 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Papers of 
the Michigan Acad emy of Science, Arts and Letters 
25:517-542. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region.   University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.    Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928 .  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4:2(175-326). 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000503.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., B.F. Hansen, & E.L. Bridges 2000.  
Atlas of Florida vascular plants .  Version: 000503.  
<http://cyber.acomp.usf.edu/~isb/projects/atlas/atlas.
html>.  University of South Florida, Institute for 
Systematic Botany, Tampa, Florida. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, c/o Department of Plant Science, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 Edited 05dec00 jsp;  21may03 ahv; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.