Plant Guide
BIGLEAF LUPINE 
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl.  
Plant Symbol =  LUPO2 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon
   
 Photo by Amy Bartow,  NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2010  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:  large leaf lupine,  large -leaved 
lupine,  Washington lupine, garden lupine, marsh lupine, 
blue -pod lupine , altramuz perenne  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Due to its large geographic 
range, adaptability, and tendency to hybridize, there are 
several different forms of this species that have been 
variously  treated by botanists as subspecies, varieties, or 
taxonomic synonyms, including the following:   
Lupinus arcticus  S. Wats. var. prunophilus  (M.E. 
Jones) C.P. Sm. , 
Lupinus burkei S. Wats. ssp . burkei,  
Lupinus garfieldensis  C.P. Sm.,  
Lupinus matanuskensis  C.P. Sm ., 
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. ssp. bernardinus  (Abrams 
ex C. P. Sm.) Munz,  
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. ssp. polyphyllus ,  
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. ssp. superbus  (A. Heller) 
Munz,   
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. var. albiflorus  Lindl.,   
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. var. burkei  (S. Watson) C. 
L. Hitchc.,   
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl.  var. humicola  (A. Nelson) 
Barneby ,  
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. var. grandifolius  (Lindl. 
ex J. Agardh) Torr. & A. Gray,  
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. var. pallidipes  (A. Heller) 
C. P. Sm.,   
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl. var. polyphyllus ,   Lupinus polyphyllus
 Lindl.  var. prunophilus  ( M.E. 
Jones) L. Phillips ,  
Lupinus polyphyllus  Lindl.  var. saxosus  (Howell) 
Barneby , 
Lupinus prunophilus  M.E. Jones , 
Lupinus pseudopolyphyllus C.P. Sm .,  
Lupinus stationis C.P. Sm .,  
Lupinus wyethii  S. Wats. var. prunophilus  (M.E. 
Jones) C.P. Sm.  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat : Bigleaf lupine attracts native bees, 
bumble bees, and other beneficial insects  with its  nectar 
and pollen -rich flowers that bloom from mid- spring into 
mid -summer (Ley et al., 2007).  It also attracts 
hummingbirds, contributing to the bi odiversity of any 
site.  
Ornamental : Also commonly known as garden lupine, its 
pleasant fragrance and tall, showy flowers make the plant 
a favorite ornamental for gardeners across the country.  
Take care to manage the lupines properly as some 
ornamental hyb rids can become weedy and problematic.  
Restoration : Plants may be used for prairie or wetland 
restoration as an important component of the native flora.  
They are deep rooted and suitable for erosion control and 
soil stabilization.  Also, as a native legume, they can be 
used in revegetation of logging roa ds or clear cuts as 
nitrogen fixers (Pojar and MacKinnon, 1994).  
E thnobotany  
Tribes throughout the range of bigleaf lupine reportedly 
used different parts of the plant for medicinal or tonic 
purposes (Moerman, 2003).  Although the Thompson 
tribes of British Columbia considered it poisonous, they 
used it medicinally for themselves a nd their horses.  The 
Salishan used it to make tonics and the Kwakiutl ate the 
roots, fresh or steamed.  The Kashaya Pomo used its 
flowers ceremoniously in dances and festivals.    
Status  
Throughout its native range in the  western U.S., bigleaf 
lupine has a  facultative (FAC) indicator status, meaning it 
is just as likely to occur in wetlands as uplands (USFWS, 
2012).  Where it has become invasive in the Midwest, 
North Central and Northeastern regions, it is considered a 
facultative upland species (FACU), mea ning it 
occasionally occurs in wetlands but is usually found in 
uplands.  In the Great Plains, however, it has a facultative 
wetland (FACW) status, meaning it is usually found in 
wetlands , but occasionally occurs in uplands.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g.,