Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLE 
LOOSESTRIFE 
Lythrum salicaria L. 
Plant Symbol = LYSA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Louisiana State University-Plant Biology; 
partial funding from the US Geological Survey and 
the US National Biological Information 
Infrastructure 
 
Alternate Names 
purple loosestrife, spiked lythrum, salicaire, bouquet 
violet 
 
Uses 
Noxious and highly invasive. 
 
Ethnobotanic: Immigrants might have deliberately 
introduced  L. salicaria  for its value as a medicinal 
herb in treating diarrhea,  dysentery, bleeding wounds,  ulcers, and sores, for ornamental purposes, or as a 
source of nectar 
and pollen for beekeepers (Hayes 
1979; Jones 1976; Malecki et al. 1993; Stuckey 
1980).  In states where it is permitted, purple 
loosestrife continues to be promoted by 
horticulturists for its beauty as a landscape plant and 
for bee-forage.  Purple loosestrife has been of interest 
to beekeepers because of its nectar and pollen 
production.  However, honey produced from it is 
apparently of marginal quality (Feller-Demalsy & 
Parent 1989). 
 
Horticultural : Horticultural cultivars of purple 
loosestrife ( Lythrum spp.) were developed in the mid-
1900s for use as ornamentals.  Initially, these were 
thought to be sterile, and therefore safe for 
horticultural use.  Recently, under greenhouse 
conditions, experimental crosses between several 
cultivars and wild purple loosestrife and the native  L. 
alatum  produced hybrids that were highly fertile 
(Ottenbreit 1991; Ottenbreit  & Staniforth 1994).  
Comparable, subsequent experiments performed 
under field conditions produced similar results, 
suggesting that cultivars of  purple loosestrife can 
contribute viable seeds and pollen that can contribute 
to the spread of purple loosestrife (Lindgren & Clay 
1993).  Ottenbreit & Stanifor th (1994) indicate that 
such results suggest the need to prohibit cultivars of 
this species. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Noxiousness : Purple loosestrife grows most 
abundantly in parts of Canada, the northeastern 
United States, the Midwest, and in scattered locations 
in the West.  Although this species tolerates a wide 
variety of soil conditions, its typical habitat includes 
cattail marshes, sedge meadows, and bogs.  It also 
occurs along ditch, stream, and riverbanks, lake 
shores, and other wet areas.  In such habitats, purple 
loosestrife forms dense, monospecific stands that can 
grow to thousands of acres in size, displacing native, 
sometimes rare, plant species and eliminating open 
water habitat.  The loss of native species and habitat 
diversity is a significant threat to wildlife, including 
birds, amphibians, and butterflies, that depend on 
wetlands for food and shelter.  Purple loosestrife 
monocultures also cause agricultural loss of wetland 
pastures and hay meadows by replacing more 
palatable native grasses and sedges (Mal et al. 1992; 
Thompson et al. 1987).   
 
Having a noxious weed designation in some states 
prohibit its importation and distribution, but it is

readily available commercially in many parts of the 
country.   Lythrum salicaria   has been labeled the 
“purple plague." because of its epidemic devastation 
to natural communities.  The species is included on 
the Nature Conservancy’s list of “America’s Least 
Wanted -The Dirty Dozen” (Flack & Furlow 1996). 
 
Impact/Vectors : Naturalized purple loosestrife was 
relatively obscure from the time of its introduction 
into North America in the  early 1800s (Pursh 1814) 
until 1930, when a significant increase in populations 
invading wetlands and pastures was documented 
(Strefeler et al. 1996b).   Reasons for the apparent 
sudden colonization and spread of this species 
include the disturbance of natural systems by human 
activities including agricultural settlement, 
construction of transport routes such as canals, 
highways, and perhaps, nutr ient increases to inland 
waters (Mal et al. 1992;  Malecki et al. 1993).  
Absence of natural enemies and ornamental use are 
other possible causes for purple loosestrife’s rapid 
expansion in North America (Thompson et al, 1987).  
Recently created irrigation  systems in many western 
states have supported further establishment and 
spread of  L. salicaria   (Malecki et al. 1993). 
 
The acquisition of adaptive characteristics from 
native species of  Lythrum may have enhanced purple 
loosestrife’s invasive success.  It will hybridize with 
Lythrum alatum,  a widespread, native North 
American species, in natural settings.  Under certain 
circumstances fertile hybrids are produced that can 
cross with weedy purple loosestrife.  Such 
interspecific hybrids could serve as a “hybrid bridge” 
for the transfer of adaptive traits from native  L. 
alatum  into weedy populations of purple loosestrife 
(Anderson & Ascher 1993; Strefeler et al. 1996b). 
 
North American naturalized populations of purple 
loosestrife often form monospecific stands, whereas, 
in its native Eurasian habitat the species comprises 1-
4% of the vegetative cover (Batra et al. 1986; 
Strefeler et al. 1996b).  Purple loosestrife causes 
annual wetland losses of about 190,000 hectares in 
the United States (Thompson et al. 1987; Mal et al. 
1997).  The species is mo st abundant in the Midwest 
and Northeast where it infest s about 8,100 hectares in 
Minnesota, 12,000 ha in Wisconsin, over 12,000 ha 
in Ohio, and a larger area in  New York State.  Recent 
distributional surveys document the occurrence of 
monocultures in every county in Connecticut, where 
it has been found in 163 wetland locations (Ellis and 
Weaver 1996; Ellis 1996).  At the Effigy Mounds 
National Monument (EFMO), combined populations 
of purple loosestrife cover an area of 5 to 10 hectares 
growing in regularly disturbed sites.  This species has  a major visual impact on the vegetation of EFMO, 
and it has the potential to invade and replace native 
communities endangerin
g the areas' primary 
resources. (Butterfield et al. 1996).  In response to the 
alarming spread of this exotic species, at least 13 
states (e.g., Minnesota, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, 
Washington, and Wisconsin) have passed legislation 
restricting or prohibiting its importation and 
distribution (Malecki et al . 1993; Strefeler et al. 
1996b).   
 
Numerous studies demonstrate the aggressive and 
competitive nature of purple loosestrife.  Fernald 
(1940) reported a loss of native plant diversity in the 
St. Lawrence River floodplain following the invasion 
of purple loosestrife and another exotic,  Butomus 
umbellatus  L.  Gaudet and Keddy (1988) report 
declining growth for 44 native wetland species after 
the establishment of  Lythrum.  Among the species 
tested, Keddy (1990) found that purple loosestrife 
was the most competitive.  His hierarchical rank, 
arranged from most to least competitive, illustrates 
the dominance of this invasive weed over many 
common natives:  Lythrum>Cyperus>Juncus> 
Eleocharis> Mimulus>Verbena.   In the Hamilton 
Marshes adjacent to the Delaware River, annual 
above-ground production of L. salicaria far exceeded 
all other plant species’ production combined. 
 
Purple loosestrife provides little food, poor cover, 
and few nesting materials for wildlife (Mann 1991).  
Waterfowl nesting becomes more difficult as clumps 
of  L. salicaria  restrict access to open water and offer 
concealing passageways for predators such as foxes 
and raccoons (Mal et al. 1992).  Non-game species, 
including black terns and marsh wrens, also lose 
nesting sites when purple loosestrife infests their 
normal habitats.  Balogh and Bookhout (1989a) 
report that dense stands of purple loosestrife provide 
poor waterfowl and muskrat habitat.  Red-wing 
blackbirds appear to be the  only species to cope with 
changes in wetlands caused by purple loosestrife 
(Balogh and Bookhout 1989a).  In many areas where 
L. salicaria populations have increased, wildlife 
species have declined.  While some studies may fail 
to demonstrate cause and affect relationship, they 
firmly establish circumstantial evidence implicating 
that  Lythrum’s invasion is responsible for major 
changes in wetland communities (Mal et al. 1992). 
 
Purple loosestrife prefers moist, highly organic soils 
but can tolerate a wide range of conditions. It grows 
on calcareous to acidic soils, can withstand shallow 
flooding, and tolerates up to 50% shade.  Purple 
loosestrife has low nutrient requirements and can 
withstand nutrient poor sites.  Under experimental,

nutrient-deficient conditions, the root/shoot ratio 
increased and provided purple loosestrife with a 
competitive advantage over the native species 
Epilobium hirsutum.  Survival and growth of L. 
salicaria  was greatly improved by fertilizer treatment 
and greater spacing betwee n plants.  Such results 
suggest that excessive use of fertilizers and the 
release of phosphates, nitrates, and ammonia into the 
environment has enhanced the success of  Lythrum  
(Mal et al., 1992; Shamsi  and Whitehead, 1977a and 
b). 
 
Purple loosestrife flowers from July until September 
or October. Flowering occurs 8-10 weeks after initial 
spring growth.  The lowermost flowers of the 
inflorescence open first  and flowering progresses 
upward.  The capsules mature in the same sequence 
and the lowermost will ripen and disperse its seeds 
while flowering is still occurring further up the 
inflorescence (Butterfield et al. 1996).  Thompson et 
al. (1987) estimated that on  average, a mature plant 
produces about 2,700,000 seeds annually.  Purple 
loosestrife seeds are mostly dispersed by water, but 
wind and mud adhering to wildlife, livestock, vehicle 
tires, boats, and people serve also as agent.  Seeds are 
relatively long-lived, retaining 80% viability after 2-3 
years of submergence (Malecki 1990).  Welling & 
Becker (1990) investigated  seed bank dynamics in 
three wetland sites in Minnesota and noted a mean 
density of 410,000 seeds per square meter in the top 5 
cm of soil, which was more than all other species 
combined. 
 
Spring-germinated seedlings have a higher survival 
rate than summer-germinated seedlings. Seedlings 
that germinate in the spring will flower the first year, 
whereas, summer-germinated seedlings develop only 
five or six pairs of leaves before the end of the 
growing season.  Since its seeds are small, weighing 
about 0.06 mg each and carry little food reserves, 
germination must occur under conditions where 
photosynthesis can occur immediately.  A strong 
taproot develops quickly in seedlings and persists 
throughout the life of the plant.  The aerial shoots die 
in the fall and new shoots arise the following spring 
from buds on the rootstocks.  Shoots destroyed by 
fire, herbicides, or mechanical removal can also 
regenerate from the rootstock.  As plants mature, they 
produce more and more aerial shoots forming very 
dense clumps of growth.  Purple loosestrife can 
spread vegetatively by resprouting from stem cuttings 
and from regeneration of pieces of root stock (Mal et 
al. 1992).  Rhizomatous growth is insignificant in 
purple loosestrife (Shamsi & Whitehead 1974a; 
Thompson et al. 1987). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Loosestrife Family (Lythraceae).  Purple 
loosestrife is an erect perennial herb that grows up to 
2.5 m tall, develops a strong taproot, and may have 
up to 50 stems arising from its base.  Its 50 stems are 
four-angled and glabrous to pubescent.  Its leaves are 
sessile, opposite or whorled, lanceolate (2-10 cm long 
and 5-15 mm wide), with rounded to cordate bases. 
Leaf margins are entire.   Leaf surfaces are pubescent. 
 
Each inflorescence is spik e-like (1-4 dm long), and 
each plant may have numerous inflorescences.  The 
calyx and corolla are fused to form a floral tube (also 
called a hypanthium) that is cylindrical (4-6 mm 
long), greenish, and 8-12 ne rved.  Typically the calyx 
lobes are narrow and thread-like, six in number, and 
less than half the length of the petals.  The showy 
corolla (up to 2 cm across)  is rose-purple and consists 
of five to seven petals.  Twelve stamens are typical 
for each flower.  Individual plants may have flowers 
of three different types cla ssified according to stylar 
length as short, medium, and long.  The short-styled 
type has long and medium length stamens, the 
medium type has long and short stamens, and the 
long-styled has medium to short stamens.  The fruit is 
a capsule about 2 mm in  diameter and 3-4 mm long 
with many small, ovoid dust-like seeds (< 1 mm 
long). 
 
Mal et al., 1992, provide a detailed morphological 
description for L. salicaria.  The authors also give 
details of the tristylous features of this species, as 
well as an account of its pollen structure and 
chromosome numbers.  The plant’s habit, vegetative, 
and reproductive structures are illustrated with line 
drawings. 
 
Other species of  Lythrum that grow in the United 
States have 1-2 flowers in each leaf-like 
inflorescence bract and eight or fewer stamens 
compared to  L. salicaria, which has more than two 
flowers per bract and typically twelve stamens per 
flower.  Lythrum  virgatum , another species 
introduced from Europe closely resembles  L. 
salicaria , but differs in being glabrous (lacking plant 
hairs), and having narrow leaf bases.  The latter two 
species interbreed freely producing fertile offspring, 
and some taxonomists (Rendall 1989) consider them 
to be a single species.

Distribution: Purple loosestrife is a hardy perennial 
herb with stunning spikes of purple flowers.  A native 
of Eurasia, it was introduced to North America in the 
early 1800's where it first appeared in ballast heaps of 
eastern harbors (Stuckey  1980).  Most likely seeds 
were transported as contaminants in the ballast or 
possibly attached to raw wool or sheep imported 
from Europe (Cole, 1926; Thompson et al., 1987). 
 
The native range of  L. salicaria is thought to extend 
from Great Britain to ce ntral Russia from near the 
65th parallel to North Africa.  It also occurs in Japan, 
Korea, and the northern Himalayan region.  The 
species has been introduced to Australia, Tasmania, 
and New Zealand.  Since its introduction to North 
America, this alien plant has spread rapidly into 
Canada, and throughout most of the United States 
where it has been reported from all states except 
Alaska, Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina.  
Several factors have contributed to the spread of 
purple loosestrife such as its potential for rapid 
growth, its enormous repr oductive capacity, lack of 
natural diseases or predators, its use as an 
ornamental, and for bee forage  (Mal et al. 1992).  For 
current U.S. distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective.  
 
An important consideration in controlling purple 
loosestrife is its prolific seed production, the ease 
with which seeds are dispersed, and their ability to 
remain viable for several years.  Also, this plant can 
spread vegetatively by resprouting from stem and 
rootstock cuttings.  Other considerations in selecting 
control methods are their detrimental effects on 
native species and the possibility for reinvasion by 
purple loosestrife or other exotic species.  In addition, 
native plants of similar appearance should not be 
subjected to control.  Purple loosestrife may 
superficially resemble plants of the mint family or 
species of the genera  Epilobium and Liatris .  Proper 
identification is an important consideration in 
controlling exotic loosestrife. 
 
In natural areas, it may be more feasible to contain 
populations of purple loosestrife than control them.  
Large populations extending over one hectare or 
more will be difficult to eradicate.  Containing them 
may be more feasible.  Removing plants or applying 
herbicides to ones extending beyond the main 
population can accomplish this.  If loosestrife cannot 
be eradicated, efforts shou ld then concentrate on 
keeping it from invading the highest quality areas 
(Butterfield et al., 1996. 
 
Manual, Mechanical, and Replacement : Mowing, 
burning, and flooding are largely ineffective.  Cutting 
followed by flooding so that cut plant stalks are 
completely immersed has shown some success. 
However, flooding may encourage the spread of 
purple loosestrife seed present in the soil and may 
result in the regeneration of new plants from stem 
fragments.  Mature plants can withstand short-term 
immersion.  Burning is largely ineffective and it may 
also stress native plants and subsequently enhance 
loosestrifes’ competitive advantage (Butterfield et al., 
1996). 
 
Hand removal is effective for small populations and 
isolated plants.  Younger plants (one to two years 
old) can be pulled by hand.  Plants should be 
removed, prior to seed set, with minimal disturbance 
to the soil.  Removal after seed-set will scatter the 
seeds.  The entire rootstock must be pulled out 
because of the potential fo r regeneration from root 
fragments.  A hand cultivator or similar implement 
will be helpful for older plants, especially those in 
deep organic soils.  Uprooted plants and broken 
stems need to be removed from the site since such 
fragments can re-sprout.  Bagging plants for removal 
will prevent their spread along the exit route.  
Follow-up treatments are recommended for three 
years after plants are removed.  Clothing and 
equipment used during plant removal should be 
cleaned to remove contaminating seeds. 
 
Replacement control has been attempted in several 
wildlife refuges.  Research has shown that Japanese 
millet ( Echinochloa frumentacea  Link) seedlings 
outcompete purple loosestrife seedlings.  The millet 
must be planted immediately after marsh drawdown 
and replanted each year because it does not 
regenerate well.  Replacement seeding trials using 
native pale smartweed ( Polygonum lapathifolium  L.) 
showed that it also out-competed purple loosestrife.  
Replacement methods have obvious limited 
application in natural areas, but they may provide 
control of loosestrife populations on bordering 
property (Butterfield et al. 1996).

Herbicide Control: Various chemical treatments have 
been used on purple looses trife with varying success.  
Many herbicides are not specific to purple loosestrife 
and may not be specifically  licensed for such use.  
Label directions for application and use according to 
local, state, and federal regulations must always be 
observed. 
 
In areas with populations exceeding 100 plants (up to 
1.6 ha in size) where hand-pulling is not feasible, 
application of a glyphosate herbicide to individual 
purple loosestrife plants provides effective control 
Glyphosate is available under the trade names 
Roundup® and Rodeo®.  Rodeo is registered for use 
over open water and is the most commonly used 
herbicide to control purple loosestrife.  Glyphosate is 
nonselective and can kill desirable plants associated 
with loosestrife if applied carelessly.  Application to 
the tops of plants alone can be effective and limits 
exposure of non-target species (Butterfield et al. 
1996). 
 
Herbicide treatment should be conducted as early as 
possible during the manufacturer's recommended 
time of application in order to kill the plants and 
prevent seed production.  Application is most 
effective when plants have just begun flowering.  
Timing is important because seed set can occur if 
plants are in mid- to late flower.  Where possible, the 
flower heads should be cut, bagged, and removed 
from the site prior to application to prevent seed set.  
Rodeo applied as a 1.5% solution (2 oz. Rodeo/gallon 
clean water) with the addition of a wetting agent, as 
specified on the label has been shown to provide 
control.  Another option, which may be more 
effective, is to apply glyphosate twice during the 
growing season.  The plants should be sprayed as 
described above when flowering has just started and 
a second time two to three weeks later (Butterfield et 
al. 1996). 
 
Application of ghyphosate from a vehicle-mounted 
sprayer is generally necessary in areas with extensive 
stands of purple loosestrife.  The most effective 
control can be achieved by beginning treatment at the 
periphery of large patches and working toward the 
center in successive years.  This technique allows 
native vegetation to re-invade the treated area as the 
loosestrife in eliminated  (Butterfield et al. 1996). 
 
A combination of 2,4-D and Banvel® (dicamba) has 
been used on a limited basis.  This formulation is 
broadleaf specific and apparently would not hurt the 
dominants if sprayed in a cattail marsh or 
communities dominated by rushes, sedges, and 
grasses.  Spraying produces good control once  loosestrife has reached 10-15%
 of its mature growth.  
Treatment is more effective if repeated once during 
the growing season  (Butterfield et al. 1996). 
 
Biological Control : Several biological control agents 
have the potential to aid in the control of purple 
loosestrife.  Of 120 species  of phytophagous insects 
associated with purple loosestrife in its natural range 
in Europe, 14 species were considered host-specific 
to the target plant.  From this group, six species have 
been selected as the most  promising for biological 
control.  These species we re a root-mining weevil, 
Hylobius transversovittatus  Goeze, which attacks the 
main storage tissue of purple loosestrife; two leaf-
eating beetles,  Galerucella calmariensis  L., and G. 
pusilla  Duftschmid, which are capable of completely 
defoliating the plant; two  flower-feeding beetles, 
Nanophyes marmoratus  Goeze and N. brevis 
Boheman, which severely reduce seed production; 
and a gall midge,  Bayeriola salicariae  Kieffer, which 
similarly reduces seed production by attacking the 
flower buds.  Five of the six species are found 
throughout its range in Europe and the sixth,  N. 
brevis, is restricted to southe rn Europe (Malecki et al. 
1993; Weedin et al. 1996). 
 
The most promising insects appear to be the root-
mining weevil,  H. transversovittatus , and the two 
leaf-eating beetles,  G. calmariensis and G. pusilla , 
because of their broad geographic ranges and the 
amount of damage done to the host plant.  In June of 
1992, all three species  were approved by USDA, 
APHIS for introduction into the United States.  The 
insects were released in New York, Pennsylvania, 
Maryland, Virginia, Minnesota, Oregon, and 
Washington.  Releases were also approved in Canada 
(Malecki et al. 1993). 
 
The two  Galerucella  species successfully over-
wintered and began oviposition at all release sites.  
The other species,  H. transversovittatus , was proving 
more difficult to establish, because of its long life 
cycle and low fecundity.  The investigators predict 
that all three species will become established 
throughout the North American range of purple 
loosestrife.  Furthermore,  H. transversovittatus is 
expected to have the greatest negative impact to  L. 
salicaria.   However, a combination of various 
phytophagous insects will provide greater control 
than any one species.  Control of purple loosestrife 
will be achieved more rapidly in mixed plant 
communities where comp etition for space and 
nutrients is greater.  A re duction in the abundance of 
purple loosestrife to approximately 10% of its current 
level over about 90% of its range is expected 
(Malecki et al. 1993).

In order to evaluate the potential of fungus pathogens 
to control purple loosestrife, a survey was conducted 
on fungi associated with that plant.  During the three 
year study, 5265 fungal isolates were obtained.  
Thirty-one taxa were found that had not previously 
been reported from purple loosestrife.  Tests for the 
pathogenicity to purple loosestrife are being tested 
(Nyvall 1995). 
 
Illustrations and Photographs:  
Gleason, H. A. 1952.   Illustrated flora of the 
northeastern United States and adjacent Canada .  
Lancaster Press, Inc., Lancaster, Pennsylvania.  (line 
drawing, Vol. 3, p. 53). 
 
Mal, T.K., J. Lovett-Doust,  L. Lovett-Doust, & G.A. 
Mulligan 1992.   The biology of Canadian weeds.  
100.  Lythrum salicaria .    Can. J. Plant Sci. Rev. 
Can. Phytotech. 72(4):1305-1330.  Agricultural 
Institute of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.  
(detailed line illustrations of the whole plant and 
flower morphs). 
 
O'Neil, P. 1992.   Variation in male and female 
reproductive success among floral morphs in the 
tristylous plant Lythrum salicaria (Lythraceae) .   
American J. of Botany 79(9):1024-1030.  Botanical 
Society of America, Colu mbus, Ohio  (detailed 
illustration of the three (tristyly) flower morphs). 
 
Radford, A. E., H. E. Ahles, & C. R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  (small line drawing, p. 831). 
 
Randall, J. M. & J. Marinelli 1996.   Invasive plants, 
weeds of the global garden.   Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Handbook #149, Brooklyn, New York.  99 p.  
(photographs of plants in flower, front cover, p. 5 and 
p. 81; infested habitat, p. 5). 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000412.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   Wetland flora CD-ROM .  
<http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/ wli/wetprods.htm>.  
Wetland Science Institute, Laurel, Maryland. 
 
References 
Anderson, N.O. & P.D. Ascher 1993.   Male and 
female fertility of loosestrife (Lythrum) cultivars .   
Journal of the American Horticulture Society 
118(6):851-858. 
 
Balogh, G.R. & T.A. Bookhout 1989a.   Purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) in Ohio's Lake Erie 
marshes .  Ohio Journal of Science 89(3):62-64.  
maps. 
 
Batra, S.W.T., D. Schroeder, P.E. Boldt, & W. 
Mendel 1986.  Insects associated with purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria L.) in Europe .  Proc. 
Entomol. Soc. Wash., 88(4):748-759, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Blossey, B. 1993.   Herbivory below ground and 
biological weed control: life history of a root-boring 
weevil on purple loosestrife.   Oecologia 94(3):380-
387. 
 
Blossey, B. 1995.   A comparison of various 
approaches for evaluating potential biological 
control agents using insects on Lythrum salicaria .  
Biological Control 5(2):113-122. 
 
Blossey, B. & R.U. Ehlers 1991.   Entomopathogenic 
nematodes (Heterorhabditis spp. and Steinernema 
anomali) as potential antagonists of the biological 
weed control agent Hylobius transversovittatus 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae) .  J. Invertebrate 
Pathology 58(3):453-454. 
 
Blossey, B. & R. Notzold 1995.   Evolution of 
increased competitive ability in invasive 
nonindigenous plants: a hypothesis .  J. Ecology 
83(5):887-889. 
 
Blossey, B. & D. Schroeder 1995.   Host specificity of 
three potential biological weed control agents 
attacking flowers and seeds of Lythrum salicaria 
(purple loosestrife) .  Biological Control 5(1):47-53. 
 
Blossey, B., D. Schroeder, S.D. Hight, & R.A. 
Malecki 1994a.  Host specificity and environmental 
impact of two leaf beetles (Galerucella calmariensis 
and G. pusilla) for biological control of purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) .  Weed Science 
42(1):134-140. 
 
Blossey, B., D. Schroeder, S.D. Hight, & R.A. 
Malecki 1994b.   Host specificity and environmental 
impact of the weevil Hylobius transversovittatus, a 
biological control agent of purple loosestrife 
(Lythrum salicaria) .  Weed Science 42(1):128-133. 
 
Brungardt, S. [1992.]   Wisdom of a flower ban 
supported by research .  Minn. Sci. Agric. Exp. Stn. 
Univ. Minn. 47(1):4-5.

Butterfield, C., J. Stubbendieck, & J. Stumpf 1996.  
Species abstracts of highly disruptive exotic plants .  
Version: 16JUL97.  Northern Prairie Wildlife 
Research Center Home Page, Jamestown, North 
Dakota.   
http://www.npsc.nbs.gov/reso urce/othrdata/plntguid/s
pecies/lythsali.htm. 
 
Cole, A.H. 1926.   The American manufacture .  Vol. 
1.  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Cornell University, Educational Television Center 
and Media Services 1996.   Restoring the balance: 
biological control of purple loosestrife.   Ithaca, New 
York.  1 videocassette (28 min.). 
 
Ellis, D. R. 1996.   Biological control of purple 
loosestrife in Connecticut .  1996 Summary Report.  
<http://www.ceris.pur due.edu/napis/pests/pls/index.h
tml>.   (15 May 1997). 
 
Ellis, D.R. & J.S. Weaver 1996.  Purple loosestrife: 
Survey and biological control .  1995 Summary 
Report, USDA, APHIS, PPQ, Cooperative 
Agricultural Pest Survey (CAPS).  9 pp 
 
Feller Demalsy, M.J. & J. Parent 1989.   Analyse 
pollinique des miels de l’Ontario, Canada .  
Apidologie 20:127-138. 
 
Fernald, M.L. 1940.   The problem of conserving rare 
native plants.  Annual Report, Smithsonian 
Institution (1939):375-391. 
 
Flack, S. & E. Furlow 1996.  America's least wanted 
"purple plague," "green cancer" and 10 other 
ruthless environmental thugs .  Nature Conservancy 
Magazine 46(6) November/December.  
<http://www.tnc.org/news/magazine/nov_dec/index.h
tml>. 
 
Gabor, T.S., & H.R. Murkin 1990.   Effects of 
clipping purple loosestrife  seedlings during a 
simulated wetland drawdown .  Journal of Aquatic 
Plant Management 28:98-100. 
 
Gardner, S.C. & C.E. Grue 1996.   Effects of Rodeo 
and Garlon 3A on nontarget wetland species in 
central Washington .  Environmental Toxicolog. 
Chem. 15(4): 441-451. 
 
Gaudet, C.L. & P.A. Keddy 1988.  A comparative 
approach to predicting competitive ability from plant 
traits .  Nature 334(6179):242-243. 
 
Gaudet, C.L. & P.A. Keddy 1995.  Competitive 
performance and species distribution in shoreline 
plant communities: a comparative approach .  
Ecology 76(1):280-291. 
 
Hayes, B.  1979.   Purple loosestrife - The wetlands 
honey plant .  American Bee Journal 119:382-383. 
 
Heidorn, R., & B. Anderson 1991.   Vegetation 
management guideline: pur ple loosestrife (Lythrum 
salicaria L.) .  Natural Areas Journal 11:172-173. 
 
Heuch, I. 1979.   The effect of partial self-fertilization 
on type frequencies in heterostylous plants Lythrum 
salicaria .  Annals of Botany 44(5):611-616.  ill. 
 
Hight, S.D., B. Blossey, J. Laing & R. DeClerck-
Floate 1995.   Establishment of insect biological 
control agents from Europe against Lythrum 
salicaria in North America .  Environmental 
Entomology 24(4):967-977. 
 
Jones, M.A.  1976.   Destination America .  Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston, New York, New York. 
 
Katovich, E.J.S., R.L. Becker, & B.D. Kinkaid 1996.  
Influence of nontarget neighbors and spray volume 
on retention and efficacy of triclopyr in purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) .  Weed Science 
44(1):143-147. 
 
Keddy, C. 1988.   A review of Lythrum salicaria 
(purple loosestrife) ecology and management: The 
urgency for management in Ontario .  Natural 
Heritage League, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.  34 pp. 
 
Keddy, C.  1990.   The use of functional as opposed to 
phylogenetic systematics: a first step in predictive 
community ecology .  IN:  S. Kawano, ed.   Biological 
approaches and evolutionary trends in plants .  
Academic Press, London, U.K. 
 
Kok, L.T., T.J. McAvoy, R.A. Malecki, S.D. Hight, 
J.J. Drea, & J.R. Coulson 1992.   Host specificity tests 
of Hylobius transversovittatus Goeze (Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae), a potential biological control agent 
of purple loosestrife, Lythrum salicaria L. 
(Lythraceae).   Biological Control 2:1-8. 
 
Kok, L.T., T.J. McAvoy, R.A. Malecki, S.D. Hight, 
J.J. Drea, & J.R. Coulson 1992.   Host specificity tests 
of Galerucella calmariensis (L.) and G. pusilla 
(Duft.) (Coleoptera Chrysomelidae), potential 
biological control agents of purple loosestrife, 
Lythrum salicaria L. (Lythraceae).   Biological 
Control 2:282-290.

Lindgren, C.J. & R.T. Clay 1993.  Fertility of 
'Morden Pink' Lythrum virgatum L. transplanted into 
wild stands of L. salicaria L. in Manitoba.  
HortScience 28(9):954. 
Mal, T.K., J. Lovett-Doust,  L. Lovett-Doust, & G.A. 
Mulligan 1992.   The biology of Canadian weeds.  
100.  Lythrum salicaria .  Can. J. Plant Sci. Rev. Can. 
Phytotech. 72(4):1305-1330. 
 
Mal, T.K., J. Lovett-Doust, & L. Lovett-Doust 1997.  
Time-dependent competitive displacement of Typha 
angustifolia by Lythrum salicaria .  Oikos 79:26-33. 
 
Malecki, R.A., B. Blossey, S.D. Hight, D. Schroeder, 
L.T. Kok, & J.R. Coulson 1993.  Biological control 
of purple loosestrife .  BioScience 43:680-686. 
 
Malecki, R.  1990.  Research update-Biological 
control of purple loosestrife .  Report of New York 
Cooperative Fish and Wildlif e Research Unit, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York.  4pp + 2 figs. 
 
Malecki, R. 1994.   Insect biological weed control: an 
important and underutilized management tool for 
maintaining native plant communities threatened by 
exotic plant introductions .  Trans. North. Am. Wildl. 
Nat. Resoures Conf. (59th) p. 400-404.  Wildlife 
Management Institute, Washington, DC. 
 
Mann, H.  1991.   Purple loosestrife: A botanical 
dilemma .  The Osprey 22:67-77. 
 
Notestein, A. 1987.   Purple loosestrife managed with 
herbicides at Horicon National Wildlife Refuge 
(Wisconsin) .  Restoration and Management Notes 
5:91. 
 
Nyvall, R.F. 1995.   Fungi associated with purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) in Minnesota .    
Mycologia 87(4):501-506. 
 
Nyvall, R.F. & A. Hu 1997.   Laboratory evaluation 
of indigenous North American fungi for biological 
control of purple loosestrife .  Biological Control 
8(1):37-42. 
 
O'Neil, P. 1997.  Natural selection on genetically 
correlated phenological characters in Lythrum 
salicaria L. (Lythraceae) .    Evolution 51(1):267-274. 
 
Ottenbreit, K.A. 1991.  The distribution, reproductive 
biology, and morphology of Lythrum species, hybrids 
and cultivars in Manitoba .  M.Sc. thesis, Department 
of Botany, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada. 
 
Ottenbreit, K.A. & R.J.  Staniforth 1994.  Crossability 
of naturalized and cultivated Lythrum  taxa .   
Canadian Journal of Botany 72(3):337-341. 
 
Pursh, F.  1814.   Flora Americae Septentrionalis (or 
systematic arrangement and description of the plants 
of North America) .  White, Cochrane, and Co., 
London, England. 
 
Rendall, J.  1989.   The Lythrum story: A new chapter .  
Minnesota Horticulturist 117:22-24. 
 
Shamsi, S.R.A., & F.H. Whitehead 1974a.  
Comparative eco-physiology of Epilobium hirsutum 
L. and Lythrum salicaria L .  I.  IN General biology, 
distribution, and germination .  Journal of Ecology 
62:279-290. 
 
Shamsi, S.R.A., & F.H. Whitehead 1974b.  
Comparative eco-physiology of Epilobium hirsutum 
L. and Lythrum salicaria L .  II.  IN Growth and 
development in relation to light .  Journal of Ecology 
62:631-645. 
 
Shamsi, S.R.A., & F.H. Whitehead 1977a.  
Comparative eco-physiology of Epilobium hirsutum 
L. and Lythrum salicaria L .  III.  IN Mineral 
nutrition .  Journal of Ecology 65:55-70. 
 
Shamsi, S.R.A., & F.H. Whitehead 1977b.  
Comparative eco-physiology of Epilobium hirsutum 
L. and Lythrum salicaria L.  IV.  IN  Effects of 
temperature and inter-specific competition and 
concluding discussion .  Journal of Ecology 65:71-84. 
 
Shamsi, S.R.A. 1976.   Effect of a light-break on the 
growth and development of Epilobium hirsutum and 
Lythrum salicaria in short photoperiods .  Annals of 
Botany 40(165):153-162. 
 
Strefeler, M.S., E. Darmo, R.L. Becker, & E.J. 
Katovich 1996a.   Isozyme variation in cultivars of 
purple loosestrife (Lythrum  sp.) .  HortScience 
31(2):279-282. 
 
Strefeler, M.S., E. Darmo, R.L. Becker, & E.J. 
Katovich 1996b.   Isozyme characterization of genetic 
diversity in Minnesota populations of purple 
loosestrife, Lythrum salicaria (Lythraceaae).   
American Journal of Botany 83(3):265-273. 
 
Stuckey, R.L. 1980.   Distributional history of 
Lythrum salicaria (purple loosestrife) in North 
America .   Bartonia 17(47):3-20.

Thompson, D.Q. 1991.  History of purple loosestrife 
(Lythrum salicaria L.) biological control effects .  
Natural Areas Journal 11:148-150. 
 
Thompson, D.Q., R.L. Stuckey, & E.B. Thompson 
1987.    Spread, impact, and control of purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) in North American 
wetlands .  Research Report No. 2.  USDI, Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Washington, DC. 
 
Twolan-Strutt, L. & P.A. Keddy 1996.   Above- and 
below-ground competition intensity in two 
contrasting wetland plant communities .  Ecology 
77(1):259-270. 
 
Voegtlin, D.J. 1995.   Potential of Myzus lythri 
(Homoptera: Aphididae) to influence growth and 
development of Lythrum  salicaria (Myrtiflorae: 
Lythraceae).   Environmental Entomology 24(3):724-
729. 
 
Weeden, C. R, A. M. Shelton, & M. P. Hoffmann, 
Eds. 1996.   Biological control: A guide to natural 
enemies in North America .  Cornell University. 
(http://www.nysaes.cornell.edu/ent/biocontrol/weedfe
eders/galerucella.html; 
http://www.nysaes.cornell.edu/ent/biocontrol/ 
weedfeeders/hylobius.html). 
 
Welling, C.H. & R.L. Becker 1990.   Seed bank 
dynamics of Lythrum salicaria L.: implications for 
control of this species in North America .  Aquatic 
Botany 38:303-309. 
 
Wilcox, D.A., M.K. Seeling, & K.R. Edwards 1986.  
Ecology and management potential for purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) .  IN The George 
Wright Society conference  on science in the National 
Parks .  USDI, National Park Service, Washington, 
DC. 
 
Wilcox, D.A. 1989.   Migration and control of purple 
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria L.) along highway 
corridors .  Environmental Management 13(3):365-
370. 
 
Prepared By 
Lowell Urbatsch, Department of Plant Biology, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Skinner, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 19sep00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 060802 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.