Plant Guide
OSTLER’S 
PEPPERWEED  
Lepidium ostleri  S.L. Welsh & 
Goodrich  
Plant Symbol =  LEOS 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
Ostler’s pepperweed . Daniela Roth, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service  
Status 
In 2007 the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) was 
petitioned to list Ostler’s pepperweed  as either 
endangered or threatened. In 2011 FWS announced a 
determination that listing was warranted; however listing 
of  Ostler’s pepperweed  was  precluded by higher priority 
actions ( USDI-FWS  2011).  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Depart ment of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Mustard family (Brassicaceae). Ostler’s 
pepperweed is a long- lived, clump-forming  perennial forb 
rising from a branching root crown  (Welsh et al. 2008) . 
The stems are erect, forming dense tufts up to 5 cm (2 in) 
tall. The leaves are linear, entire, 4 to 15 mm (in) long and  covered with grayish green hairs. The basal leaves may be 
3 to 5 
lobed. The flowering stems are covered with 5 to 
35 white to purplish tinted flowers. Flowering occurs 
from June to early July (USDI -FWS 2011).  
Distribution :  Ostler’s pepperweed  is endemic to the 
Great Basin. It is known from four populations in the San 
Francisco Mountains in north -central Beaver County, 
Utah.  All populations occur on privately owned lands.  
Ostler’s pepperweed  shares the same distribution as 
Frisco buckwheat  ( Eriogonum soredium ). 
 
Population estimates vary widely. The mound -forming 
nature  of the plants makes it difficult to make accurate 
plant estimates where each mound could be counted as 
one or several plants. For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Ostler’s  pepperweed  is found only on soils 
derived from Ordovician limestone outcrops. These rare 
soils are home to other rare plant species including Frisco 
buckwheat  and Frisco clover ( Trifolium friscanum ). All 
four populations of  Ostler’s pepperweed  exist  on spa rsely 
populated slopes in pinion- juniper and sagebrush 
communities from 1,890 to 2,200 m ( 6,200 to 7,200 ft). 
Other associated species include Mormon tea ( Ephedra 
sp.), snakeweed ( Gutierrezia sarothrae ), dwarf mountain 
mahogany ( Cercocarpus intricatus ), and rock goldenrod 
( Petradoria pumila)  (USDI -FWS 2011) .  
Adaptation  
Ostler’s pepperweed  is adapted to white limestone 
outcrops in areas receiving 200 to 300  mm (8 to 12 in) 
mean annual precipitation. Ostler’s pepperweed  
populations cover approximately 52 acr es out of 
approximately 845 acres of suitable habitat. It is unknown 
if there are other factors limiting Ostler’s pepperweed  
distribution (USDI FWS 2011).    
Establishment  
There is no known seed establishment information for 
Ostler’s pepperweed . 
Management  
Over 90 percent of the known habitat for Ostler’s 
pepperweed  occurs on private mining claims. There are 
no laws protecting endangered plant species on private, 
State or Tribal lands in Utah. However, m ining operations 
must prepare State environmental impac t assessments and 
address the potential effects on State and federally listed 
species for operations that create 5 acres or more surface 
disturbance.

Pests and Potential Problems 
The greatest threat to Ostler’s pepperweed  comes from 
mining operations in c lose proximity to Ostler’s 
pepperweed  populations. The area has historically been 
mined for precious metals, and is currently used for gravel 
quarrying for crushed limestone. These operations are 
expected to increase in the future due to increased 
demand  ( USDI -FWS 2011).   
Environmental Concerns  
There are a number of environmental factors which may 
affect  Ostler’s pepperweed . Prolonged  drought due to 
climate change has the potential to eliminate the small 
populations of Ostler’s pepperweed . Additionally, 
i nvasion of cheatgrass ( Bromus tectorum) has the 
potential to greatly increase the fire return interval in the 
Great  Basin (Whisenant 1990). Ostler’s pepperweed  is 
adapted to sparsely covered plant communities and is 
likely not adapted to frequent fires (USDI -FWS 2011.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
There is no known plant propagation information for 
Ostler’s pepperweed . 
References  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants; 12 -month finding on a 
petition to list Astragalus hamiltonii , Penstemon 
flowersii,  Eriogonum soredium , Lepidium ostleri, and 
Trifolium friscanum  as endangered or threatened. 
Federal Register. 76 (36): 10166- 10199. 
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. Higgins  [eds]. 2008. A Utah flora , fourth edition, revised. 
Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University. 1019 pp.   Whisenant, S. G. 1990. Changing fire frequencies on 
Idaho's Snake River plains: ecological and  
management implications. In: Proceeding -
Symposium on cheatgrass invasion, shrub die -o ff, 
and other aspects of shrub biology and management, 
(Eds., E. D. McArthur, E. M. Romney, S. D. Smith, 
and P. T. Tueller), USDA Forest Service 
Intermountain Research Station General Technical 
Report INT -276:4- 10. 
 
Prepared By :   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS P lant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D . 2012.  Plant Guide for Ostler’s pepperweed  
( Lepidium ostleri). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials 
Center. 83210- 0296. 
Published  November 2012  
Edited:  16oct2012djt;  17oct2012ls ; 01Nov2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.us da.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER