Plant Guide
SILKY LUPINE 
Lupinus sericeus Pursh 
Plant Symbol =  LUSE4 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Silky lupine.  Photo by Paul Alabak, University of Montana. 
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  blue -bonnet lupine  
Uses  
Silky lupine is consumed by white -tailed deer,  bighorn 
sheep,  upland game birds, small nongame birds and small 
mammals.  Livestock will utilize the plant but it is 
poisonous to cattle and sheep.   Palatability is rated poor to 
fair for cattle and horses and fair for sheep  (Matthews, 
1993) .  It may be unpalatable to elk (Tracy and 
McNaughton, 1997).   It is rated poor in terms of 
nutritional value.  Silky lupine provides fair to good cover 
for small mammals and birds.  Its ability to fix nitrogen 
allows it to colonize disturbed, low fertility soils  but  is 
rated low to m edium for control of soil erosion and for 
long term revegetation ( Matthews, 1993).   
Hummingbirds are attracted to silky lupine and the plant 
is recognized by pollination ecologists as attracting large 
numbers of native bees
.  It is an important pollen sour ce 
for bumble bees and a nectar source for honey bees (Lady 
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, Online) . 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Because of its toxic qualities to domestic livestock, stock 
growers  may consider silky lupine to be a weed  where it 
is prevalent  and interferes with livestock  grazing . 
 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, o r state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Pl ant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Ethnobotany  
The Okanagan -Colville  tribe of British Columbia used a 
mixture of strained, pounded seeds mixed with water as 
an eye medicine.  They also used the plant for bedding 
and floor covering in sweathouse s.  They used the plant 
bloom as an indication that groundhogs were fat enough 
to eat and recognized the plant as being a favorite food of 
the marmot.  The Thompson Indians of British Columbia 
considered the plant poisonous but thought  that horses 
consumed  the plant as a medicine (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database).  
Description  
General :  Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Silky lupine is a native, 
perennial,  tap-rooted,  cool season legume .  There are 
usually several solid stems at the base of the plant th at are 
2 -8  mm  (0.08- 0.31 in) in  diameter.  Total plant height, 
including the inflorescenc e ranges from 4-14 dm  (25.75-
55.12 in)  tall.  Leaves are palm -shaped with  5-9 leaflets 
( finger -like segments ).  Leaflets are usually densely 
pubescent on both faces.  Flowers are small and spurred 
forming  racemes and are dense in bud, becoming loose 
during flowering.  R acemes are 12-25 cm (4.72- 9.84 in)  
long.  Flower petals are either vivid blue with white or 
yellow white eyespot, pale blue, or whitish with brown