Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PERENNIAL RYEGRASS  
Lolium perenne  L. ssp. 
perenne 
Plant Symbol = LOPEP 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Britton & Brown. 1913. Flora of the North States and Canada 
 
Alternate Names 
None 
 
Uses 
A few farmers and ranchers are beginning to plant 
perennial ryegrass, Lolium perenne ssp. perenne , on 
irrigated pasture in the Intermountain West. This 
paper is intended to provide some technical guidance 
in the establishment and management of this species 
for the Intermountain West.  
 
Perennial ryegrass is a valuable forage and soil 
stabilization plant.  This  species is one of the 
predominant forage grasses in Europe. It has been 
used in the United States for forage and turfgrass  applications since the late 1700s.  Generally the 
tetraploid varieties are used for forage and diploid 
varieties are used for 
turfgrass (lawn) and 
conservation plantings.  Us ers should double check 
the intended use of available releases before buying 
seed to ensure they are getting the type desired.  
Italian ryegrass, the annual  L. perenne ssp. 
multiflorum , is primarily used for quick cover in 
erosion control plantings. 
 
Why plant perennial ryegrass? There are several very 
good reasons to consider  perennial ryegrass when 
planning an irrigated pasture planting. Perennial 
ryegrass establishes easier and more quickly than 
most of our proven long-lived pasture grass varieties. 
Under ideal conditions, perennial ryegrass is ready to 
graze within 60 days of planting. When managed 
correctly, it can be very productive. Perennial 
ryegrass can also be inter-seeded in existing weak 
stands of grass with fairly good results (avoid inter-
seeding healthy, productive stands). It can be 
broadcast seeded followed by harrowing, packing or 
livestock trampling with fairly good establishment 
results. Perennial ryegrass is very nutritious having 
similar or higher energy and protein levels than most 
proven pasture grass alternatives. This is a very 
important consideration when grass fattening beef 
cattle or for maintaining high milk production with 
dairy cows. It is also considered to be a very 
palatable feed. Preliminary forage quality results 
from a Montana study indicated good potential for 
high production of both protein and total digestible 
nutrients (TDN) per acre, depending on level of 
inputs and harvest management. 
  
Because we do not have long  term information on the 
survivability of perennial ryegrasses, we recommend 
the following to farmers and ranchers interested in 
planting perennial ryegrass. 
 
•   Use perennial ryegrass only in pastures that will 
be intensively managed. 
 
•   Plant only in areas with a good supply of 
irrigation water. 
 
•   Provide high levels of fertilizer with frequent 
applications. Perennial ryegrass production 
increases with split applications of nitrogen. It is 
recommended that 45  pounds per acre of 
nitrogen follow each grazing cycle. If only one

application is economically feasible, then apply 
150 pounds of nitrogen per acre in the spring. 
 
•   When planted with white clover, apply fertilizer 
in two applications, early spring and early 
autumn. When planted without clover, 3- 5 
applications may be necessary. 
 
•   Use varieties bred in Holland to provide earlier 
dormancy and better winter hardiness. 
 
•   In cold winter areas, perennial ryegrass has 
excellent first season yields and quality; 
however, plants may be subject to winter-kill and 
may require reseeding and should generally be 
viewed as annual or short-lived forage crops that 
may require renovation each year.  
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Perennial ryegrass grows from 1 to 2 feet 
tall with a bunchy form. It has medium longevity in 
mild climates. In northern Intermountain and Rocky 
Mountain states it tends to be short-lived, often no 
more than one growing season.  Some turfgrass 
varieties are longer lived.  There are numerous long, 
narrow, stiff leaves  near the base of the plant where 
most of the forage is concentrated.  The under 
surfaces of leaves are bright, glossy, and smooth.  
Inflorescence stems are nearly naked.  Seedheads are 
spikes with spikelets growing edgewise (at right 
angles) to the reproductive stem.  Perennial ryegrass 
seeds do not have awns (bristles), whereas annual 
ryegrass seeds have awns.  Other morphological 
characters of the two species are similar.  There are 
approximately 247,000 seeds per pound.   
Annual and Italian ryegrass  are similar to perennial 
ryegrass except they are  annual or biennial, 
depending on climate and/or length of growing 
season.  Italian ryegrass may grow a little taller than 
perennial ryegrass: from 2 to 3 feet tall.  The seed of 
this sub-species have awns. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Perennial ryegrass has a wide range of adaptability to 
soils, but thrives best on dark rich soils.  It will  withstand fairly wet soils
 with reasonably good 
surface drainage. It will not tolerate standing water 
for extended periods of time. It grows on soils that 
have a pH between 5 and 8 with best yields on soils 
with pH between 6 (slightly acidic) to 7 (neutral). 
 
Perennial ryegrass should be restricted to regions 
having mild climates with moderate temperature and 
higher moisture or irrigated regions of the 
Intermountain and Rocky Mountain West. It does not 
withstand hot, dry weather or severe winters. To 
produce high yields, perennial ryegrass requires 30 to 
50 inches of rainfall or equivalent supplemental full 
irrigation annually. 
 
Establishment 
A firm, weed-free seedbed gives the best results.  
Spring seedings should occur in March to early May.  
Perennial ryegrass may also be seeded in mid-August 
to early September under irrigated conditions.  
Timing for fall seedings should ensure that at least 6 
weeks are allowed for establishment prior to killing 
frosts. Seeding rates will vary with local conditions 
and purpose of planting.  Generally, a rate of 15 
pounds per acre is used if perennial ryegrass is 
seeded alone. Double this rate if seed is broadcast 
planted. Perennial ryegrass is also recommended for 
grass-legume mixtures, but due to a strong animal 
preference toward perennial ryegrass over other 
pasture grasses, it should not be planted with other 
grasses for grazing. Reduce the full rate to the 
percentage of mixture desired when planting with 
legumes.  Because perennial ryegrass has very strong 
seedling vigor, it should be planted at 7 to 8 pounds 
per acre in alternate row pl antings with alfalfa and 
other legumes. When planting in the same row, do 
not exceed 4 pounds per acre of perennial ryegrass in 
the seed mixture with alfalfa and other legumes.  
 
When planting with a drill, the ideal seeding depth is 
¼ inch or less. Do not exceed ½ inch seeding depth. 
Results from a Utah stud y indicate that broadcast 
seeding followed with a roller packer results in very 
good stands. 
 
Well established stands may remain productive for 3 
to 4 years if not adversely affected by cold winters. 
However, in most cases  producers over-seed fields 
with up to 5 pounds of perennial ryegrass seed per 
acre each year in late fall or early spring to maintain 
fully productive stands. 
 
Management  
Perennial ryegrass is generally cut for hay when seed 
is in the soft-dough stage.  Perennial ryegrass

responds well to good management, such as intensive 
rotational grazing and fertilizer applications. 
Perennial ryegrass performs best when used in 
intensively managed pasture. It requires very accurate 
irrigation water management and fertilizer 
management. If either irrigation or fertilility 
requirements are not met, it will immediately cease 
growth.  
 
Perennial ryegrass forage production can be 
improved with split applications of nitrogen. It is 
recommended that fertilizer recommendations be 
based on soil tests. However, rates approximating 45 
pounds per acre of nitrogen following each grazing 
cycle has resulted in excelle nt overall production. If 
only one application is econ omically feasible, then 
apply 150 pounds of nitrogen per acre in the spring. 
 
Perennial ryegrass is most productive and nutritious 
when livestock are turned into well established 
pastures with six to eight inches of growth and 
quickly grazed to three inches. Livestock should then 
be removed to allow plants to regrow. Regrowth 
periods vary from about 14 to 28 days depending on 
the local climate and time of  year. The peak growth 
period is from mid May through June. In the 
Intermountain West, during July and August, when 
temperatures exceed 80
º F, perennial ryegrass 
production normally declines due to high 
temperatures, water stress and long day lengths. With 
proper fertilization and irrigation water management, 
perennial ryegrass will maintain fair growth during 
the heat of the summer. A second peak growth period 
can be expected when temperatures cool in the fall. 
Perennial ryegrass can be allowed to attain twelve 
inches of growth, but should not be allowed to go to 
seed because the plants will not re-grow readily or 
maintain high nutrition and palatability.  
 
The disadvantage of perennial ryegrass in the 
Intermountain West and Rocky Mountains is that it is 
not as winter hardy as other proven irrigated pasture 
grasses (orchardgrass, meadow brome, intermediate 
wheatgrass, pubescent wheatgrass and tall fescue). 
Winter hardiness data regarding perennial ryegrass is 
limited, thus recommendations of released varieties 
to farmers and ranchers are difficult. New Zealand 
varieties of perennial ryegrass tend to produce more 
than meadow brome, in termediate wheatgrass, 
pubescent wheatgrass and mountain brome the first 
growing season. However, in the Intermountain and 
Rocky Mountain regions, stands are commonly lost 
during the winter. In a trial near Shelley in eastern 
Idaho, the Mara variety persisted for more than 5 
years, but it did not producing as much as other 
irrigated pasture grass species. Winter hardiness is  thought to be associated with
 lack of dormancy in the 
fall and stands have also been lost during dry periods 
when adequate irrigation water was not available 
during growth.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Perennial ryegrass contai ns a fungal endophyte, 
Acremonium lolii,  which is linked to the occurrence 
of a neurological disorder in livestock known as 
ryegrass staggers. There have been reports of 
ryegrass staggers in western Oregon and California, 
but not in the Intermountain or Rocky Mountain 
West. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Most forage type perennial ryegrass varieties were 
developed for short-rotation pasture and green-chop. 
There are many releases on the market that were bred 
in either New Zealand or  Holland where most of the 
research for highly productive and nutritious varieties 
has taken place. Perennial ryegrasses are divided into 
diploid and tetraploid varieties. The tetraploid 
varieties tend to be more upright and somewhat better 
forage producers. The diploid varieties tend to be 
more persistent under grazing conditions. The New 
Zealand varieties generally tend to grow earlier in the 
spring and later into the fall. A plot of Zero Nui (a 
New Zealand variety) in the Pocatello, Idaho area and 
pastures near Preston, Idaho winter killed. The 
Holland varieties generally go dormant earlier in the 
fall. Pastures and plots of Holland varieties survived 
well at Pocatello and Preston.  
 
Due to the large number of cultivars currently on the 
market, it is recommended that you consult a seed 
supplier in your area for up-to-date cultivars and 
blends. When requesting seed, ensure that you 
request a forage type perennial ryegrass if forage 
production is your goal. 
 
Perennial ryegrass cross-pollinates freely with annual 
and Italian ryegrass, so many hybrid types of ryegrass 
have developed.  It is difficult to maintain perennial 
ryegrass genetic purity; cons equently, Italian ryegrass 
is marketed as common ryegrass or domestic 
ryegrass, and it is often a mixture of annual and 
perennial species.  There is no certification of this 
seed since pure varietie s of Italian ryegrass are 
almost non-existent.   
There are many varieties of perennial ryegrass 
available for turf application.  Newer turf-type 
varieties are often intentionally infected with an 
endophytic fungus to improve stress-tolerance.

References 
Asay, Kay. 1996. Personal Communication . ARS, 
Utah studies. 
 
Cash, Dennis and Howard Bowman. 1995.  Be 
Cautious With New High Yielding Forage Grasses . 
Western Beef Producer. page 8. 
 
Engle, Scott and Dan Ogle. October 1996.  Perennial 
Ryegrass for Irrigated Pasture in Southern Idaho and 
Northern Utah . USDA – NRCS, Boise, ID. 4 p. 
 
Gould, F.W. and R. B. Shaw. 1983.  Grass 
Systematics . 2d ed. Texas A&M Press, College 
Station. 397pp. 
 
Jensen, Kevin, Howard Horton, Ron Reed and Ralph 
Whitesides. 2001.  Intermountain Planting Guide . 
USDA, ARS and Utah State University. Pages 58- 
59. 
 
Kaye, John. 1995. Modern Forage Systems, Inc. 
booklet. 12 p. 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 
2008.  Grass, Grass-Like, Forb, Legume and Woody 
Species for the Intermountain West.  Natural 
Resources Conservation Servi ce. Boise, Idaho. Idaho 
Technical Note No. 24. 43p. 
 
Peterson, J.S. 2002.  Perennial Ryegrass Plant Fact 
Sheet . USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, LA. 2p.  
 
Shewmaker, G. E. 2005.  Idaho Forage Handbook. 
Third Addition. University of Idaho Bulletin 547. 
99p. 
 
Prepared By 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho 
 
Scott Engle, USDA NRCS Pocatello Field Service 
Center, Pocatello, Idaho 
 
Glenn Shewmaker, University  of Idaho, Twin Falls, 
Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
Idaho 
 
Edited: 042908 jsp; 043008 dgo; 080702 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.