Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIAN TOBACCO 
Lobelia inflata L. 
Plant Symbol = LOIN  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic: The root of this plant was used by the 
Iroquois to treat venereal  diseases, ulcers, and legs 
sores.  The leaves were smashed and applied as a 
poultice to treat an abscess at the side of the neck.  
The plant was used to counteract sickness produced 
by witchcraft.  The Cherokee mashed the roots of 
Indian tobacco and used them as a poultice for body 
aches.  The leaves were rubbed on sores, aches, stiff 
necks, and chapped places.  The Crow used the plant 
in religious ceremonies. 
 
Wildlife : Birds are attracted to  the nectar, such as 
hummingbirds.  Young seedlings provide browsing 
for deer and other grazing animals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Bellflower Family (Campanulaceae).  This 
annual plant is up to 1 m. high with branched, hairy 
stems.  The leaves are sessile or subsessile and 
toothed.  They are ovate-oblong to oblong-obovate.  
The irregular, two-lipped flowers are blue or white, 
6-8 mm.  The lower lip is bearded at the base within.  
The flowers appear in  racemes terminating the 
branches.  The fruiting hypanthium is inflated. 
 ©  Hugh Wilson Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M University 
 
Distribution 
This plant is found in open woods or sometimes in 
gardens as weeds from the West Coast to Minnesota, 
south to Georgia and Mississippi.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seeds : The seeds will germinate 
without cold stratification, but they need light, so sow 
the seeds in a flat with a damp fine grade peat lite 
mix.  Keep the flats moist and under lights or in a 
greenhouse.  They should green up in a few weeks.  
Transplant seedlings in 4-6 weeks into individual 
pots such as 70 cell plug trays, use the same potting 
mix and keep fertilizing.  The seedlings are tiny at 
first, so fertilize them every other week with a liquid 
fertilizer.  After another 4 weeks they can be put out 
in the garden or transplanted into 4 to 6 inch diameter 
pots Plant the seedlings in an outdoor spot that is in 
full sun or very light shade and never allow soil to 
dry out completely.  Space th e plants 8 to 12 inches 
apart.  Add plenty of p eat moss when planting and 
mulch well to keep the soil cool and moist.  Protect 
the plants from deer.  Indian tobacco will usually 
bloom in the first year and seeds should be allowed to 
self-sow.  Young seedlings are heavy feeders and will 
require compost or fertilizer applications during the 
growing season. 
 
Propagation by cuttings : During early spring take 
two node stem cuttings (4-6 inches) before the 
flowers open and remove the lower leaf and half of 
the upper leaf.  Treat the cutting with a chemical, 
place the cuttings in a sand and perlite medium, cover 
lightly, and water.  Planting trays should be watered

and kept moist to aid in root development.  Roots will 
form in 2-3 weeks, but the cuttings need to force a 
good new crown from the lower node to successfully 
over-winter. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected Indian tobacco are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Banks, W.H. 1953.  Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Masters Thesis, University of Tennessee. 
 
Blankinship, J.W. 1905.   Native economic plants of 
Montana.   Montana Agricultural College 
Experimental Station, Bulletin 56, Bozeman, 
Montana. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany.   
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared by and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.