Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LITTLELEAF 
LEADTREE 
Leucaena retusa  Benth. 
Plant Symbol = LERE5 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Knox City, Texas Plant 
Materials Center 
Clarence A. Rechenthin 
Courtesy of USDA NRCS Texas State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
Littleleaf leucaena, goldenba ll leadtree, wahoo tree, 
lemonball 
 
Uses 
Wildlife:  Littleleaf leadtree is very palatable and 
considered a high quality browse plant by many 
herbivores.  White-tailed deer will browse littleleaf 
leadtree leaves and tinder st ems whenever plants are 
available.  Littleleaf leadtree provides good cover for 
game animals, game birds, small non-game birds, and 
small mammals.  Littleleaf leadtree is not considered 
an important honey plant and has minimal wood 
value.  Seeds of littleleaf leadtree are high in protein 
and used as food for wildlife and livestock. 
 
Recreation and beautification:  Planted are commonly 
used as an ornamental in Central and West Texas.  
The yellow flowers and large leaflets make littleleaf  leadtree an attractive ornament
al plant.  Plants maybe 
found at nurseries specializing in native plants.  Its 
exotic looking blossoms, and open grow form make it 
an attractive plant for home landscapes.  Littleleaf 
leadtree plants are well suited for use along highways 
for ornamental purpose becau se of their golden globe 
shaped flowers and drought hardiness. 
 
Ethnobotanic: Some species of  Leucaena seeds used 
for food, and plants for alley cropping.  No reported 
uses for L. retusa. 
 
Livestock:  Littleleaf leadtree leaves and seeds are 
commonly browsed by cattle, sheep and goats.   
 
Restoration: Littleleaf leadtree is considered an 
important species for wildlife and restoring native 
habitat in the hill country of West Texas.  Littleleaf 
leadtree plants establish easily from seed and being a 
legume will fix nitrogen in the soil for other plants to 
use.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  Leguminosae (Fabaceae) Littleleaf leadtree 
is a native warm-season very decorative, single or 
multi-stem small tree.  In an  undisturbed state, plants 
can reach 25 feet in height .  Its bright green, twice-
pinnately compound leaves cast a filtered shade, and 
the bright yellow powder-puff flowers appear from 
April - October.  Large flower flushes occurring after 
rains.  The fruit is a straight, narrow pod 3 to 10 
inches long and ½ inch in width.  Littleleaf leadtree is 
very drought tolerant and can withstand reflected 
heat.  The bark is cinnamon-colored and flaky.  The 
wood is brittle and can break in high winds and ice 
storms.  Plants easily re-sprout when disturbed. 
 
Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Littleleaf Leadtree is found on limestone 
hills and dry rocky slopes in western portions of the 
Edwards Plateau and the Trans-Pecos area.  Plants 
may also be found in New Mexico and Mexico.  It is 
adapted to different soils,  but prefers good drainage.

Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for littleleaf leadtree are 
7 to 9.   
 
Establishment 
Seed of littleleaf lead tree can be collected in late 
summer into fall.  Collect seed pods before they split 
open and drop seeds.  Seed of littleleaf leadtree can 
be planted from late winter (March) to late spring 
(May).  Plant seeds at 1/4 to 3/4 inch deep in areas 
protected from browsing anim als.  Scarification is not 
necessary to improve germination, untreated seed 
will establish easily.  Seed should also be inoculated 
with the correct rhizobial bacteria before planting.  
Fertilizer applications will improve seedling growth. 
Seedlings can successfully be  grown in nursery pots 
and transplanted when needed. 
 
Management 
Established plants require little maintenance. 
Littleleaf leadtree will reseed and re-establish if 
young seedlings are protected  from grazing animals.  
In areas where prescribed  burning is permitted, 
unwanted top growth may be controlled allowing 
plants to re-sprout tender new growth. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Most seed collected for production has been 
accomplished by hand picking from native trees. 
Attempts to mechanically harvest seed have not been 
successful.  Seed production  fields can be established 
by planting littleleaf leadtree plants in a 10 X 10 foot 
block.  Being a legume that fixes nitrogen littleleaf 
leadtree plants only needs  one small application of 
phosphorous applied in the spring each year.  Seeds 
are ready for harvest in late summer.  Harvested 
seeds need to be dried for one to two days and treated 
with some type of insecticide before storage.  Seed 
will remain viable for at least two years if stored in a 
cool dry place. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Yellow Puff’ littleleaf leadtree a cultivar release 
from the USDA-NRCS Knox City Plant Materials 
Center in TX, selected for use as a leguminous shrub 
or small tree for revegetation of critical areas, as a 
wildlife food plant, and as a plant for beautification. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cox, P. W. and P. Leslie. 1988. Texas trees. Corona 
Publ. Co., San Antonio. 374 pp. 
 
Elias, T. S. 1980. The  complete trees of North 
America field guide and natural history. Times 
Mirror Magazine, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Englert, J. M. et al. 1999–. USDA-NRCS Improved 
conservation plant materials released by NRCS and 
cooperators. (NRCS Cons Pl Mat) 
 
Hatch, S. L., K. N. Gandhi, and L. E. Brown. 1991. 
Checklist of the vascular plants of Texas. Texas 
Agric. Exp. Sta. MP-1655 College Station. 158 pp. 
 
Kingsberry, J. M. 1964. Poisonous plants of the 
United States and Canada. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 626 pp. 
 
Native American Ethnobotany Database 
(http://herb.umd.umich.edu, 13 June 2006). 
University of Mich igan - Dearborn. 
 
Native plant database (http://www.wildflower2. 
org/NPIN/Plants/plant. html, 13 June 2006). Lady 
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, Austin. 
 
Nokes, J. 1986. How to grow native plants of Texas 
and the Southwest. Texas Monthly Press, Inc. Austin. 
404 pp 
 
Pellett, F. C. 1976. American Honey Plants, 5th ed. 
Dadant and Sons, Hamilton, Ill. 
 
Simpson, B. J. 1988. A field guide to Texas trees. 
Texas Monthly Press Austin, Texas. 
 
Van Dersal, W. R. 1938. Native woody plants of the 
United States: their erosion-control and wildlife 
values. U.S. Dep. Agric. Misc. Publ. No. 303, 
Washington, D.C. 362 pp. 
 
Vines, R. A. 1960. Trees, shrubs and woody vines of 
the southwest. Univ. of Texas Press, Austin. 1104 pp. 
Native Plant Information Network. 2001.  
 
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
Germplasm Resources Information Network - 
(GRIN) [Online Database]. National Germplasm 
Resources Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. 
URL: http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl (13 March 2006). 
 
USDA, NRCS 2006.  The PLANTS database. 
(
http://plants.usda.gov).   National Plant Data Center,

Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. Accessed: 13 
March 2006. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Morris J Houck 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Knox City, 
Texas 
 Edited: 20jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and mar ital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all pr ograms.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print,  audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service
.