Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SUNDIAL 
Lupinus perennis L. 
Plant Symbol = LUPE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
wild lupine, lupine 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Menomini fed this plant to horses 
to make them spirited and full of fire.  They also 
rubbed the plant on their own hands or other parts of 
the body in order to control horses.  The Cherokee 
made a cold infusion from the plant and used it as a 
wash to check hemorrhage and vomiting. 
 
Wildlife:  Sundial is the only food for the larvae of the 
Karner Blue butterfly  (Lycaeides melissa samuelis). 
Both fire suppression and habitat loss have 
contributed to the decline of the lupine and the 
butterfly.  The Karner Blue is nearly extinct over 
much of its range. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Bean Family (Fabaceae).  This herbaceous 
perennial has erect stems that are 2-6 dm, that are 
thinly pubescent.  The petioles are 2-6 cm.  The 
leaves are palmately compound.  The leaflets are 7-
11, oblanceolate, and are fr om 2-6 cm.  The flowers 
occur in terminal racemes,  arising above the leaves.  
They are numerous, ranging from blue to pink or 
white.  The fruits are pubescent pods that are oblong, 
flattened, and with 2-severa l seeds.  They are 3-5 cm. 
 © Kenneth Sytsma University of Wisconsin @ Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found in dry, open woods and 
clearings from southern Maine to Florida, west to 
Minnesota and Indiana.  The plant grows in Pine 
Barrens and sandy prairies in the east. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seeds:  This lupine grows in areas that 
have been burned.  Scarify the seed coat of each seed 
with sandpaper to make a gentle scratch.  The seeds 
can then be soaked overnight in tepid water.  Treat 
the seeds with a rhizobium inoculant before sowing 
them.  Plant the seeds into cells or flats in a 
greenhouse and cover them w ith a quarter inch of soil 
over the top.  Lupines succumb to root rot very easily 
in pots, so it is best to transplant them to the garden 
when they have two to three leaves.  Seeds can also 
be cleaned and stored dry at 40° F for several months 
and then planted directly in the garden in the 
following spring (after scarification).  Seed can be 
sown with a yard roller or by walking the site.  Plant 
in full sun with good air circulation, in loose, well-
drained soil.  The plants can tolerate poor, sandy, or 
gravely soil, preferably acid.   If no lupines have been 
present for many years on the site, wet the seeds and 
roll them in an inoculant for nitrogen-fixing bacteria 
before planting.  They should germinate in about one 
week.  The roots are stro ng and deep, making the 
moving of older established plants difficult.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
LUPE3 is available through native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Banks, W.H. 1953.  Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians.   Masters Thesis.  University of Tennessee. 
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers of the United States and Canada.   
Houghton Mifflin Co., New York, New York. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses--a 400 year history.   Herald 
Publishing, Sylva, North Carolina. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1923.   Ethnobotany of the Menomini . 
Version: 000503.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Milwaukee  4:1(8-175). 
 
USDA, NRCS 2006.   The PLANTS database.  
<plants.usda.gov>.  National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 17jan01 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all  prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.