Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BITTER ROOT 
Lewisia rediviva Pursh  
Plant Symbol = LERE7 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The roots were harvested with a 
digging stick and eaten traditionally by the Washoe, 
Owens Valley Paiute, Northern Paiute, Western 
Shoshone, Gosiute, Northern Shoshone, Eastern 
Shoshone, Utah Southern Paiute, Northern Ute, and 
Flathead.  The roots were al so an important food for 
the interior peoples of British Columbia, including 
the Upper Nlaka'pamux, southern Shuswap, 
Okanagan-Colville, and southern Kootenay.  Lower 
Nlaka'pamux, Lillooet, northern Shuswap and 
northern Kootenay peoples obtained them through 
trade.  Families in some cultural groups still gather 
the roots today.  The roots are prepared for eating by 
removing the bark and boiling, steaming, or pit-
roasting them and they are eaten fresh or dried.  
Because digging the roots destroys the entire plant, 
care should be taken to propagate and harvest the 
plants in ways to maintain populations. 
 
Wildlife : The gray-crowned rosy finch ( Leucosticte 
tephrocotis ) feeds on the seeds of  Lewisia spp. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Purslane Family (Portulacaceae).  The 
handsome, flowers range from white to pink with 10-
19 petals and multiple stamens (40-47) and 6-8 
sepals.  The petals are 2-2.5 cm. long.  Each plant has 
many stems, 1-3 cm. long, each with a solitary 
flower.  The flowers are up to 4 cm across and they 
close at night and reopen w ith the morning sun.  The 
inflorescence disjoints readily at the middle of the 
stem on drying.  The caudex is short.  The seed vessel 
is an ellipsoid capsule, 5-6 mm. long that encloses 
dark, shiny seeds.  The roots are fleshy and radiating.  
The many succulent, linear leaves form a rosette and 
usually wither by flowering time. 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  St. Mary’sCollege @ CalPhoto 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This perennial herbaceous plant is found at a 
wide elevational range from 60 to 3000 m.  It grows 
in open woodlands and sagebrush shrublands with 
pine, oak or juniper in many soil types such as shale, 
sand, clay, granite, serpentine,  or talus.  It is found in 
the San Jacinto Mountains an d the Transverse Ranges 
in southern California, the Coast Ranges of 
California from Mt. Pinos to Mt. Diablo and Lake 
County, the Klamath Mountains, in the eastern 
Cascade Ranges of Oregon and Washington, north to 
British Columbia and east to Montana, Colorado and 
Arizona. 
 
Establishment 
This is a difficult plant to grow.  This plant should 
not be started from the roots, as digging them in the 
wilds kills the plant.  Start the plant from seed in 
early October.  After collecting or buying the seeds, 
place them in a paper bag until planting time.  Place 
the seed on top of the soil in 4 to 6-inch pots.  
Sprinkle a light layer of soil over the seeds and place 
one-quarter inch gravel on top of the soil to hold the 
seeds in place.  Give the pots no water.  Let the rains 
water the pots.  Place the containers outside in full 
sun and protect them from wildlife.  The seeds will 
germinate in late winter or early spring.

In May when the leaves turn yellow, stop watering 
and put the pots in the hottest spot you have until fall 
when the rains come.  Bitter root requires hot, dry 
summer baking.  Repeat this cycle over two years.  
During the summer or fall of the third year, when the 
plants are dormant, out-plant the plants in full sun 
and in well-drained soil.  Crown the plants at the soil 
surface.  Plant each plant 4-6 inches apart.  Mark the 
spot where you plant bitter root and give the plants 
no water.  Let the rains come.  Protect the plants from 
deer and other wildlife. 
 
Management 
Weed periodically around th e plants, as they need full 
sun. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
LERE7 is available at selected native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dempster, L.T. 1993.   Lewisia.  pp. 900-903, IN:  The 
Jepson manual: Higher plants of California .  J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Elliott, R. 1978.   Lewisias.  Alpine Garden Society. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.    Subsistence.  pp. 64-97 IN 
Handbook of North American Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin .  Warren L. D'azevedo [Ed.]. Smithsonian 
Institution.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist 1973.  Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest: An illustrated manual .  University 
of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples:  
Nutrition, botany and use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.   
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.