Plant Guide
 
BARNEBY RIDGE-
CRESS  
Lepidium barnebyanum  Reveal 
Plant Symbol =  LEBA 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
Barneby  ridge-cress  ( Lepidium barnebyanum ). Photo by Ben 
Franklin, Courtesy of Utah DNR  
Alternate Names 
Lepidium  montanum  ssp.  demissum  Hitchcock  
Barneby pepper cress  
Ridgecress  
 
Uses  
There are no known human uses of Barneby ridge -
cress . 
Status  
Barneby ridge -cress  was listed as an endangered 
species by the US DI Fish and Wildlife Service in 
1990 (USDI -FWS, 1990).  It is restricted to a single 
population in Duchesne County, Utah  comprised of 
three disjunct stands . It is considered a species with a 
high degree of threa t and a low recovery potential for 
which there are conflicts with economic activities 
(USDI -FWS, 1993).  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
 
   
Description
 
General : Mustard  family ( Brassicaceae).  Barneby 
ridge -cress is a pulvinate -caespitose (mound forming) 
perennial forb arising from a thickened branched   
wo ody taproot. The plants grow 7 to 12 cm ( 3 to 5 in) 
tall and forms clumps or cushions up to 20 cm (8 in) 
across.  The stems are smooth or minutely hairy. The 
leaves are narrow, 1 to 6.5 cm ( 0.4 to 2.5 in) long and 
1 to 3 mm ( 0.04 to 0.12 in) wide. The flowe rs are 
small, four -petaled, with white petals 3.5 to 4 mm 
(0.14 to 0.16 in) long. The fruit is a silicle (an oval 
pod), 3 to 6 mm ( 0.12 to 0.24 in) long and 3 to 4 mm 
( 0.12 0.16 in) wide (Welsh et al., 2003).  
 
Distribution :    
Barneby ridge -cress is endemic  to Indian Canyon 
Drainage in Duchesne County, Utah  approximately 5 
km (3 mi) south of Starvation Reservoir . The single 
population contains approximately 5,000 individuals 
and covers nearly 500 acres (CPC, 2011).  All known 
stands exist on the Ouray Reserva tion of the Ute 
Indian Tribe (USDI- FWS, 1993). 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Barneby ridge -cress grows on a series of marly shale 
barrens on three ridgelines on either side of Indian 
Creek. The habitat for Barneby ridge- cress occurs in 
pockets in pinyon -juniper woodlands.  Barneby ridge-
cress grows in close association with other mound 
forming species including  stemless woolybase 
( Hymenoxys acaulis ), plateau Townsendia 
( Townsendi a mensana), Hooker’s sandwort 
( Arenaria  hookeri ), and low feverfew ( Parthenium 
ligulatum ). 
 
Adaptation  
Barneby ridge -cress is endemic to m arly shale 
barrens derived from the Uinta and Green River 
Formations  in a 10 to 14 inch precipitation area.  
These shale barrens form pockets or islands of 
suitable habitat surrounded by unsuitable soils 
(USDI -FWS, 1993).  
 
Management  
Threats to Barneby ridge -cress include off -road  
vehicle damage and oil and gas development.  The 
entire population is currently loc ated in an 
established oil and gas field (USDI -FWS, 1993). 
Short term management objectives include