Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TANOAK 
Lithocarpus densiflorus (Hook. 
& Arn.) Rehd.  
Plant Symbol = LIDE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Tan oak, tan bark oak 
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic :  Historically, acorns were the most 
important staple plant food for Native American 
groups in the coastal ranges of California.  Native 
Californians harvested, and still harvest today, 
several species of acorns including tanoak, coast live 
oak ( Quercus agrifolia ), canyon oak (Q. 
chrysolepsis ), black oak ( Q. kellogii), and valley oak 
( Q. lobata ).  California tribes are estimated to have 
harvested from 500 to 2000 pounds of acorns per 
family per year (Hoover 1977).  A single tanoak tree 
can produce over 200 pounds of acorns in a good 
year and produces at least  a partial crop every year 
(Baumhoff 1963). 
 
Tanoak acorns were the  preferred acorns for the 
Salinan, Costanoan, Pomo, Yurok, Hoopa, and other 
groups residing within the trees range (Baumhoff 
1963; Merriam 1967; Heizer & Elsasser 1980).   The 
ripe acorns are harvested in the fall.  They were 
spread out in the sun to dry and then stored in baskets 
or storage bins.   Many tribes constructed outdoor  storage bins, either above or below ground, to protect 
the dried acorns from robbing squirrels and 
chipmunks.  The Salinan built outdoor acorn 
granaries on the ground next to their homes (Mason 
1912).  The granaries were constructed in a basket-
like fashion from white willow twigs that were then 
covered with grass.  The Pomo used tanoak leaves to 
line aboveground bins that they constructed from 
redwood (
Sequoia sempervirens ) boughs (Hoover 
1977).  The Costanoan and Chumash stored acorns in 
baskets made from inte rlaced white willow twigs 
(Brusa  1975).  The baskets were about 1 m in 
diameter at the bottom and sloped up gradually 
inward into a cone about 0.5 m with a 0.5 m opening.   
Hollow tree trunks also se rved as storage bins 
(Hoover 1971). 
© Charles Webber  
California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
The acorns were pounded into flour as needed.  
Stone, bedrock, and wooden mortars were used to 
crush the acorns into a meal.  Sometimes the acorns 
were soaked overnight to help crack open the shells.  
After soaking, the acorns  were removed from the 
shells and spread out onto open-work baskets to dry.  
The Salinan cracked open  the acorns individually 
using a small, hard stone hammer and then set them 
out in the sun to dry (Mason 1912).  The dried acorns 
were then placed into a stone, bedrock, or wooden 
mortar and pulverized into flour using a long pestle.  
Some tribes used a hopp er mortar basket (a 
bottomless basket either glued with tar to the stone 
mortar or held down with the legs) to keep the 
pounded flour from bouncing up out of the mortar.  
Mason (1912) notes observations of remnant pitch or 
asphaltum circles surrounding mortar depressions 
within the Salinan area.   After pounding, acorn flour 
must be leached to remove  the tannic acid.  There are 
various methods for completing this step, but they all 
include pouring water thro ugh the meal repeatedly 
until all traces of the bitter tannins are washed away.  
The Salinan placed the fine ly pounded flour into a 
specially made leaching basket.  The basket was 
woven closely enough to hold the meal but to allow 
the leaching water to percolate through (Mason 
1912). 
 
The majority of the California tribes, including the 
Costanoan, Yokuts and Luiseño peoples, leached 
acorn flour by using carefully constructed basins of 
clean sand near a stream or river.  The flour was 
leached many times by pouring the water over a 
bundle of leaves to keep the water from splashing 
sand into the meal.  Other tribes made leaching

frames from branches of incense cedar.  The cedar 
leaves kept the meal from washing away while 
imparting a spicy flavor to the meal (Murphey 1959).  
Another leaching method was to bury the whole 
acorns in the bed of a running stream and leaving 
them for as long as a year (Merriam 1967).  
 
The finely pulverized acorn meal was mixed with 
water and cooked in a special watertight cooking 
basket by placing hot, round stones that had been 
heated in the fire into the basket.  The acorn mixture 
was stirred constantly to keep the rocks rolling 
around and prevent them from burning the basket.  
The meal was cooked in this manner to make 
porridge and also a thick soup called atole.  The 
cooked mixture could be used to make pancakes and 
breads by pouring it onto a hot, flat rock that served 
as a griddle.   The Salinan baked acorn bread in an 
earth-oven and made acorn cakes about 8cm in 
diameter by wrapping them between two layers of 
grass and cooking them overnight (Mason 1912). The 
Pomo used to wrap loaves of acorn bread dough in 
leaves and place it in the coals of a fire to cook 
(Goodrich et al. 1990).  The Yurok made a dry form 
of acorn bread, baked on hot stones, which kept for a 
month or more (Merriam 1967). 
 
Tanbark acorns were also used for medicinal 
purposes such as treating coughs.  A single acorn was 
popped into the mouth an d sucked on like a cough 
drop.  The tannins are said to help sooth the throat.  
Some California tribes made a type of penicillin from 
acorn meal (Murphey 1959).  Moist meal was 
wrapped and allowed to sit until it developed a moldy 
film.  Then the film was peeled off into a roll, which 
was stored in a damp place until needed.  Pieces of 
the mold were placed upon boils and other sores to 
draw out inflammation.  The Coastanoan made an 
infusion from the bark that they used as a medicinal 
wash for sores on the face and as a mouthwash to 
treat loosened teeth and toothaches (Bocek 1984).   
 
Whole tanbark acorns with their caps can be strung 
together to make a musical  instrument that is played 
by twirling it in a special way.   
 
The Wintu made candy from the gum-like sap that 
they gathered in the fall (Dubois 1935).  The Wintu 
and other tribes used the soot from burnt oak galls to 
make tattoos (Knudtson 1988).   
 
Wildlife :  Tanoaks are important for cover and are 
used for resting, hiding, and nesting by many wildlife 
species (McMurray 1989).  The trees provide cover 
for northern flying squirrels ( Glaucomys sabrinus), 
dusky-footed woodrats ( Neotoma fuscipes), arboreal  salamanders (
Aneides lugubris ), and black 
salamanders ( Aneides flavipunctatus ).  House wrens 
( Troglodytes aedon),  northern flickers (Colaptes 
auratus ), downy woodpeckers ( Picoides pubescens), 
red-breasted nuthatches ( Sitta Canadensis), white-
breasted nuthatches ( Sitta carolinensis), and brown 
creepers ( Certhia Americana ) nest in cavities in 
tanoak trees.   
 
Mule deer ( Odocoileus hemionus ) graze on tanoak 
leaves and acorns.  Tanoak acorns are a source of 
food for black bears ( Ursus americanus), chipmunks 
( Eutamias spp. ), California ground squirrels 
( Spermophilus beechyi ), Douglas squirrels 
( Tamiasciurus douglasi ), pocket gophers (Thomomys 
bottae ) and black-tailed deer ( Odocileus hemionus).   
The acorns were once relished by grizzly bears 
( Ursus arctos ), the state emblem of California, which 
have been extinct in this state since 1924 (Storer & 
Usinger 1963).  Birds that rely on tanoak acorns as a 
source of food include the Steller’s jays ( Cyannocita 
stelleri), band-tailed pigeons ( Columba fasciata), 
varied thrushes ( Ixoreus naevius) and acorn 
woodpeckers ( Melanerpes formicivorus ).   
 
Livestock:  Ground acorns are sometimes added to 
chicken feed.  Tanoak is considered of low forage 
value for livestock because of its low palatability due 
to tannin content.   When cattle and other livestock 
consume tanoak, it is an indication of overgrazing, as 
the animals will generally only resort to this food 
source after higher quality forage has been consumed 
(McMurray 1989). 
 
Erosion control :  Tanoaks may be used for erosion 
control on sites that experience frequent disturbance.  
The trees help to stabilize  soils as they have an 
extensive root system with a deep taproot and they 
quickly reestablish after disturbance through 
sprouting from a lignotuber, which is an underground 
regenerative organ  (McMurray 1989).   
 
Other :  Tanoak wood is of high quality, being of 
good strength and hardness with a fine grain, 
however the wood is not widely used because of 
limited supply.  Tanoak wood has been used for a 
variety of purposes including flooring, paneling, 
decking, plywood, garden tools, baseball bats, and 
firewood.  The bark has high tannin content and was 
once used extensively by industry in California for 
curing leather.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s

current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Oak family (Fagaceae).  Tanoak is an 
evergreen hardwood tree or shrub native to the west 
coast ranges from Southern Oregon to Southern 
California.  The plants can  reach 20 to 45 meters in 
height with the stems of large trees reaching up to 1 
meter in diameter.  The form and size of tanoak is 
variable depending on the environment.  Taller forms 
generally occur in shady forests and shorter forms in 
open areas where sunlight is more abundant.  
However, the trees can have a shrub-like form with 
multiple stems when access to light is prevented, 
such as when growing in a dense forest understory.  
Mature trees growing in a more open forest have a 
single, short trunk with horizontal branches.   
 
The thick, leathery evergr een leaves are oblong in 
shape with pointed tips (4 to 10 cm long).   The 
leaves have noticeable parallel side veins on the 
undersides that are evenly spaced and run from the 
central vein of the leaf ending in a pointy tooth at the 
leaf margin.  New leaves are covered with reddish-
brown hairs, which turns whitish as they mature.  
Older leaves are a smooth green on top with lightly 
pubescent gray-green below.  The evergreen leaves 
remain on the tree about 3 to 4 years before they are 
shed. The light reddish-brown bark develops deep 
fissures as the trees age.     Large clusters of tiny 
white flowers bloom in the summer months in the 
leaf axils of the current s easons growth.   The flowers 
are erect catkins and have an odor that is not pleasant.  
The acorns are from 2.5 to 5 cm long with a diameter 
of about 1.5 to 1.8 cm and grow singly or in cluster.   
Tanoak acorns have hairy,  rather than scaly caps of 
the true oak.  Acorns ripen in the fall of the second 
season.   
 
Distribution :  Tanoak occurs on fertile mountain 
slopes and ridges below 1200 meters in the Coast 
Ranges from the Santa Inez Mountains in Southern 
California, to the Cascade Ranges in Southwestern 
Oregon.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat:  The tree form is a major part of the coastal 
redwood forest, Douglas fir forest, and mixed 
evergreen forest while the shrub form is a component 
of chaparral communities.    
 
Adaptation 
Tanoak is adapted to cool coastal areas with mild 
temperatures and little summer rainfall.  The plants  do not do well in interior valleys and areas of 
extreme temperatures.  Tanoaks grow best in deep, 
fertile soils but are also known to grow well on stony 
or shallow soils.  The trees prefer well-drained loam 
to gravelly soils. 
 
Establishment 
The Kashaya Pomo name for tanoak means 
“beautiful tree” (Goodrich et 
al. 1990).  Tanoak is an 
attractive tree that is shade tolerant.   
 
Tanoak can be easily propagated by seed.  Use only 
fresh seeds, as the seeds do not retain viablity.  The 
seeds of tanoak requir e no pretreatment and 
germinate quickly.  Tanoak ac orns germinate faster if 
they are planted with their  point facing upward in the 
soil (McMurray 1989).   The seeds may be directly 
sown into the ground or planted into flats or pots 
using a light soil mixture or peat moss.  If flats are 
used it is necessary to tran sfer the seeds into pots or 
the ground once they have germinated.   Pots should 
be of the kind that are long  and deep to allow for the 
taproot to develop.  Set the seeds or seedlings into a 
carefully chosen spot keep ing in mind that they can 
be long lived, with an average age of about 180 years 
and a maximum to 400 years.  Seedlings do best in a 
moist area with partial shade.   Do not plant in areas 
with frequent irrigation.  Give seedlings an 
occasional deep watering until established.  
 
Management 
Tanoak trees need to be car efully pruned while young 
in order to develop into a nicely shaped, dense, well-
branched tree.  The trees should be placed in a spot 
where they will be protected from extreme 
temperatures and hot winds, which may burn the 
leaves during hot, dry weather.  Established trees 
should not be watered unless there are severe drought 
conditions.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Tanoak is among the several species in northern and 
central California that have  been affected by the 
Phytophthora  fungus, in what is called “sudden oak 
death syndrome.”  The disease is easily spread by 
beetles attracted to the sap  of the infected trees.  
Contact with infected roots and wood, and infected 
soil may be transported on tools, tires or shoes 
(Brenzel 2001).   To keep trees healthy, apply a thick 
layer of mulch to the root zone area beneath the 
crown and do not garden or disturb this area in any 
way.  Also avoid frequent irrigation, prune only from 
June to September (when the fungus and insects are 
less active), and fertilize if  the tree shows signs of 
deficiency (Švihra et al. 2001).  Prunings and 
firewood from infected trees should be enclosed in

heavy, clear plastic for 6 months in order to trap and 
kill beetles that may emerge and infect nearby living 
trees (Brenzel  2001).  Other pests include aphids, 
greedy scale, mealybug, oak scale and white fly.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two varieties of   Lithocarpus densiflorus:  
var. echinoides  is a shrub that  is a component of 
chaparral communities, and var.  densiflora is a tree 
form which grows in  mixed coastal evergreen forest 
communities.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Baumhoff, M.A. 1963.  Ecological determinants of 
Aboriginal California populations.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California.  235 pp.  
 
Bocek, B.R.  1984.  Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.    
 
Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.   Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, CA.  768 pp. 
Brusa, B.W.  1975.   The Salinan Indians and their 
neighbors.   Naturegraph Publishers, Inc., Happy 
Camp, California.  95 pp. 
 
Dubois, C. 1935.   Wintu ethnography.  University of 
California Publications in American Archeology and 
Ethnology.  Vol. 36, No. 1.   
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Heizer, R.F. & A.B. Elsasser 1980.   The natural 
world of the California Indians .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California.  271 pp.   
 
Hoover, R.L. 1971.   Food plants of the California 
Indians .  Pacific Discovery Vol. 24, No. 3.  Pp.11-17. 
 
Hoover, R.L. 1977.   California Indian uses of native 
plants.   In: D. R. Walters, M. McLeod, A.G. Meyer, 
D.Rible, R O. Baker, & L. Farwell.   Native plants:  A 
viable option.   Special Publication No. 3, California  Native Plant Society, Berkeley, California.  Pp.128-
162.  
 
Knudtsen, P.M. 1988.  
The Wintu Indians of 
California.   Naturegraph Publishers, Inc. Happy 
Camp, California.  92 pp.   
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
California.  248 pp.   
 
Lenz, L.W. 1956.   Native plants for California 
gardens.   Abbey Garden Press, Pasadena, California.  
166 pp.    
 
Merriam, C.H. 1967.   Ethnological notes on 
California Indian Tribes.   Compiled & Edited by 
R.F. Heizer.  Reports of the University of California 
Archaeological Survey, No. 68, Parts II & III.  Pp 
167-448.   
 
McMurrray, N.E. 1989.   Lithocarpus densiflora. In:   
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory  2001, May.    Fire Effects Information 
System, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [20 October 
2001]. 
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Mendocino County Historical Society, Fort Bragg, 
California.   
81 pp. 
 
Storer, T.I. & R.L. Usinger 1968.   Sierra Nevada 
Natural History .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley & Los Angeles, California.  374 pp.   
 
Švihram P., J.K. Palkovsky, & A. J. Storer 2001.  
Recommendations for the management of oaks in 
areas affected by sudden oak death.   University of 
California Cooperative Extension.  2001.   Marin 
County Sudden Oak Death Publications,  [Online].  
Available: 
http://cemarin.ucdavis.edu/publications.html.  
[15December 2001].   
 
Webber, C. 1998.   Lithocarpus densiflora .  California 
Academy of Sciences.  Digital Library Project, 
University of California, Berkeley, [Online]. 
Available:  
http://www.calflora.org.  [18November 
2001].

Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California  
 Edited: 29jan02 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.