Plant Guide
SLICKSPOT 
PEPPERGRASS   
Lepidium papilliferum (L.F. 
Hend.)  A. Nelson & J.F. Macbr.   
Plant Symbol = LEPA17  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
  
Sheri Hagwood, USDI Bureau of Land Management   
 
Alternate Names  
Idaho pepperweed.  
Lepidium montanum  Nutt. Var . papilliferum  (L.F. Hend.) 
C.L. Hitchc.   
Uses  
Slickspot  peppergrass is a small, flowering plant in the 
mustard family which grows in unique microsites known 
as slick spots within the semiarid sagebrush -steppe of the 
Snake River Plain of southwestern Idaho.  No large 
ungulates, either domestic or wild use the p lant (USDI, 
2009).  This species has no known agricultural, economic, 
or other human uses at this time.  This species may have 
scientific significance due to its evolutionary isolation 
which is an important subject in conservation biology 
research.   
 
Statu s  
The U.S . Fish and Wildlife Service determined that 
slickspot peppergrass is a threatened species under the 
Endangered Species Act of 1973.  The ruling beca me 
effective December 7, 2009. In 2011the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service proposed to designate app roximately 58,000 acres of critical habitat for slickspot peppergrass 
in Ada, Elmore, Payette, and Owyhee Counties in Idaho
 
(USDI, 2011) . In 2012 the decision was reversed by the 
United States District Court of Idaho (U.S. District Court 
of Idaho, 2012).  
   
Description   
General : Slickspot  peppergrass is an intricately branched, 
tap -rooted plant, averaging 2 to 8 inches tall, but 
occasionally reaching up to 16 inches in height.  Leaves 
and stems are covered with fine, soft hairs, and the leaves 
are divided into linear segments.  Flowers are  numerous, 
0.1 inches in diameter, white, and have four petals.  Fruits 
(siliques) are 0.1 inch across, round in outline, flattened 
and two -seeded (Moseley, 1994).  Plants can be annual or 
biennial.  The annual form reproduces by flowering and 
setting seed  in its first year, and dies within one growing 
season.  The biennial form initiates growth in the first 
year as a vegetative rosette and flowers and sets seed the 
second year (Meyer, 2005). A third, but uncommon 
flowering pattern involves two episodes of reproduction, 
one late in the first year and one in the second year 
(White, 2009).   
   
Distribution : Slickspot peppergrass is e ndemic to Idaho’s 
Snake River Plains and adjacent foothills. The species 
occupies an area  of approximately 90 x 256 miles  with a 
d isjunct population on the  Owyhee Plateau. An early 
record of slickspot peppergrass in Bannock County, Idah o 
( Atwood and DeBolt , 2000) appears to have been in error 
(De Bolt, pers. c omm., 2012).  For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for th is species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
   
Habitat : Slickspot peppergrass is specialized to occupy a 
specific microhabitat within the sagebrush steppe 
vegetation of the Snake River Plains of southwestern 
Idaho.  This specific microhabitat is referred to as “sli ck 
spots” which are small -scale sites of water accumulation 
in the gently undulating landscape.  Dominant perennial 
species of the sagebrush steppe are usually excluded from 
slick spots, presumably because of the their inability to 
tolerate winter flooding  even though the climatic regime 
of this region is characterized by low and variable winter 
and spring precipitation and dry summers with a mean 
annual precipitation under 10 inches (Meyer, 2005).   
   
Slick spots are visually distinct small- scale (mostly 
be tween 10 to 20 square feet) depressions in the soil that 
collect water.  These sparsely vegetated microsites are 
created by unusual edaphic conditions.  Drainage swales 
commonly bisect the landscape and often contain the slick 
spots with ponded water.  Sli ck spot soils are silt to clay

in texture and mostly devoid of vegetation.  Below the 
surface layer is a vesicular layer (defined as a structure 
probably caused by capillary pressure within air-filled 
voids surrounded by water) that is partially impermeabl e 
to water infiltration and can cause water ponding.  The 
soil profile below the vesicular layer is dominated by a 
clay layer.  Chemical properties indicate that soils are 
sodic and/or saline (high electrical conductivity, EC), 
have very low levels of C and N, and P and K levels are 
variable.  The compositions of humic acids within slick 
spots fall within the range of values commonly reported 
for other soils (Palazzo 2008).  
   
Slick spots have a common visual appearance.  The first 
visual cue is the smooth pan -like surface.  Typically, the 
slick spot follows the general slope of prevailing 
landforms with a slight leveling or break on steeper 
slopes.  On mostly level surfaces, slick spots are very 
shallow but rarely are closed depressions.  They 
sometimes inc lude smaller areas where remnants of thin 
soil -algal crusts indicate surface ponding of water (Fisher, 
1996).   
 
Slick spots contain no perennial grasses or shrubs.  Other 
than slickspot peppergrass, a wide variety of moss and 
lichen species cover 10 to 90  percent of the surface.  
Weedy invasions of cheatgrass, Bromus tectorum  and burr 
buttercup  Ceratocephala  falcata (R anunculus 
testiculatus ) rooted in surface cracks and in surface crusts 
are common (Fisher, 1996).   
 
Slickspot.  Photo by Dana Quinney, Idaho  Army National Guard.  
 
Adaptation   
Slickspot peppergrass is found almost exclusively in the 
slick spots of southwestern Idaho. It has been infrequently 
documented to occur on disturbed soils along graded dirt 
roads and badger mounds but these observations  are rare.  
In adapting to the environment of the lower Snake River 
Plains, slickspot peppergrass has undergone modifications 
in its adaptive strategy relative to a closely related and 
possible ancestor Lepidium montanum , a widely 
distributed species (bien nial to perennial growth form) 
that is found in a variety of open habitats in arid to 
semiarid regions of the southern Intermountain area.  The  most obvious adaptation is the shift from biennial to 
summer annual.  The dry summers in southwest Idaho 
have ap
parently applied strong selection pressure to the 
annual habit.  Even in years when biennial forms are 
successful, their contribution to seed production may be 
small  (Meyer, 2005).  A third, but uncommon flowering 
pattern which involves two episodes of rep roduction, one 
late in the first year and one in the second year is also an 
adaptive strategy to maintain gene flow within the species 
(White 2000).  Another major adaptive feature is the 
evolution of seed dormancy that permits seeds to persist 
in the seed  bank (Meyer, 2005).   
   
Establishment   
Slickspot peppergrass reproduces by seed.  Seed  
germinates in the spring.  Annual types are single -
stemmed with few flowers and seeds.  Biennial types 
overwinter as rosettes, blooming and setting seed the 
following spring or summer.  The biennial types have 
multiple stems with hundreds of flowers and se eds.  .  
Flowering usually takes place in late April and May, fruit 
set occurs in June and seed is ripe in late June to early 
July.  Based on a 4 year demography study, survivor ship 
of the annual form was demonstrated to be higher than 
survivorship of bie nnial forms and the number of plants 
can vary widely from year to year depending on seasonal 
precipitation patterns (Meyer, 2005).   
   
Laboratory seed germination studies with various 
combinations of temperatures, moist chilling, and 
gibberlic acid treatmen ts resulted in low germination 
percentages.  Highest laboratory germination percentages 
(10 %) are obtained with 6 weeks of dry after -ripening at 
50º C followed by 8 weeks of moist chilling.  Tetrazolium 
based  viability studies in combination with seed ban k 
retrieval studies consistently showed seed viability to be 
very high (95 %+) (Meyer, 2005).  Seed located near the 
soil surface show higher rates of germination and viability 
and the greatest seedling emergence rate.  Deep burial of 
seed (greater than 5. 5 inches) may preserve them beyond 
the 12 year period of viability (USDI 2009).   
   
Slickspot peppergrass relies primarily on cross pollination 
for successful seed production (Robertson, 2004).  
Through hand pollination experiments, it was determined 
that i ndividual plants receiving pollen from distant 
sources had significantly higher percent fruit set than 
those relying on pollen from neighboring plants.  Self 
pollinated plants produced little or no fruit.  
   
Twenty five insect families from 5 orders have b een 
observed and collected from slickspot peppergrass at 2 
study sites in southwestern Idaho.  The diversity of insects 
encountered on flowers differed between the study sites.  
The insects most likely responsible for pollinating 
slickspot peppergrass incl ude members of the Apidae, 
Colletidae and Halitidae families of the Hymenoptera 
order (bees, ants, and wasps) (Robertson 2003).

Management  
Conservation management plans have been implemented 
to address the need to: maintain and enhance habitat; 
reduce intensity, frequency, and size of natural - and 
human -caused wildfires; minimize loss of habitat 
associated with wildfire -suppression activities ; reduce the 
potential for invasion of nonnative plant species from 
wildfire; minimize the loss of habitat associated with 
rehabilitation and restoration techniques; minimize the 
establishment of invasive non -native species; minimize 
the degradation or los s of habitat from off road vehicle 
use; mitigate the negative effects of military training and 
other associated activities; and minimize the impact of 
ground disturbances caused by livestock trampling during 
periods when soils are saturated (USDI, 2009).   
   
Pests and Potential Problems  
The most abundant insect herbivore of slickspot 
peppergrass is a chrysomelid beetle, Phyllotreta  sp. which 
chews holes in the petals of the flower.  This herbivory 
reduces the effectiveness of insect pollination, but does 
no t physically inhibit pollination or seed production 
(Leavitt, 2006).  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service does 
not consider herbivory by the chrysomelid beetle to be a 
significant threat at this time (USDI, 2009).   
   
The Owyhee harvester ant was recently id entified as a 
potentially important seed predator of slickspot 
peppergrass but there is no information indicating what 
the actual magnitude or severity of this threat may be 
(USDI, 2009).   
   
Environmental Concerns   
The U.S Fish and Wildlife Service determi ned that 
slickspot peppergrass is a threatened species under the 
Endangered Species Act of 1973.  The ruling became 
effective December 7, 2009.  The primary threat to 
slickspot peppergrass is the present or threatened 
destruction, modification, or curtailm ent of its habitat and 
range due to the increased frequency and extent of 
wildfires under a fire regime modified and exacerbated by 
the spread of invasive plants, particularly nonnative 
annual grasses such as cheatgrass.  Other threats to 
slickspot pepperg rass include human development, 
potential seed predation by harvester ants, and habitat 
fragmentation and isolation of small populations (USDI 
2009).   
   
Seeds and Plant Production   
No commercial or restoration known.   
   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Ma terials (and area 
of origin)   
None   
   
References   
Atwood, N.D. and A. DeBolt. 2000. Field Guide to the 
Special Status Plants of the Bureau of Land  Management Lower Snake River District. USDA
-
BLM. 12 p.  
DeBolt, A. 2012. Boise, Idaho: Idaho Botanical Garden.  
Natural Communities Specialist.  
Fisher, H., Eslick, L., Seyfr ied, M. 1996.  Edaphic factors 
that characterize the Distribution of Lepidium 
papilliferum .  Technical Bulletin No. 96 -6 Idaho 
Bureau of Land Management. 23 p.   
Meyer, S.E., Quinney, D , J., Weaver, J. 2005.  A Life 
History Study of the Snake River Plains Endemic 
Lepidium papilliferum  (Brassicaceae). Western North 
American Naturalist 65 (1). p. 11 -23.   
Leavitt. H., Robertson, I.C. 2006.  Petal herbivory by  chrysomelid beetles ( Phyllotreta sp.) is detrimental to 
pollination and seed production in  Lepidium 
papilliferum  (Brassicaceae).  Ecological Entomology 
31. p. 657- 660.  
Moseley, R.K. 1994.  Report on the conservation status of  Lepidium papilliferum .  Idaho Department of Fish 
and Game, Conservatio n Data Center.  
USDI -Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants; designation of critical 
habitat for Lepidium papilliferum (Slickspot 
peppergrass). Federal Register. 76(207): 66250-
66255.  
Palazzo, A. J., Clap, E.C., Sene si, N., Hayes, M.H., Cary, 
T.J., Mayo, J., Bas hore, T.L. 2008. Isolation and 
Characterization of Humic Acids in Idaho Slickspot 
Soils.  Soil Science V.2008 June no. 6. p. 375- 386.  
Robertson. I.C., Kle mash. D. 2003. Insect -mediated 
pollination in slickspot  peppergrass, Lepidium 
papilliferum  L. (Brassicaceae), and its implications 
for population via bility. Western North American 
Naturalist. 63(3). p 333- 342.  
Robertson, I.C., Ula ppa, A. 2004. Distance between 
pollen donor and recipie nt influences fruiting success 
in slickspot peppergrass, Lepidium papilliferum .  
Canadian Journal of Botany. Vol. 82, no. 12. p 1705- 1710.   
USDI, 2009. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and  Plants; Listing  Lepidium papilliferum  (Slickspot 
Peppergrass) as a Threatened Species Thro ughout its 
Range.  Federal Register Vol. 74, No. 194 October 8, 
2009/ Rules and Regulations.  
USDI, 2011. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and  Plants; designation of critical habitat for Lepidium 
papilliferum (Slickspot peppergrass). Federal 
Register Vol . 76, No. 207. October 2011. 66250-
66255.  
United States District Court of Idaho. 2012. Case No.  1:11- cv-00358- CWD. Memorandum Decision and 
Order.42p.  
White, J.P. and Robertson, I.C. 2009.  An Unusual Life  History Strategy in Lepidium papilliferum 
(Brassica ceae), A Rare Mustard Endemic to 
Southwestern Idaho.   Northwest Science Notes, Vol. 
83, No. 3.  [Online]. Available at 
http://www.bioone.org/doi/abs/10.3955/046.083.0311  
(accessed 2 November 2009)

Prepared By   
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials C enter, 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
   
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho  
   
Citation   
St. John, L. and D.G. Ogle.  Plant Guide for Slickspot 
Peppergrass ( Lepidium papilliferum ).  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Ab erdeen, ID  
Published  December, 2009   Edited: 
ls 16Nov2009 dgo; 20Nov2009 jb; 26Jul2012djt  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER