Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CRAPE MYRTLE 
Lagerstroemia indica L.  
Plant Symbol = LAIN 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
      J.S. Peterson @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
Uses 
Commercial use: Crape myrtle is valued as a 
landscape plant for its prolific summer flowers, heat 
and drought tolerance, and year-round landscape 
interest. 
 
Crape myrtle is used for buffer strips around parking 
lots, for median strip plantings along highways, near 
decks, patios, as shade trees in small parking lots and 
around homes.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  Crape myrtle is a medium to large shrub or 
a small multi-stemmed tree that can grow upto 40 
feet. Flowering begins as early as May in some 
cultivars and continues into the fall. Each 6- to 18-
inch cluster of flowers (or panicle) develops on the 
tips of new growth and is composed of hundreds of 
1-to 2-inch flowers. Color ranges include shades of 
purple, lavender, white, pink and red, including 
"true" red, a relatively  recent development. Some 
cultivars have bicolor flow ers (two colors on each 
petal), some cultivars have flower colors that fade 
with age or certain environmental conditions, and 
other cultivars have panicles composed of a mix of  flower colors. Strips of bark peel off in early summer 
to reveal mottled new bark ranging in color from pale 
cream to dark cinnamon to rich brown to bright 
orange. The bark color gradually fades over winter 
until it peels again the next summer.  
 
Leaves on many of the 
Lagerstroemia indica 
cultivars are rounded, opposite or some leaves 
alternate or whorled, simple, elliptical, entire margin, 
1 1/2 to 3 inches long, dark green above and paler 
below. Most hybrid cultivars have lance-shaped 
leaves up to 5 inches long and 3 inches wide while 
other species have even larger leaves. Leaves are 
often tinged red in the spring and turn dark green by 
summer. Several cultivars ar e known for new growth 
that is bronze, red or burgundy and some cultivars are 
claimed to have burgundy-colored foliage all 
summer.  
 
When the leaves fall in winter, crape myrtle becomes 
a living sculpture. The trunk and branches of tree-
form plants have an attractively gnarled, sinuous 
character with smooth bark.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Crape myrtle is adapted to climatic 
conditions throughout the south and southeast. Well-
established plants are extremely drought tolerant and 
have low fertility requirements, although they 
respond to fertilizer and water with lush growth. 
Crape myrtle has low salt tolerance, so it should not 
be irrigated with saline water or used near the coast 
unless it is well-protected from saline conditions. 
 
Adaptation 
The crape myrtle ( Lagerstroemia species) is native to 
China and Korea but ha s been so embraced by 
Southerners and has become a dominant landscape 
plant throughout the South. Breeding programs have 
produced superior forms with a wide range of plant 
sizes and habits, improved flowering, new flower 
colors, ornamental bark, ornamental foliage, pest 
resistance and increased vigor. 
 
Establishment 
Softwood, semi-hardwood, hardwood, or root 
cuttings can propagate crape myrtle. Softwood and 
semi-hardwood cuttings root easily when taken in 
spring or summer. Hardwood cuttings from dormant

plants also root easily, although use of rooting 
hormone improves rooting percentages. Root cuttings 
may be dug in early spring and planted in the 
greenhouse. Plantings established with root cuttings 
are normally poor because of root inconsistently.  
 
Seed capsules ripening in the fall may be collected, 
dried, and stored in sealed containers. No seed pre-
treatment is necessary and seeds will germinate 
within 3 weeks after sowing. Best growth results 
when seeds are sown during the early days of spring. 
Seed should be sowed in well-drained slightly acidic 
to neutral moist soil and covered to a depth of one 
quarter on an inch. 
 
When using container or root ball planting, choose 
sunny sites with well-drained soil, making sure there 
is enough room for shrub to reach its mature spread. 
Dig a hole twice as wide as container or root ball. Set 
plant at same depth or slightly higher than it was in 
the pot, or if balled, even with top of root ball. Fill in 
hole around plant with soil, mound soil to form a 2-
inch-high ridge around perimeter of the hole to act as 
a catch basin. If plant is balled in synthetic fabric, 
remove fabric carefully before planting. Burlap may 
be left around root ball and then peeled back once 
plant is set in hole. Water thoroughly, filling the 
basin and allowing water to settle several times. 
Spread 2-inch layer of mulch around plant 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Crape myrtles are trouble- free small trees with the 
most common problems being powdery mildew, 
Cercospora leaf spot, aphids, Japanese beetles and 
sooty mold. The fungus  Erysiphe lagerstroemia 
causes powdery mildew. Patches of white to grayish 
powdery growth occur on  the surfaces of leaves, 
flowers and new shoots. He avily infected flowers 
may fail to open. Infected parts of the plant are 
usually distorted and stunted. The disease is most 
serious in shady, damp locations, especially where 
plants are crowded and air circulation is poor. 
Development of the fungus is caused by high 
humidity at night and dry, mild daytime conditions, 
and often occurs during the spring and fall. 
 
Very few insects are pests of crape myrtle however, 
Tinocallis kahawaluokalani , the crape myrtle aphid is 
one of the most important insect pest of the crape 
myrtle. This aphid is feed s on the leaves and young 
twigs of crape myrtle. The  crape myrtle aphids feeds 
only on crape myrtle trees. Japanese beetle ( Popillia 
japonica ) is also a pest, feeding on leaves and 
flowers. In addition to crape myrtle, it will feed on 
nearly three hundred different plant species. 
 
Crape myrtle aphids are pale yellowish green in color 
with black spots on the abdomen. They vary in length 
from 
1/16 to 1/8 inch long. They survive the winter as 
eggs, and the eggs hatch in the spring. During the 
growing season, females give birth to live young. 
Since it takes about 10 days to reach maturity, several 
generations are produced each growing season.  
Aphids feed by inserting their mouthparts into tender 
new leaves from which they suck plant sap. Plant sap 
has a high sugar content. When they feed, the aphids 
excrete large amounts of a sugary liquid called 
honeydew. With a large aphid population, the 
honeydew can completely co at leaves. The honeydew 
serves as food for the sooty mold fungi, as well as 
various insects, including ants, wasps and flies. As 
the aphid feeds, it injects saliva into the leaf. The 
saliva causes yellow spots to develop on the leaf. 
Several other predators feed on the crape myrtle 
aphid. These include ladybird beetles (ladybugs) and 
their larvae (immature forms), green lacewings and 
their larvae, hover fly maggots, parasitic wasps and 
entomophagous (insect feeding) fungi.  
 
Leaf and stem surfaces are covered with a black 
sooty substance, causing them to appear black and 
dirty or sooty mold. It indicat es that there is an insect 
problem on the plant. These common molds are 
caused by fungi that grow  on the sugary substance, 
called honeydew, produced by various insects that 
suck sap from the plant. Aphids, scales, mealy bugs 
and whiteflies most commonly cause this problem.   
 
Adult Japanese beetles are about ½ inch in length and 
coppery-brown in color with metallic green heads. 
They emerge from the soil and feed from May to 
August. They lay their eggs in the soil. Grubs hatch 
from the eggs and feed on grass roots. As the weather 
cools, the grubs move more deeply into the soil, and 
over winter.  Both adult beetles and their larvae 
(grubs) can seriously damage plants as a result of 
their feeding. Adult Japanese beetles eat flowers and 
skeletonize leaves (eat leaf  tissue between the veins, 
resulting in a lacy skeleton remaining). The grubs 
feed on the roots of plants, especially on the roots of 
grasses. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Lagerstroemia  species are deciduous shrubs or trees 
with geographic origins in China, Japan, and other 
parts of Southeast Asia. 
 
Private individuals, nurseries and public institutions, 
have developed many cultivars of crape myrtle. In 
1962, the U.S. National Arboretum in Washington 
D.C. began a crape myrtle breeding project with

Lagerstroemia indica. Major advances occurred 
when  L. subcostata  and L. fauriei  were introduced 
into the breeding program in 1966. The resulting 
hybrids were highly ornamental and resistant to 
powdery mildew. As a result of the late Dr. Donald 
Egolf's efforts, the U.S. National Arboretum has 
released over 24 selected  for cold hardiness, for 
resistance to powdery mildew, and for varying 
heights, habits, flower colors, fall foliage colors, and 
bark characteristics. All  U.S. National Arboretum 
cultivars have Native American names.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Byers, David. 1997. Crapemyrtle: A Grower's 
Thoughts . Owl Bay Publishers Inc., Auburn, AL.  
 
Chester, E.W, B.E. Woff ord, and R. Kral. 1997. Atlas 
of Tennessee vascular plants . Vol. 2, Miscellaneous 
Publication No. 13, Center for Field Biology, Austin 
Peay State University, Clarksville, Tennessee 
 
Chester, E.W., B.E. Wofford, R. Kral, H.R. DeSelm, 
and A.M. Evans. 1993.  Atlas of Tennessee vascular 
plants.  2 vols. Miscellaneous Publication No. 9/13, 
Center for Field Biology, Austin Peay State 
University, Clarksville, Tennessee. 
 
Dirr, Michael A. and Charles W. Heuser, Jr. 1987. 
The Reference Manual of Woody Plant Propagation . 
Varsity Press, Inc., Athens, Georgia. 239 pp. Pp. 144-
145.  
 
Duncan, W.H., and J.T. Kartesz. 1981. Vascular flora 
of Georgia.  University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
Georgia. 
 
Egolf, Donald R. and Anne 0. Andrick.1978.  The 
Lagerstroemia Handbook/Checklist . American 
Association of Botanical Ga rdens and Arboreta, Inc.  
 
Fernald, M.L. 195. Gray's manual of botany,  8th ed., 
American Book Company, New York, New York 
 
Hatch, S.L., K.N. Gandhi, and L.E. Brown. 1990, 
Checklist of the vascular plants of Texas . MP-1655 
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College 
Station, Texas 
 
Johnson, Randy and Ruth Dix. 1994.  Dwarf Cape 
myrtle classification . Proc. 1993 Southern 
Nurserymen's Assoc. Research Conf. 38: 374-378.  
 
Jones, S.B., and N. Coile. 1988.  The distribution of 
the vascular flora of Georgia Herbarium , 
Department of Botany, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Knox, Gary W. 1992.  Crape Myrtle In Florida . Fact 
Sheet ENH-52, Florida Cooperative Extension 
Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, 
University of Florida. 6 pp. Revised April 1994.  
 
Knox, Gary W, Russell F. Mizell III, and Daniel 0. 
Chellemi. 1993.  Susceptibility of crape myrtle 
cultivars to carpe myrtle aphid and powdery mildew . 
Proc. 1992 southern Nurser ymen's Assoc. Research 
Conf. 37:340-342. 
 
Mizell, Russell F., III and Gary Knox. 1993. 
Susceptibility of crape myrtle, Lagerstroemia indica 
L., to the crapemyrtle aphid, Tinocallis 
kahawaluokalani (Kirkaldy) in north Florida . 
Journal of Entomological Science  28(1): 1-7.  
 
Thomas, R.D., and C.M. Allen. 1993.  Atlas of the 
vascular flora of Louisiana , Vols. 1-3, Louisiana 
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. Natural 
Heritage Program, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Wieland, R.G. 2004. County observation records of 
Mississippi Vegetation Survey Project ( Samples 
taken 9-1989 to 11-2003, inclusive of collection 
records and of field surveys by other authors) 
MMNS, Conservation of Wild life, Fisheries & Parks, 
Jackson, Mississippi 
 
Westcott, Cynthia. 1971.  Plant Disease Handbook, 
third edition. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company,New 
York, New York. 843 pp. Pp. 293-298 and 405-406. 
 
Wieland, R.G. 2004. County records of Mississippi 
collections  (#5501-9869, 9/12/89 to 1/23/04) 
deposited at Mississippi Museum of Natural Science 
Herbarium (MMNS) Mississi ppi Museum of Natural 
Science, Dept. of Wildlife, Fisheries and Parks 
Jackson, Mississippi 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., B.F. Hansen, and E.L. Bridges. 
1996.  Atlas of Florida vascular plants Online : 
http://www.usf.edu/~isb/projects/atlas/mapindex.html
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2002.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants Online: 
Http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu/University of South 
Florida,  Tampa, Florida.

Prepared By:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson 
Earth team Volunteer, USDA NRCS National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
  
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 09jun03 ahv; 31may06 jsp; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.