Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINESE PRIVET 
Ligustrum sinense Lour. 
Plant Symbol = LISI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Louisiana State University-Plant Science; 
partial funding from the US Geological Survey and 
the US National Biological Information 
Infrastructure 
 
Uses 
Weed (very invasive in the southern US), 
ornamental 
 
Noxiousness 
Chinese privet was introduced  into the United States 
from China for ornamental planting.  Having escaped 
from cultivation, it is now naturalized throughout the 
southeastern United States.  The greatest threat posed  by this species is large-scale ecosystem modification 
due to its ability to successfully compete with and  
 
displace native vegetation.  Chinese privet plants 
mature rapidly and are prolific seed producers.  They 
also reproduce vegetatively by means of root suckers.  
Once established, Chinese privet is difficult to 
eradicate because of its reproductive capacity. 
 
Impact/Vectors
: Ligustrum sinense  is native to China 
and was introduced into the United States in 1852 for 
use as an ornamental shrub.  It is used for hedge and 
mass plantings, and sometimes as single specimens 
for its foliage and its profusion of small white flowers 
(Dirr 1990; Wyman 1973).  It continues to be widely 
sold in the nursery and gardening industry.  The 
foliage of Chinese privet is also used, presumably, 
for cut-flower arrangements.  This horticultural 
introduction has been cultivated for a relatively long 
time in the United States.   Wyman (1973) reports that 
this species is still growing as a hedge on the old 
Berkman’s Nursery grounds in Augusta, Georgia, 
where it was planted in the early 1860’s.  It was 
planted on the Chickamauga and Chattanooga 
National Military Park after it came under the control 
of the Secretary of War in  1890.  Present day plants 
are descendants of those early plantings (Faulkner et 
al. 1989).  According to Small (1933), the species 
was escaping from cultivation in southern Louisiana 
by the 1930’s.  A survey of appropriate herbaria 
reveals collection records from Georgia as early as 
1900.  Based on herbariu m records the species has 
become naturalized and wide spread in the southeast 
and eastern U.S. during the 1950’s, 60’s, and 70’s.  
Taylor et al. (1996) notes the rapid, recent spread of 
Ligustrum sinense in Oklahoma. 
© J.S. Peterson USDA, NRCS, NPDC

The species is a major threat to natural landscapes.  
An example of Chinese privet’s ability to push a 
native species closer to extinction is noted in the 
recovery plan for Schweintz’s sunflower (Helianthus 
schweinitzii ).  This endangered species is known 
from about 16 populations on the piedmont of the 
Carolinas.  Residential and commercial development 
and the invasion of aggressive exotics, such as 
Ligustrum sinense , represent the greatest threats for 
this species (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1992).  
Similar observations about the competitive 
characteristics of Chinese privet have been noted in 
various Nature Conservancy reports in the Southeast.  
Removal of Chinese privet from natural areas is 
problematic and essential for their restoration (News 
from Volunteers of the Nature Conservancy, North 
Carolina Chapter and the Louisiana Chapter, pers. 
comm. 1997). 
 
In addition to the privet’s impact on natural 
landscapes, it can be directly harmful to humans.  All 
introduced species of  Ligustrum produce fruit toxic to 
humans that cause such symptoms as nausea, 
headache, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, 
weakness, and low blood pressure and body 
temperature.  Where Chin ese privet occurs in 
abundance, floral odors may cause respiratory 
irritation (Westbrooks & Preacher 1986).  Chinese 
privet is sold in nurseries and is often included on 
recommended planting lists or other literature 
produced by cooperative extension services without 
mention of its invasive nature.  Named cultivar 
selections have been developed (Bailey and Bailey 
1976). 
 
Chinese privet grows in a wide variety of habitats and 
can tolerate a wide range of soil and light conditions, 
but it grows best in mesic soils and abundant sunlight 
but can tolerate lower light conditions (Thomas 1980; 
Bailey & Bailey 1976).  Few woody plants offer an 
easier test of gardeners’ skills. 
 
The species persists on abandoned home sites and 
can readily invade abandoned lots and farmlands 
where it forms impenetrable thickets.  It becomes 
especially abundant along  fencerows, stream, bayou, 
and forest margins, and it has the ability to invade 
forests (Godfrey 1988). 
 
Chinese privet reproduces by sexual and vegetative 
means.  Seeds, produced  in great abundance, are 
spread by birds (McRae 1980 ).  Landscape plantings 
provide seed sources for establishment in disturbed 
habitats.  Soil disturbances of all sorts such as forest 
clearing, abandoned agricultural lands, and fence 
construction provide opportunities for colonization 
by Chinese privet.  Natural disturbances for example 
tree falls, erosion, animal excavations, etc. provide 
similar colonization opportunities.  The plants also 
have the ability to reproduce vegetatively from root 
suckers.  Once established, Chinese privet is difficult 
to control because of the huge seedbank and the need 
to remove underground parts as well.  Because of 
these characteristics, the  major impact of Chinese 
privet is its ability to  displace native species and 
disrupt various terrestrial ecosystems. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Olive Family (Oleaceae).  Chinese privet is 
a shrub or small tree that may grow to as much as 30 
feet tall although its 
typical height ranges from 
5 to 12 feet.  If flowering, 
its blossoms are very 
aromatic.  Its root system 
is shallow but extensive.  
Suckers are readily 
produced and the plants 
can spread vegetatively in 
this fashion.  The plants 
branch abundantly and the 
branches typically arch 
gently downward.  Its 
twigs are usually densely 
hairy (pubescent) when young, and the plant hairs 
(trichomes) spread at ri ght angles from the twig 
surface.  Raised, tan-colored lenticels are also evident 
on the twig’s surface.  Chinese privet leaves are 
evergreen to semi-deciduous and are oppositely 
arranged (two leaves per node) along the stem on 
nodes that are usually less than one inch apart.  The 
leaf stalk (or petiole, shown below) is about one-
 © L. Urbatsch Petiole, axillary bud,  stem with spreading 
 © L. Urbatsch Leaves with developing fruit.

eighth inch long and covered with hairs.  Leaf blades 
are elliptical in shape and are up to one inch wide and 
about two inches long.  Leaf margins lack teeth 
(entire).  The upper leaf  blade surfaces are glabrous 
(without hairs) at maturity.  Hairs occur along the 
midvein (see photo below) and sometimes on branch 
veins of the lower surfaces.  
 
The flowers occur in 
numerous, cone-
shaped, branching 
clusters (panicles) two 
to four inches long 
that profusely cover 
the shrub when 
flowering.  A short, 
slender stalk (pedicel) 
supports each flower.  The green calyx consists of 
four sepals fused to form a small, cup-like structure.  
Four white to off-white petals that are basally fused 
to one another make-up the corolla.  Each flower has 
two stamens attached to th e corolla, and they project 
beyond the corolla throat  (exserted stamens).  The 
flowers produce a 
somewhat disagreeable 
aroma.  The single pistil 
in each flower matures 
into a blue-black, berry-
like fruit.  The fruit are 
ellipsoidal to nearly 
globose and are produced 
abundantly in persistent, 
pyramidal clusters. 
 
Chinese privet is similar to Common Privet 
( Ligustrum vulgare ), a European species that is 
naturalized in more temperate areas of the eastern 
United States. 
Chinese privet has evergreen to semi-
evergreen leaves, densely hairy twigs and petioles, 
pubescent midveins on its lower leaf surfaces, and 
exserted stamens.  In contrast, common privet is 
deciduous to 
somewhat evergreen 
with sparsely 
pubescent twigs, 
glabrous midveins, 
and included stamens 
(the tips of the anthers 
are shorter than the 
extended corolla 
lobes) (Gleason 1952).  
 
Distribution : A survey of herb arium records shows 
that its present distribution includes an area extending 
from Florida to southern New England and westward 
to the eastern parts of Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas.   Chinese privet thrives in wet to dry habitats.  It 
persists around old home sites and flourishes along 
fencerows, and stream and forest margins where it 
forms impenetrable, monocultural thickets.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Control 
It is recommended that you contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist and/or county weed 
specialist for control measures pertinent to your area. 
 © L. Urbatsch Developing fruit & cuplike calyx of 
fused petals.
 
Various control measures have been reported for 
Chinese privet.  For smal l areas and for relatively 
small plants, hand removal is effective.  Digging 
tools such as a mattock are useful for removing 
underground parts.  Broken root fragments need to be 
removed because of their ability to re-sprout.  
Repeated mowing and cutting will control the spread 
of privet, but will not eradicate it.  For such 
treatment, stems should be cut as close to the ground 
as possible (Bartlow et al. 1997).  Mechanical 
removal is especially effective in the early stages of 
an invasion when the number s of plants are relatively 
small. 
 © L. Urbatsch Midvein of lower leaf surface 
showing hairs. 
 
For larger natural areas wh ere the use of chemical 
herbicides is inadvisable, enlisting numerous helpers 
to mechanically remove Chinese privet may be 
required.  Using heavy equipment for large-scale 
removal may be appropriate in some locations, but 
the negative effects of soil disturbance and the 
potential for erosion need to be considered. 
 
Herbicide treatments properly applied can selectively 
remove invasive species with minimal soil 
disturbance.  Even slight soil disturbance may offer 
opportunities for re-invasion.  When considering 
chemical control, local laws affecting herbicide use 
must be observed.  Appropriate precautions in 
various habitats may be needed.  Kline & Duquesnel 
(1996) point out that not all herbicides are 
appropriate for all areas.  Some may damage non-
target species.  Herbicides  will behave differently in 
different environments and under different conditions 
(Neal et al. 1986).  For ex ample, they may degrade 
more slowly in wetter, more anaerobic soils or move 
downward in sandier soils.  A careful monitoring 
program is essential for evaluating herbicide use. 
© L. Urbatsch Petiole, leaf base & margin.  
Randall & Marinelli (1996) report effective control of 
Chinese privet with glyphosate herbicides stating that 
foliage treatment is best for actively growing plants.  
Foliar spray methods should be used only where risk 
to non-target species is minimal.  A 2% solution of 
glyphosate or 2% triclopyr with a one-half percent of

non-ionic surfactant is reportedly effective for 
treating Chinese privet (Bartlow et al. 1997). 
 
Kline & Duquesnel (1996) discuss various treatments 
for woody species including Brazilian pepper, 
Australian pine, Chinese tallow, and other tree-like 
species.  They note that wi thin mixed stands single 
stem treatments consisting of basal-bark treatments, 
cut-surface treatments (injection, cut-stump, or 
girdle), or direct foliar applications may be effective.  
A typical basal or cut-surface treatment consists of a 
10-50% mixture of one of the following types of 
herbicides (glyphosate,  hexazinone, imazapyr, or 
triclopyr) with an oil dilutant.  They provide a table 
for use as a guide for selecting application methods 
and herbicides for various invasive plant species. 
 
Brian Bowen, President of the Tennessee Exotic Pest 
Plant Council, reports success in controlling privet 
using 25% glyphosate/75% horticulture oil applied as 
a cut-surface treatment (personal communication, 
1997).  He advises against using this application as 
the plants break dormancy because upward 
movement of the sap reduces the treatment’s 
effectiveness.  The same herbicide preparation is 
effective when applied to cut stumps as long as the 
ground isn’t frozen (Bartlow et al. 1997).  For the 
basal bark method, applying a mixture of 25% 
triclopyr/75% horticultural oil to the basal parts of 
the shrub is reported (Bartlow et al. 1997).  W. N. 
Kline, Senior Scientist, Dow Elanco, Duluth, 
Georgia, also favors basal-bark or cut-surface 
treatment over foliar application (pers. comm. 1997).  
The latter causes such rapid leaf drop that 
translocation of the herbicide in the plants is reduced, 
thereby lowering its effectiveness.  Furthermore, he 
reports that disturbance (e .g., fire or mechanical) 
should be avoided for about one year following 
basal-bark or cut-surface treatments to allow 
translocation of he rbicides.  Disturbance of the plants 
or root system too soon after treatment may disrupt 
translocation and result in resprouting. 
 
Fire is a naturally occurring phenomenon that is 
essential for certain native plant communities to 
exist.  Its use in exotic pest plant control is being 
investigated.  Faulkner et  al. (1989) reported its 
effectiveness as a management tool in the 
Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military 
Park for controlling Ligustrum sinense  and other pest 
plants.  Fire had the benefit of killing large privet 
stems, but the vigorous resprouting that followed 
burning offset this gain.  Fall and winter burns had 
desirable aesthetic effects by considerably reducing 
the biomass of privet, but no long-term benefits were 
achieved since the species still remained.  
 
Fire was also used as a herbicide pretreatment 
(Faulkner et al. 1989).  In the spring following the 
fall and winter burns, foliar application of glyphosate 
damaged or killed a majority of the Chinese privet 
shoots.  Burning facilitated foliar application of 
herbicide by reducing biomass.  However, it did not 
increase the effectiveness of  the herbicide compared 
to the unburned controls. 
 
Privet has no known biological controls.  A foliage-
feeding insect native to Europe,  Macrophya 
punctumalbum , is a known pest.  Privet is also 
susceptible to a fungal leaf spot,  Pseudocercospora 
ligustri , and a common root crown bacteria, 
Agrobacterium tume-faciens  (Bartlow et al. 1997). 
 
Illustrations and Photographs:  
Auburn University 1999.  Dendrology: Chinese 
privet .  Version: 000330.  
<http://sofserv.forestry.au burn.edu/samuelson/dendro
logy/oleaceae_pg/chinese_priv et.htm>.  Department 
of Forestry, Auburn, Alabama. 
 
Gleason, H. A. 1952.   Illustrated flora of the 
northeastern United States and adjacent Canada .  
Lancaster Press, Inc., Lancaster, PA. (line drawing, 
vol 3, p. 53.) 
 
Godfrey, R. K. 1988.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
of northern Florida and adjacent Georgia, and 
Alabama.  The University of Georgia Press, Athens.  
734 pp.  (excellent line drawing showing flower and 
fruit in detail, p. 518). 
 
Radford, A. E., H. E. Ahles, & C. R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  (small line drawing, p 831). 
 
Randall, J. M. & J. Marinelli 1996.   Invasive plants, 
weeds of the global garden .  Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Handbook #149, Brooklyn, New York.  99 p.  
(photograph, plants in flower, p. 58) 
 
Schopmeyer, C. S. 1974.   Seeds of woody plants in 
the United States .  USDA, Forest Service, 
Agricultural Handbook No. 450.  (illustration of  L. 
sinense  seeds and seedlings of  L. vulgare, a similar 
species, p. 500, 502). 
 
References 
Bailey, L. H., & E. Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York, New York.  1186 p.

Bartlow, J., K. Johnson, M. Kertis, T. Remaley, S. 
Ross, E. Simet, T. Smith, D. Soehn, & G. Taylor 
1997.  Tennessee exotic plant management manual . 
119 pp. (http://webriver.com/tn-eppc). 
 
Dirr, M. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape plants: 
their identification, ornamental characteristics, 
culture, propagation, and uses .  4th Edition.  Stipes 
Publishing Co., Champaign, Illinois.  826 pp. 
 
Gleason, H. A. 1952.   Illustrated flora of the 
northeastern United States and adjacent Canada .  
Vol. 3.  Lancaster Press,  Lancaster, Pennsylvania. 
 
Godfrey, R. K. 1988.  Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
of northern Florida and adjacent Georgia, and 
Alabama.  The University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
Georgia.  734 pp.  
 
James, T. K. & J. Mortimer 1983.   Control of privet.  
Pg 206-209.  IN  Proceedings of the 37th New 
Zealand weed and pest control conference , Christ 
Church, New Zealand. 
 
Kline, W. N. & J. G. Duquesnel 1996.   Management 
of invasive exotic plants with herbicides in Florida .  
Down to Earth.  Vol 51. No. 2. 
 
McRae, W. A. 1980.   Unusual bobwhite foods on 
abandoned Piedmont farmlands, Georgia .  Georgia 
Journal of Science 38(1):49-54. 
 
Miller, J.H. 1998.   Primary screening of forestry 
herbicides for control of Chinese privet (Ligustrum 
sinense), Chinese wisteria (Wisteria sinensis), and 
trumpetcreeper (Campsis radicans) .  IN Proceedings, 
51st annual Southern Weed Science Society meeting, 
January 26-28, Birmingham, Alabama.   
<http://www.srs.fs.fed.us/pubs/viewpub.asp?ID=836
>.  USDA, FS, Southern Research Station, Ashville, 
North Carolina. 
 
Neal, J. C., W. A. Skroch, & T. J. Monaco 1985.  
Effect of plant growth stage on glyphosate absorption 
and transport in Ligustrum and blue Pacific juniper .  
Weed Science 34(1):115-121. 
 
Randall, J. M. & J. Marinelli 1996.   Invasive plants, 
weeds of the global garden .  Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Handbook #149, Brooklyn, New York.  99 p. 
 
Westbrooks, R. G. & J.  W. Preacher 1986.  
Poisonous plants of eastern North America.  
University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, South 
Carolina. 172 p. 
 
Small, J. K. 1933.   Manual of the southeastern flora .  
The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1499 p.  
 
Taylor, C. E., K. L. Magrath, P. Folley, P. Buck, & S. 
Carpenter 1996.   Oklahoma vascular plants: 
Additions and distributional comments .  Proceedings 
of the Oklahoma Academy  of Science 76:31-34. 
 
Thomas, E. H. 1980.  The New York Botanical 
Garden illustrated encyclopedia of horticulture .  
Garland STPM Press, New York, New York. 
 
USDI, Fish and Wildlife Service 1992.   Endangered 
and threatened species of the Southeastern United 
States (The Red Book).   USFWS, Southeastern 
Region, Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
Wyman, W. 1973.   Shrubs and vines for American 
gardens .  MacMillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York, 
New York.  613 pp.  
 
Prepared By 
Lowell Urbatsch 
Department of Plant Biology, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Skinner 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 060802 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.