Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TALL FESCUE 
Lolium arundinaceum 
(Schreb.) S.J. Darbyshire 
Plant Symbol = LOAR10  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Schedonorus phoenix (Scop.) Holub, Festuca 
arundinacea  Schreb., Festuca elatior L. ssp. 
arundinacea  (Schreb.) Hack.,  Festuca elatior L. var. 
arundinacea  (Schreb.) C.F.H. Wimmer, Kentucky 
fescue, reed fescue 
 
Uses 
Tall fescue has been used extensively in the past, 
prior to the understanding of its endophytic fungus 
interactions and their implications.  For decades, the 
tall fescue cultivar Kentuckey-31 was planted widely 
as a forage and erosion control plant, because it is 
widely adapted, easy to establish, and long lived 
under harsh conditions and mistreatment.  It is now 
recognized that the presence  of the endophyte (in this 
grass and others) contributed to both the tough nature 
of the grass and the poor performance of grazing 
animals in the warmer months.  It is suspected that 
this endophyte infected  
 
cultivar has been deleterious to wildlife as well.  For 
these reasons, there are effo rts by some groups to ban 
the use of tall fescue in some states, and it still may 
be overused. 
 
Studies indicate that the presence of tall fescue and 
the fescue endophyte diminish biological diversity on 
the level of soil organisms, insects, plants, birds, and 
mammals.  Soil organisms, both beneficial and 
detrimental to individual plants, exert a major 
influence on the structur e of plant communities.  
Beneficial associations between mycorrhizal fungi 
and plants occur in about 80% of all land plants; 
these associations are criti cal in supplying specific 
nutrients for many plants.  Endophyte infected tall 
fescue inhibits many soil organisms, including 
pathogenic fungi, parasitic nematodes and beneficial 
mycorrhizal fungi.  The fescue endophyte produces 
loline alkaloids that are toxic to at least twenty insect 
species from ten families and five orders.  The 
endophyte also produces ergot  alkaloids that are toxic 
to mammals including domestic livestock.  
 
Tall fescue exerts many problems for a number of 
game birds. Tall fescue, which has replaced many 
acres of native grass, does not supply the type of food 
and cover that many smaller game species need in 
order to thrive. For example, tall fescue only supports 
a limited number of insects, which are an important 
food for both quail and turkey. Another problem is 
that when tall fescue either mowed or grazed it forms 
a thick, impenetrable mat of culms near the soil 
surface. Many birds, including dove and quail are 
"weak scratchers" and tall fescue does not allow 
enough bare ground for these birds to obtain adequate 
food. Several bird species lost weight when fed an 
endophyte-infected tall fescue seed compared to 
endophyte-free seed.  Meadow voles exhibit higher 
mortality rates when restri cted to endophyte-infected 
tall fescue seed compared to an endophyte-free diet. 
Grasslands dominated by endophyte-infected tall 
fescue are expected to support less total herbivore 
biomass, which in turn should support less predator 
biomass. A 25 to 30 foot wide border around tall 
fescue pastures, which is composed of either native 
grasses or native grasses and legumes, can moderate 
the harmful effect of tall fescue on wildlife. A border 
supplies some food and cover for small game, and is 
particular effective when th e pasture is adjacent to a 
well-managed forest.  
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA, NRCS 1989 
Midewestern Wetland Flora  @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Studies have show that tall fescue is allelopathic to 
rape ( Brassica napus  L.), bird's-foot trefoil ( Lotus 
corniculatus  L.), red clover (Trifolium pratense  L.), 
white clover ( Trifolium repens  L.), sweetgum 
( Liquidambar styraciflua  L.), and loblolly pine

(Pinus taeda  L.).  These studies did not reveal 
whether the endophyte or the fescue caused the 
allelopathy.  In a recent study, both endophyte-
infected and endophyte-free  tall fescue seed extracts 
exhibited allelopathy to red clover, white cover, small 
white clover ( Trifolium nigrescens  Viviani), crimson 
clover ( Trifolium incarnatum  L.), and subterranean 
clover ( Trifolium subterraneum  L.).  In general, a 
loss of plant diversity is expected where tall fescue is 
common and where a high percentage of plants are 
infected with the endophyte.  
 
Approximately 75% of the tall fescue stands in the 
United States are endophyte-infected.  In mixed 
stands, containing both endophyte-infected and 
endophyte-free plants, the percentage of plants that 
are endophyte-infected is ex pected to increase across 
time.   
Currently, most tall fescue cultivars planted for 
forage contain a low level of the endophyte (less than 
5 percent).  Low endophyte  cultivars are less drought 
tolerant and more susceptible to overgrazing than 
high 
endophyte cultivars.  Therefore, greater 
management skill is needed for both the 
establishment and grazing management of low 
endophyte cultivars.  In the southern portion of the 
tall fescue region (Oklahoma-Texas and eastward), 
cultivars with a high levels of the endophyte are 
recommended because they  exhibit better drought 
tolerance, which results in better summer survival.  
Tall fescue cultivars planted for turf and soil erosion 
control, in all regions, often contain high levels of the 
endophyte.     
 
The soil concentration of phosphorus near shade and 
water was greater in endophyte-infected tall fescue 
pasture compared with endophyte-free pasture.  The 
risk of phosphorus loss to the environment, when 
grazing endophyte infected tall fescue, can be 
reduced by changing the location of shade and water 
every 4 or 5 years and ensuring that shade and water 
are not located in areas subject to water runoff. 
 
There are many cultivars of tall fescue.  Many 
cultivars introduced since 1980 contain a low level of 
the endophyte (less that 5 percent).  Fine leafed 
cultivars are intended as tu rf grasses and often are 
intentionally endophyte infected to capitalize on the 
competitive advantage that the endophyte confers to 
the plant. Testing services are available to have 
existing stands of this grass evaluated for endophyte 
presence.  Strategies for managing endophyte 
infected tall fescue for fora ge include: 1) graze and 
clip so plants remain vegetative; 2) graze only during 
spring and autumn when the plants are vegetative; 3) 
cut for hay during boot stage rather than later growth  stages; 4) dilute the e
ffect of the endophyte by 
intercropping tall fescue with forage legumes.  
Additional information about the fescue endophyte 
and the antiquality factors caused by the endophyte is 
available from web sites, which can be accessed from 
the tall fescue Plants Profile as described in the Key 
Web Sites section.  
 
The old standby cultivar Kentucky-31 (with a high 
level of the endophyte) is  a very good critical area 
treatment grass due to its tolerance of poor soils and 
abuse or neglect.  However, the user should be sure 
this grass will meet all the planting objectives and 
that there are not good a lternative species before 
specifying its use. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Description 
Tall fescue is a robust long-lived, comparatively 
deep-rooted, bunchgrass.  The leaves of forage types 
are broad, while turf types have been selected for 
narrow leaves.  The flat leaves are smooth and shiny 
on the underside, with pronounced ribs on the upper 
surface. The stems are 3-4  feet tall, supporting a 
nodding panicle that is 4-12 inches long.  There are 
227,000 seeds per pound.   
 
Adaptation 
Tall fescue is adapted to cool and humid climates and 
most soils with a pH of 5.5 to 7.0.  Tall fescue will 
grow fairly well on soils low in fertility, but it is 
better adapted to fertile conditions.  Tall fescue will 
produce top growth when soils are as cold as 40   F, 
and it continues growth into late fall in the south.  
The areas of tall fescue adaptation include all areas 
east of the Great Plains, except southern and central 
Florida.  Other areas of adaptation include the Pacific 
and Intermountain Northwest and extreme southern 
Alaska.  A map that displays the area of adaptation 
for tall fescue is available from the Forage 
Information System web site.

Establishment 
Tall fescue is easy to establish due to its rapid 
germination and good seedling vigor.  It may be 
planted by any common method such as grass 
seeders, hydroseeding, and broadcasting.  
Recommended seeding rates for pasture and hayland 
establishment vary from 12 to 20 pounds per acre for 
pure fescue. Some researchers recommend using the 
lower seeding rate of 12 pounds per acre when 
seeding tall fescue with a forage legume.  Seeding 
rates for turf establishment are very high in order to 
obtain a dense, even turf, usually 50-100 pounds per 
acre.  In mixtures with other seed for critical area 
treatment work, the tall fescue component is typically 
10-15 pounds per acre.   
 
Management 
While tall fescue is tolerant of abuse and low fertility, 
it does respond to fertilizer inputs.  Follow the soil 
test recommendations for turf and forage uses.  The 
management considerations for forage use of 
endophyte infected stands are discussed under Uses.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Plant breeders have developed tall fescue cultivars 
for every region of the tall fescue adaptation area.  
These cultivars include both forage and turf types, 
and low 
and high endophyte types.  University 
extension publications contain information about 
cultivars for local areas.  Also, information about 
cultivars is available from the Grass Varieties in the 
U.S. and Forage Information System web sites. These 
sites can be accessed from the tall fescue Plants 
Profile as described in the Key Web Sites section.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Alderson, J & W.C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties in 
the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, USDA, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Ball, D.M., C.S. Hoveland & C.D. Lacefield. 1996. 
Southern forages. 2nd edition. Potash & Phosphate 
Institute and Foundation for Agronomic Research, 
Norcross, GA. 
 
Clemson University. Grassland Watershed 
Management. 2001.  <
http://grasslands.clemson.edu/Forage%20Species/T
all%20Fescue/Tall%20Fescue.htm>, version 22 
March 2001. 
 
Clubine, S.E., 1995. Managing forages to benefit 
wildlife. p. 263-275.  In R.F.Barnes, D.A. Miller & 
C.J. Nelson (ed.) Forages:   The Science of Grassland 
Agriculture. Vol. 2. Iowa  State Univ. Press, Ames. 
 
Luu, K.T., A.G. Matches, C. J. Nelson, E.J. Peters, 
and G. B. Garner. 1989. Characterization of 
inhibitory substances of tall fescue on birdsfoot 
trefoil. Crop Sci. 29:407-412. 
 
Matthews, J. 2000. Fescue : The lean, mean, green 
machine. Missouri Prairie Journal 21: 4-7. 
 
The Nature Conservancy, Weeds on the Web. 2001.           
<
http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/index.html>, version 22 
March 2001. 
 
Oregon State University, Fo rage Information System.  
2001. <
http://forages.orst.edu/>, version 22 March 
2001. 
 
Palmer, J. 2001. Rethink tall fescue for wildlife 
habitats. Progressive Farmer 116 (9):40.    
 
Schomberg, H.H., J.A. Stuedemann, A.J. 
Franzluebbers, and S.R. Wilkinson. 2000. Spatial 
distribution of extractable phosphorous, potassium, 
and magnesium as influenced by fertilizer and tall 
fescue endophyte status. Agron. J. 92: 981-986. 
 
Sleper, D.A. & R. C. Buckner. 1995. The fescues.  p. 
345-356.  In R.F.Barnes, D.A. Miller and C.J. Nelson 
(ed.) Forages:   The Science of Grassland Agriculture. 
Vol. 1. Iowa State Univ. Press, Ames. 
 
Springer, T.L. 1996. Allelopathic effects on 
germination and seedling growth of clovers by 
endophyte-free and -infected tall fescue. Crop Sci. 
36: 1639-1642. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
James F. Henson, USDA, NRCS, National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 22 March 2001 jfh; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of

race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.