Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TWINBERRY 
HONEYSUCKLE 
Lonicera involucrata  Banks ex 
Spreng. 
Plant Symbol = LOIN5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
twinberry, black twin-berry, four-line honeysuckle, 
bearberry honeysuckle 
 
Uses 
Warning: Twinberry honeysuckle is considered 
toxic and should be used with caution.
 
Ethnobotanic : The Quileute and Kwakwaka’wakw 
people used these berries as a black pigment (Pojar & 
MacKinnon 1994).  The Haid a rubbed the berries on 
the scalp to prevent hair from turning gray (Ibid.). 
A decoction of the bark has been applied to a 
woman’s breasts to encourage milk flow (Moerman 
1998).  An infusion was used to treat chest and 
stomach complaints and to cleanse the body (Ibid.).  
The Carrier boiled the leaves and used the liquid to 
bathe sore eyes, or applied the crushed leaves as a 
poultice to open sores (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Twinberry honeysuckle ( Lonicera involucrata) is an 
erect clustered shrub one to three meters high with 
freely exfoliating bark (Peck  1961).  The leaves are 
opposite, short-stemmed, somewhat elliptical to 
broadly lanced shaped, pointed often hairy beneath 
(Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The flowers are yellow, 
tinged with red, and cupped by a large pair of green 
to purplish bracts.  The fruits are roundish or oval, 
blackish berries, paired on long axillary stalks and 
distinct; ripening August or September (Grimm 
1993). 
 Alfred Brousseau © Saint Mary's College of California @CalPhotos 
 
Distribution : Lonicera involcrata is widely 
distributed across North America from Quebec 
westward to Alaska and British Columbia and 
southward into California, Colorado, Utah, and 
Arizona (McMinn 1939).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site . 
 
Adaptation 
Twinberry honeysuckle is typically found in moist 
forests, clearings, riparian habitats, swamps and 
thickets (MacKinnon, Pojar & Coupe ′ 1992).  It 
prefers a good moist soil but can succeed in any 
fertile soil.  This species grows best and produces 
abundance of fruit in open  sunlight compared to a 
lost of fruit when grown in the shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Lonicera involucrata seeds 
should be collected from is olated plants and extracted 
by maceration in water (D irr & Heuser 1987).  Sow 
the seeds as soon as they are ripe in a cold frame.  
When the seedlings are large enough, plant them 
directly into their permanent positions in late spring 
or early summer. 
 
Management 
Twinberry honeysuckle berries has been noted as 
poisonous.  The fruit is bitter and sour and are eaten 
by some.  Since the European species of honeysuckle 
species are regarded as emetic and cathartic, they are 
better avoided in favor of something less dubious 
(Mozingo 1987).

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Somewhat available from native plant nurseries.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M.A. & M.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens, Georgia. 
 
Epple, A.O. 1995.   A field guide to the plants of 
Arizona .  Falcon Press, Helena, Montana. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1993.   The illustrated book of 
wildflowers and shrubs .  Stackpole Books, 
Mechanisburb, Pennsylvania. 
 
Longyear, B.O. 1927.   Trees and shrubs of the Rocky 
Mountain region .  The Knickerbocker Press, New 
York, New York. 
 
MacKinnon, A, J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Mozingo, H.N. 1987.   Shrubs of the Great Basin: a 
natural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1974.   A flora of southern California .  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Nelson, R.A. 1969.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  Skylar Publishers, Estes Park, Colorado. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana  Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.