Plant Guide
MAMMOTH WILDRYE 
Leymus racemosus ( L am.) Tzvelev  
Plant Symbol = LERA5  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Washington 
Plant Materials Program  
 
 Mammoth Wildrye.  Pamela Pavek, USDA -NRCS, Pullman , 
WA PMC  
Alternate Names  
Elymus arenarius var. giganteus, Elymus giganteus , 
Elymus racemosus, Leymus giganteus ( PLANTS 
D atabase) . 
 
Uses  
Mammoth wildrye is used primarily for stabilization of 
inland sand dunes and for wind erosion control on sand  to 
fine sandy loam soils .  It is also used in wildlife plantings 
to provide cover and nesting sites for upland birds.  It can 
also be used for revegetation of mine tailings and in fire 
breaks or greenstrips.  Mamm oth wildrye has also been 
used  to incorporate genes from Leymus  into wheat to 
improve resistance to barley yellow dwarf virus (Qi, et.al  1997).
  Mammoth wildrye is  generally not suitable for 
grazing  and has poor to  fair palatability during the spring 
and summer (Monsen et.al 2004) . 
 
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).   An environmental 
evaluation of ‘Volga’ mammoth wildrye  conducted by the 
Plant Materials Program in 2002 indicated that the 
cultivar had a low chance of negatively affecting the 
environment, and is relatively easy to control.  
 
Weedine ss 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace other  vegetation if 
not properly managed.  C onsult with your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture  department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is available from the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  C onsult the 
Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for 
additional  information. 
 
Description  
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Mammoth wildrye is 
an introduced,  long -lived,  rhizomatous perennial grass 
that grows to approximately 3 feet in height.  It is coarse 
stemmed with large,  long,  flat,  and  tough leaves.  
 
Culms to 100 cm (39 in) tall,  10 mm (0.04 in) diameter 
and scaberulous pubescent below raceme.  Leaf sheath is 
membranous at the margin and ligule is approximately 2 
mm ( 0.008  in) long,  membranous with a truncate apex .  
The leaf blade is glaucous green 20 -40 cm (8- 16 in) long  
and 1.5 cm (0.6 in) wide, the lower surface smooth and 
the upper surface and margin scabrous.  The spike is 15 -
30 cm (6- 12 in) long , 1-2 cm (0.39- 0.79 in) diameter  and 
is stout and glabrous.  There are 4- 6 spikelets per node 
with 3 -5 florets .  Glumes are linear -lanceolate with a 
robust midvein and 2 faint lateral veins.  The lemma is 
lanceolate, 7 -veined, softly hairy and awnless.  The palea 
is slightly shorter than the lemma.   
Chromosome number is 2n=28 (Flora of China, 2006).  
Zhipeng Liu et.al (2008) re ported that Leymus racemosus  
is a tetraploid (4x).  
 
Distribution :  
Mammoth wildrye is native to China, Kazakhstan , 
Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Russia, Turkmenistan and 
Uzbekistan (Flora of China, 2006).
   For current

Prepared By 
Loren St. John,  Team Leader,  USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Daniel G. Ogle,  Plant Materials Specialist,  USDA, NRCS, 
Boi se, ID  
 
Mark Stannard,  Manager,  USDA, NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, WA  
 
Pamela Pavek,  Agronomist,  USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA  
 
Citation  
St. John, L., D.G. Ogle, M. Stannard, P. Pavek. 2010. 
Plant Guide for Mammoth Wildrye ( Leymus r acemosus ).  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center.  
 
Published   October 2010  
 
Edited:  ls 26Oct2010; p lsp 26Oct2010; dgo01Nov10; jab02Nov2010;  
ls08Nov2010 ; plsp 08Nov10; dgo 08Nov10; jab 09Nov10;  ms 09Nov10  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District
 <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site
  <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site
  <http://Plant -
Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER