LENTIL 
Lens culinaris Medik. 
Plant Symbol = LECU2 
 
Drawing of lentil in Flora von Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz 1885 by Prof. Dr. Otto Wilhelm Thomé, Gera, Germany; www.biolib.de. 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  none 
Scientific Names:  Cicer lens (L.) Willd.; Ervum lens L.; 
Lens esculenta Meunch 
Description 
General:  Legume family (Fabaceae). Lentils are 12 to 30 
inches tall, slender, semi-erect annuals. Plants can have a 
single stem or branched, bushy form. Leaves are pinnate 
and have up to 14 sessile, ovate to lanceolate leaflets, 
each about 0.5 to 1.5 inches long. Leaves have two small 
stipules at the base and may terminate in a tendril. 
Flowers are usually double, or sometimes one to four on 
racemes, small (less than 0.5 inch long) and white to pale 
purple or dark purple. They bloom in sequence from the 
lower braches upwards (Cash et al., 2001). Flowers are 
self-pollinated and usually pollinate before opening. 
Occasionally cross-pollination can occur by thrips or 
other small insects. Flowers fade within 3 days of 
opening, and seed pods form 3 to 4 days later. Seed pods 
are flat, smooth, 0.5 to 0.75 inch long and contain 1 or 2 
seeds (Muehlbauer et al., 2002). Seeds are lens shaped, 
and have a seed coat which ranges in color from clear to 
green, pale tan, brown and black. Seed coats of some 
cultivars have purple or black mottles or speckles. 
 
Lentils are divided into two major types: macrosperma 
(large-seeded, or Chilean types) and microsperma (small-
seeded, or Persian types) (Zohary, 1995; Cash et al., 
2001). Large-seeded lentils have seeds up to 0.5 inch 
diameter with yellow cotyledons and little pigmentation 
in the flowers or vegetative structures. Small-seeded 
lentils have seeds up to 0.25 inch diameter with red, 
orange or yellow cotyledons and more pigmentation in the 
plant tissue. Small-seeded lentils are generally shorter and 
have smaller leaves and pods (Muehlbauer et al., 2002). 
 
Distribution: Lentils are currently cultivated in 53   
countries around the world (Food and Agriculture 
Organization, 2015). Major producers are Canada, India, 
Turkey, Australia and the United States (Food and 
Agriculture Organization, 2015). In the United States, 
Montana, North Dakota, Washington and Idaho lead 
production (USDA-National Agricultural Statistics 
Service, 2012). For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Adaptation 
Lentils are a drought-tolerant, cool-season crop. They are 
usually grown in semi-arid climates without irrigation. A 
minimum of 10 inches of annual rainfall is required for 
lentil production (Cash et al., 2001). Lentils can tolerate 
low rainfall and high temperatures, however these stresses 
may negatively impact yield if they occur during 
flowering and seed set (Muehlbauer et al., 2002). Lentils 
are often planted in the spring in cool climates and in the 
fall or winter in warm climates. A few varieties are 
tolerant of extreme cold temperatures and can be planted 
in the winter in cool climates. 
 
Lentils grow best in deep, sandy loam soils, however they 
will grow in all soil types with good drainage (Oplinger et 
al., 1990; Elzebrok and Wind, 2008). They can tolerate 
moderate alkaline or saline conditions (Muehlbauer et al., 
2002) and grow in soils with pH of 4.4 to 8.2, but are best 
adapted to soils with pH of 5.5 to 7 (Elzebrok and Wind, 
2008). 
Uses 
Commercial crop: Lentils are considered a “pulse” or 
“grain legume” because they are grown for their edible 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

seed, which is consumed primarily by humans. Some 
lentils are sold and consumed with seed coats intact, and 
others with seed coats removed. Seeds are often 
consumed whole or split in soups, stews and salads, and 
can be ground into flour and used in cakes or infant food 
(Elzebrok and Wind, 2008). Canada, Australia, and the 
United States export most of their lentil crop to Asian 
countries which have high levels of consumption (Cash et 
al., 2001). 
 
Lentils are an excellent source of fiber, protein, the amino 
acid lysine and the nutrients folate, thiamin, phosphorus 
and iron (USDA-Agricultural Research Service, 2015). 
They are low in the amino acids methionine and cysteine, 
however when consumed with cereals, form a complete 
protein (Cash et al., 2001).  
 
Livestock feed: Lentils that do not meet food grade 
standards (#3 or below) are used for livestock feed 
(Oplinger et al., 1990). Plant residues are also sometimes 
fed to livestock. 
 
 
Lentils in a variety trial near Dusty, WA  in early July at the end of flowering during pod filling. Stephen Guy, Washington State University 
Rotational crop: Lentils provide many agronomic benefits 
when grown in rotation with cereals and other crops. They 
help reduce cereal disease severity because they are not 
an alternate host for cereal disease pathogens 
(Muehlbauer et al., 2002). Being a broadleaf crop, they 
allow an opportunity to control grass weeds. They also 
provide nitrogen to the subsequent crop through 
biological nitrogen fixation in association with symbiotic 
Rhizobium bacteria. Depending on environmental 
conditions, lentils may provide 30 to 100 pounds of 
nitrogen per acre (Muehlbauer et al., 2002). In addition, 
lentil residue decomposes quickly due to its low carbon to 
nitrogen ratio, minimizing operations necessary to prepare 
a seedbed for the following crop.   
 
Green manure and cover crop: Lentils are a potential 
cover crop or green manure in semi-arid areas and are an 
option for replacement of fallow in the northern Great 
Plains (Allen et al., 2011). Research demonstrates, 
however, growers should approach this practice with 
caution and good management. If lentils are grown as a 
green manure and not terminated before pod set, they can 
have negative impacts on soil moisture and wheat yield 
compared to fallow (Zentner et al., 1996; Brandt, 1999; 
Allen et al., 2011). Early lentil termination (at flower 
stage) may reduce effects on soil moisture (Pikul et al., 
1997; Allen et al., 2011) but also reduce the amount of 
nitrogen produced (McCauley et al., 2012).  
 
Allen et al. (2011) determined several years may be 
required before experiencing benefits from growing a 
lentil green manure. In their long term study in Montana, 
wheat yield was significantly lower when grown in 
rotation with lentil green manure compared to fallow 
during the first five years, but after six years (three 
rotation cycles), differences in wheat yield were 
negligible. They discovered after six years, lentil green 
manure improved soil nitrogen cycling, maintained water 
productivity and offset wheat fertilizer requirements. 
 
The Lockeford Plant Materials Center (CAPMC) in 
California’s Central Valley demonstrated lentils grown as 
a cover crop outperformed several other legumes in 
winter trials under drought conditions (Smither-Kopperl, 
personal communication, 2015). The CAPMC is 
conducting advanced trials to evaluate differences among 
lentil cultivars. 
Ethnobotany 
The centers of origin of lentil are the Mediterranean and 
southwest Asia (Vavilov, 1949; Zohary, 1995). Lentils 
have been cultivated for as long as humans have planted 
crops (Zohary and Hopf, 1973). They were domesticated 
approximately 8,500 years ago, around the same time as 
wheat, barley and pea (Zohary and Hopf, 1973). Lentils 
were cultivated in Spain and Germany 7,000 years ago, 
and in India 4,500 years ago (Hancock, 2004; Elzebrok 
and Wind, 2008). They were brought to the United States 
in 1916 and grown near Farmington, Washington, then 
grown on a larger commercial scale beginning in 1937 
(Youngman, 1967).  
 
Lentils are a significant component of Mediterranean, 
Middle Eastern, Indian, Ethiopian, and western Asian 
diets. Popular lentil dishes are dhal in India, mujaddara in 
Arab countries, kik wot in Ethiopia, and kushari in Egypt. 
Lentils are an important food in Jewish mourning 
ceremonies because their round shape symbolizes the 
cycle of life, and in Italy and Hungary, people consume 
lentils on New Year’s Eve to bring about wealth and 
prosperity since lentils are shaped like coins (USA Dry

Pea and Lentil Council, 2015). The lentil is celebrated 
every year in Pullman, Washington, at The National 
Lentil Festival with a parade and the “world’s largest 
bowl” of lentil chili.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
Spring varieties of lentils should be planted when the soil 
has warmed to 40°F. Timely spring planting results in 
taller plants, which may improve ease of harvest and yield 
(Oplinger et al., 1990; Cash et al., 2001). Lentil seedlings 
can generally withstand frost and temperatures as low as 
21°F (Cash et al., 2001). Lentils are more tolerant of frost 
than other crops because their cotyledons remain below 
the soil surface during germination (Cash et al., 2001).  
 
Winter-tolerant varieties of lentils should be planted in the 
late summer or early autumn. The timing of planting is 
dictated by soil moisture conditions. In regions utilizing 
summer fallow, lentils can be planted into moisture in late 
August. In other regions, autumn-sown lentils are 
typically planted in September or October just before or 
after autumn precipitation. 
 
Lentil seed should be inoculated with Rhizobium 
leguminosarum bacteria when planting in fields where 
lentils, peas or vetch have not been recently grown to 
ensure root nodule formation and the fixation of 
atmospheric nitrogen. In fields where residual nitrate 
levels exceed 44 pounds per acre, lentils may not nodulate 
and produce nitrogen (Cash et al., 2001). If soil nitrate 
levels are extremely low, a small amount of nitrogen (10 
to 30 pounds per acre) applied prior to planting may be 
beneficial for establishment (Oplinger et al., 1990).  
 
Lentils require high levels of phosphorus for optimum 
seed yields and nitrogen fixation (Cash et al., 2001). 
Phosphorus and potassium fertilization rates should be 
based on soil test results and recommendations for your 
area. See local extension bulletins for this information. 
The fertilizer should be worked into the soil or deep-
banded in the fall prior to spring planting or during spring 
field preparation to avoid direct contact with seedlings 
(Oplinger et al., 1990; Cash et al, 2001). 
 
Seeding rates range from 40 to 70 pounds per acre, 
depending on variety (Cash et al., 2001; Muehlbauer et 
al., 2002). Typical grain drills with 6 to 12-inch row 
spacing can be used for seeding and should be calibrated 
to plant about 10 seeds per square foot (Cash et al., 2001). 
The ideal seeding depth is 1 to 2 inches.  
 
Management 
Weed management prior to lentil establishment is critical 
since lentils do not compete well with weeds (Cash et al., 
2001) and plants are easily damaged by post-planting 
cultivation (Oplinger et al., 1990). Applications of pre-
emergent herbicides such as linuron and metribuzin 
(applied post-planting) are common. A few post-
emergence herbicides are labeled for lentils, however they 
are not typically used since they may cause damage to the 
crop. These include sethoxydim and trilliate for grass 
weeds, and imazethapyr and metribuzin for broadleaf 
weeds (Cash et al., 2001). Contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely. 
Always read label and safety instructions for each control 
method. Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information. USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
A growing season of 80 to 100 days is required for 
growing a lentil crop, depending on seeding date, 
precipitation and heat units (Cash et al., 2001). Lentil seed 
pods mature from the bottom up, with the lower pods 
maturing before the upper pods. The crop should be 
swathed or desiccated with chemical desiccants when the 
lower pods mature to prevent seed shattering (Cash et al., 
2001). The crop can also be direct combined, which 
reduces losses due to shattering and weather delays. 
Combine headers with automatic height adjustment 
(“flex” headers) and “pick up” reel attachments are 
helpful. Low cylinder speeds (less than 500 rpm) should 
be used to minimize damage to the seed. Lentils should 
have about 18 to 20% moisture at the time of harvest to 
prevent seed damage (Oplinger et al., 1990), then dried to 
14 to 15% moisture for long-term storage (Oplinger et al., 
1990; Cash et al., 2001). 
 
Single row planting of a lentil accession in the lentil core collection from the Washington State University germplasm repository at Pullman, WA. Plants are at physiological maturity. Stephen Guy, Washington State University

Pests and Potential Problems 
Lentils are attacked by insects at all stages of plant 
growth. Seeds and seedlings are eaten by seedcorn 
maggots (Delia platura), wireworms (Limonius spp. and 
Ctenicera spp.), cutworms (Agrotis spp.), and weevil 
larvae (Sitona spp.). Lentil leaves, stems and flowers are 
eaten by thrips (Frankliniella spp.), leaf weavils (Sitona 
lineatus), lepidopterous larvae (Helicoverpa spp. and 
Spodoptera spp.), lygus bugs (Lygus spp.) and 
grasshoppers (multiple spp.) (Muehlbauer et al., 2002). 
Aphids (Aphis craccivora  and Acyrthosiphon pisum) can 
cause damage by drinking sap from plant parts. 
 
Common lentil diseases include aphid-vectored viruses 
(alfalfa mosaic, bean/pea leaf roll, bean yellow mosaic, 
pea enation mosaic, pea streak, and seedborne mosaic), 
root rots or wilts (Rhizoctonia, Pythium, Sclerotium, 
Aphanomyces and Fusarium spp.), rust (Uromyces viciae-
fabae), Ascocyta blight (Acochyta fabae), Stemphylium 
blight (Stemphylium spp.), anthracnose (Colletotrichum 
truncatum) and seedborne fungi (Muehlbauer et al., 
2002).   
 
Lentil disease severity can be reduced by planting 
disease-free seed, eliminating plant residue, and 
lengthening crop rotation cycles so the same crop is not 
planted in the same field more than once every three years 
(Cash et al., 2001). 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 
Control 
Lentils can shatter from the pods before or during harvest 
and become weeds in the following crop. They can 
typically be controlled with herbicides labeled for cereal 
crops. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Lentil seed size varies with seed type and cultivar. Large-
seeded cultivars ‘Laird’ and ‘Merrit’ have approximately 
6,500 seeds per pound, and small-seeded varieties ‘Eston’ 
and ‘Pardina’ have about 12,600 to 19,700 seeds per 
pound. Average yields in the U.S. during the years 2002 
to 2012 ranged from 1,000 to 1,400 pounds per acre 
(USDA-National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2012). 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Numerous lentil cultivars are available for commercial 
production. A few of the most common cultivars for each 
market class are listed below. Cultivars preceded by CDC 
were developed by the Crop Development Centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Small Reds:  CDC Rosetown, Crimson, CDC Rouleau, 
CDC Redcoat, CDC Redberry 
 
Small Green:  CDC LeMay, CDC Viceroy 
 
Medium Green:  CDC Richlea, Avondale  
 
Large Green:  CDC Greenland, Pennell, Merrit, Riveland  
 
Spanish Brown:  Pardina   
 
Zero Tannin:  Shasta, Cedar 
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, extension or local USDA 
NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars 
for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Allen, B.L., J.L. Pikul Jr, J.T. Waddell, and V.L. Cochran. 
2011. Long-term lentil green-manure replacement for 
fallow in the semiarid northern Great Plains. 
Agronomy J. 103:1292-1298. 
Brandt., S.A. 1999. Management practices for black lentil 
green manure for the semi-arid Canadian prairies. 
Canadian J. of Plant Sci. 79:11-17. 
Cash, D., R. Lockerman, H. Bowman and L. Welty. 2001. 
Growing Lentils in Montana. Montana State 
University Extension Guide MT199615. Montana 
State University, Bozeman, MT. 
Elzebroek, T., and K. Wind. 2008. Guide to cultivated 
plants. CAB International, Oxfordshire, UK. 
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2015. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://faostat3.fao.org/download/Q/QC/E (Accessed 
24 August 2015). FAO, Rome. 
Hancock, J.F. 2004. Plant Evolution and the Origin of 
Crop Species. CAB International, Oxon, UK and 
Cambridge, MA. 
McCauley, A.M., C.A. Jones, P.R. Miller, M.H. Burgess, 
and C.A. Zabinski. 2012. Nitrogen fixation by pea 
and lentil green manures in a semi-arid 
agroecoregion: effect of planting and termination 
timing. Nurtient Cycling in Agroecosystems 92:305-
314. 
Muehlbauer, F.J., R.J. Summerfield, W.J. Kaiser, S.L. 
Clement, C.M. Boerboom, M.M. Welsh-Maddux,  
and R.W. Short. 2002. Principles and Practice of 
Lentil Production. Available at: 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/is/np/lentils/lentils.htm  
(Accessed 17 August 2015). USDA-Agricultural 
Research Service, Pullman, WA. 
Oplinger, E.S., L.L. Hardman, A.R. Kaminski, K.A. 
Kelling and J.D. Doll. 1990. Lentil. Alternative Field 
Crops Manual. [Online] Available at: 
https://hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/lentil.html. 
University of Wisconsin Cooperative Extension and 
University of Minnesota Extension Service, Madison, 
WI and St. Paul, MN. 
Pikul, J.L. Jr., V.L. Cochran, and J.K. Aase. 1997. Lentil 
green manure as fallow replacement in the semiarid 
northern Great Plains. Agronomy J. 89:867-874.

USA Dry Pea and Lentil Council. 2015. Processing 
Information and Technical Manual. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.pea-lentil.com/ (Accessed 
19 Aug 2015). USA Dry Pea and Lentil Council, 
Moscow, ID. 
USDA-National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2012. 
Press release. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/Washin
gton/Publications/Current_News_Release/pealent11.
pdf. (Accessed 14 August 2015). USDA-NASS, 
Washington, DC. 
USDA-Agricultural Research Service. 2015. National 
Nutrient Database Standard Release. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/foods/show/4782?fgcd=
&manu=&lfacet=&format=&count=&max=35&offse
t=&sort=&qlookup=lentil (Accessed 24 August 
2015). USDA-ARS, Washington, DC. 
Vavilov, N.I. 1949. The origin, variation, immunity and 
 breeding of cultivated plants. Chron. Bot. 13:1-54. 
Youngman, V.E. 1967. Lentils – a pulse for the Palouse. 
Economic Botany 22:135–139. 
Zentner, R.P., R. Selles, V.O. Biederbeck, and C.A. 
Campbell. 1996. Indianhead black lentil as green 
manure for wheat rotations in the Brown soil zone. 
Canadian J. of Plant Sci. 76:417-422. 
Zohary, D. and M. Hopf. 1973. Domestication of pulses 
in the Old World. Science 182:887-894. 
Zohary, D. 1995. Lentil: Lens culinaris (Leguminoseae – 
Papilionoideae). In: Smartt, J. and N.W. Simmonds 
(eds) Evolution of Crop Plants. Longman Scientific 
& Technical, Harlow, UK. 
 
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. and R. McGee. 2016. Plant Guide for lentil 
(Lens culinaris Medik.). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Pullman Plant Materials Center. 
Pullman, WA. 
 
Published January 2016 
 
Edited: 22Dec2015 aym 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER