BEARDLESS WILDRYE 
    
Leymus triticoides  (Buckl.)  Pilger 
      
Plant Symbol = LETR5     
   
Common Names:  Creeping wildrye  , alkali ryegrass, valley 
wild rye       
   
  
Scientific Names:  Elymus triticoides  Buckley 
Description  
General :  Grass Family (Poaceae).  Beardless wildrye is a 
cool -season, perennial, sod -forming native grass.  It grows 18 to 51 inches tall and is strongly rhizomatous (Hickman, 1993).  
Stems are usually smooth, but are occasionally hairy.  Leaf blades are green to blue- green, stiff and flat early in the growth 
season, becoming rolled later in the year, and are 0.1 to 0.2 inch wide . The spike is narrow and 2 to 7.9 inches long, with 
typically two or more spikelets occurring per node, except for occasional single spikelets near the top.  Glumes and lemmas 
are sharp pointed, and lemmas are generally tipped with an approximately 0.1 inch awn.   
 
Identification :  Beardless wildrye hybridizes with Leymus condensatus , L. mollis  and  L. cinereus .  It may be confused with 
western wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum smithii) due to their similar habitat and growth habit (OSU Extension Service, 1979).  It 
can be distinguished from western wheatgrass by the double spikelets at each node ( P. smithii usually has only one spikelet 
per node).  Beardless wildrye also lacks the minute saw -toothed edge found on the leaves of western wheatgrass, and it is  
generally taller than western wheatgrass.  The glumes of beardless wildrye are narrow, short and acute, with only a single 
vein, while those of western wheatgrass are lanceolate, long -tapering, and have several veins (Barkworth and Atkins, 1984) . 
Distribu tion:  Beardless wildrye is found throughout the western United States at elevations below 9,000 ft,  ranging from 
Washington to Montana and south to California and western Texas (CHC, 2010; Hickman, 1993).  For current distribution, 
please consul t the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
Adaptation  
Beardless wildrye grows in dry to moist, often saline meadows (Barkworth, 2009).  It does well on sandy loams to poorly -
drained soils where adequate soil moisture is present thro ughout the growing season, and is found in valleys, foothills, 
mountain flats and meadows (USDA -SCS, 1988).  It is thought that beardless wildrye was one of the dominant species in the 
prairies and lowland oak woodlands of the Central Valley of California prior to European settlement and conversion to 
agriculture (Holstein, 2001).   
 
This species tolerates neutral to strongly alkaline soils (pH 6.0 to 9.0), moderate shading, 7 to 60 inches  of precipitation, and 
soils classified as strongly saline  (greater than 15 dS/m) (PLANTS database, 2010).  Winter hardiness and frost tolerance are 
good, though variable among seed lots.  
Uses  
Beardless wildrye is primarily used for soil stabilization, especially along channel or river banks, and for wildlife ha bitat in 
wetland and riparian plantings.  It is also recommended for use as forage and for reclamation of saline -affected, irrigated 
cropland and pastureland  (Dyer and O’Beck, 2005) . 
 
Soil stabilization :  This grass is tolerant to periods of prolonged inundation, and lays flat during high water flow periods, thus 
allowing full water flow while still protecting the stream, river or canal bank.  It can tolerate up to 12 inches (30 cm) of 
sediment depositio n (USDA-NRCS, 1991).   
 
Forage:   Beardless wildrye is moderately palatable to all livestock, especially in the early spring before it becomes coarse.  It 
tolerates trampling and recovers well following grazing (Bishop, 1996).   
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Photo by Anna Young-Mathews, Lockeford PMC

Wildlife:  Wet meadows dominated by beardless wildrye provide high quality nesting habitat for waterfowl, shorebirds, and 
wetland -obligate passarines, as well as foraging areas for Canada geese and Sandhill cranes (Kilbride et al., 1997).  Seasonal 
wetlands and dry meadows of beardles s wildrye also provide habitat for reptiles, rodents and other small mammals (McAdoo 
et al., 2006; Olson, 2001).   
Ethnobotany  
Beardless wildrye seed was used historically by Native Americans  in California as meal, or pinole (Chesnut, 1902, Zigmond, 
1981 ). See d was harvested with a beater into a V -shaped gathering basket. The grass was also harvested for forage later in the 
summer as it stays green longer than other grasses. The seed was pounded in a bedrock mortar -hole and cooked and eaten as 
a thick mush ( Zignond, 1981). The medicinal use of ergot, which can infect beardless wildrye was known to Indians in 
Round Valley in California  ( Chesnut, 1902) . The Thompson Indians of British Coumbia used the culms as a substitute for 
making basketry. (Steedman, 1928).  
Status  
T his  plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
s tate agriculture department regarding its status and use . 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/
) and your  state ’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Vegetative planting of rhizomes (‘sprigging’) or plugs in mid- September to November is recommended to establish beardless 
wildrye on sites typically saturated or inundated in the spring or early summer, or where rapid cover is needed.  Stand 
establishment  from sprigs is slow during the first year, but once established rhizomes spread rapidly to produce better 
coverage and more forage than stands originating from seed.  In California, plugs are often planted on 1 -ft (30 -cm) centers if 
rapid cover and erosion  control is needed, or on 2 to 3- ft (60 to 90-cm) centers for large projects without erosion control 
problems (J. Anderson, Hedgerow Farms, personal communication, 2009).   
 
High levels of seed dormancy due to an impermeable seed coat make stand establishme nt difficult (Knapp and Wiesner, 
1978).  Fall, dormant plantings are recommended for northern regions in order to break seed dormancy by overwintering in 
the soil.  Seedlings have poor vigor, develop slowly, and compete poorly with weeds and other forage g rasses in the first year 
of establishment.  It is very important to minimize weed competition with properly prepared seedbeds and appropriate weed 
management in the year prior to seeding.   
 
For range and pasture seedings, seeds should be drilled into a wel l- disked seedbed in late fall at a depth of 0 to ¼ inch (6 
mm) and a rate of 7 to 10 lbs pure live seed (PLS) per acre for full -rate, monotypic seedings (Bridger MTPMC, unpublished 
report, 1980).  For restoration plantings where drilling is not possible, s eeds can be broadcast at a rate of 15 PLS lbs/acre 
(USDA -SCS, 1988).  For areas with high erosion potential, beardless wildrye (or other) straw can be blown on the site and 
crimped in to keep seeds moist and in place during germination.  
 
Because seeds can  take 3 to 4 weeks to germinate, weeds should be controlled before seedlings appear.  Beardless wildrye is 
tolerant to most standard, broad- leaf herbicides, except for Telar® (active ingredient: chlorsulfuron), which can impact 
seedlings if application rates are too high.  Seedlings are generally more tolerant to all standard, broad -leaf herbicides once 
they have reached the 3 - to 4 -leaf stage.  For seed production, Milestone® (active ingredient: aminopyralid) has been 
observed to decrease seed production, although plant growth was unaffected (J. Anderson, Hedgerow Farms, personal 
communication, 2009).   
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instru ctions for each control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products  may be equally effective.  
Management  
Once established, stands of beardless wi ldrye survive for many years.  Beardless wildrye is highly productive for hay 
production when planted at a rate of 7 PLS lbs/acre on irrigated or sub -irrigated sites. Best yields are attained on fields with 
adequate levels of fertility, especially available nitrogen.  High concentrations of salts and/or low levels of moisture result in 
poorer stand establishment, lower forage yields, and slower growth rates.

Pests and Potential Problems  
Beardless wildrye is susceptible to a soil- borne pathogen, “take-all” disease, caused by the root -inhabiting fungus  Ophiobolus 
graminis  (Stroh, 1968).   A temporary solution to arrest the disease may be achieved with an application of P
2O5 at a rate of 
100 lbs/acre.  More drastic follow -up measures to renovate the site include plowing to a 6 -inch  depth, harrowing, and 
irrigating to promote rhizome emergence.   
 
Beardless wildrye varies in resistance to leaf rust, stripe rust, and ergot.  ‘Rio’ was found to have the lowest levels of rust 
infestation in trials of 12 California beardless wildrye accessions.  In some years, infection of ergot is high, resulting in  
limited use of the name ‘honey grass’ (USDA, 1949).  No ill effects are known fr om livestock consumption of the infected 
material.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns asso ciated with beardless wildrye.  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn  what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warr anty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
There are approximately 172,000 seeds per pound (Bridger MTPMC, unpublished report, 1988; USDA -NRCS, 1991).  The 
recommended seeding rate f or seed production under irrigation is 3.5 PLS lbs/acre at 24- inch row spacing (Bridger MTPMC, 
unpublished report, 1988).  Seed generally matures in June –  July, with little preharvest seed shatter.  Seed yields are 
maximized by use of a flail -vac harveste r (USDA-SCS, 1988).  No special problems are presented in cleaning the seed.  
 
Seed production in California from cultivated stands has generally been poor, possibly due to natural hybridization with othe r 
Leymus  species, such as giant wildrye ( L. condensatus), and resulting sterility (Holstein, 2001).  Rio was selected for superior 
seed set, with production averaging 300 lbs/acre (336 kg/ha) (USDA -NRCS, 1991).   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of 
origin)   
‘Rio’  was released in 1991 by the Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, CA in cooperation with the California Ag ricultural 
Experiment Station, UC Davis.  It was collected in 1973 from a 
native stand
 in Stratford, Kings County, CA.  The collection site 
is at an elevation of 230 ft in climate zone 8 in the San Joaquin 
Valley, where average annual precipitation ranges from 5 to 7 
inches.  Seed and rhizomes were harvested from test plots at the 
Lockeford PMC and used for testing throughout the 
Mediterranean climate in California, in Major Land Resource 
Areas (MLRAs) 4, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 20.  Rio demonstrated 
superio r seed viability and initial sod establishment in 
comparison with 12
 other California native collections (USDA -
NRCS, 1991).   
 
‘Shoshone’  beardless wildrye was released in 1980 through a 
cooperative agreement among the Bridger, MT PMC and the 
agricultural experiment stations of Montana and Wyoming.  
After its release, however, Shoshone was determined to be the 
Eurasian species Leymus multic aulis, manystem wildrye  (Asay 
and Jensen, 1996).  Please see the Manystem Wildrye Plant 
Guide for more information on Shoshone.  Several source 
identified germplasms of beardless wildrye are commercially 
available.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
Rio in grassed waterway planting at CAPMC, 2010.

information.  Look in the phone book under United States Government.  The Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local  
land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations  on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Asay, K.H., and K.B. Jense n. 1996. Wildryes. p. 725-748. In L.E. Moser, D.R. Buxton, and M.D. Casler (eds.) Cool -season 
forage grasses. Agron. 34. Amer. Soc. of Agron., Madison, WI.   
Barkworth, M.E. 2009. Leymus Hochst. Grass Manual on the Web [Online]. Available at  
http://herbarium.usu.edu/webmanual/info2.asp?name  =Leymus_triticoides&type=treatment (accessed 11 Sep. 2009 ; 
verified December 12, 2016). Utah State University, Logan.  
Ba rkworth, M.E., and R.J. Atkins. 1984. Leymus Hochst. (Gramineae: Triticeae) in North America: taxonomy and  
distribution. American J. Botany 71:609- 625.  
Bishop, G. 1996. A vegetative guide to selected native grasses of California. Technical Note PM -40.  USDA- NRCS, Davis,  
CA.   
CHC (Consortium of California Herbaria). 2010. Leymus triticoides  and  Elymus triticoides  [Online]. Data provided by the  
participants of the Consortium of California Herbaria. Available at ucjeps.berkeley.edu/consortium/ (updated June 
2010;  accessed 18 Aug 2010; verified December 12, 2016).     
Chesnut, V.K. 1902. Plants used by the Indians of Mendocino County, California. US DA Division of  Botany. Contributions   
of the US National Herbarium 7:295- 422Dyer, D. and R. O’Beck .. 2005. Plant guide for beardless wildrye ( Leymus 
triticoides) . USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Lockeford, CA 95237.   
H ickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993. The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California. University of California Press, Berkeley.   
Holstein, G. 2001. Pre -agricultural grassland in Central California. Madroño 48:253 -264.   
Kilbride, K.M., F.L. Paveglio, D.A. Pyke, M.S. Law s, and J.H. David. 1997. Use of integrated pest management to restore  
meadows infested with perennial pepperweed at Malheur National Wildlife Refuge. USDA Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Oregon State University, Special Report 972:31 -35.    
Knapp, A.D., a nd L.E. Wiesner. 1978. Seed dormancy of beardless wildrye ( Elymus triticoides Buckl.). J. Seed Technology   
3:1 -9.   
McAdoo, J.K., M.R. Barrington, and M.A. Ports. 2006. Habitat affinities of rodents in northeastern Nevada rangeland   communities. Western Nor th American Naturalist 66:321 -331.   
Olson, T.E. 2001. Biological resources site assessment letter of findings for the Lompoc Bikepath, Allan Hancock Segment,   Lompoc, Santa Barbara County, CA.   
OSU Extension Service. 1 979. Beardless wildrye (Elymus triticoides). Range Plant Leaflet 77. Oregon State University,   
Corvallis.   
PLANTS database. 2010. Plant profile: Leymus triticoides  (Buckley) Pilg. [Online]. Available at plants.usda.gov (accessed 2   
Sep 2009; verified 18 Aug 2010). USDA -NRCS, Washington,  D.C.    
Steedman, E.V.  1928 . The Ethnobotany of the Thompson Indians of British Columbia, SI -BAE Annual Report #45:441- 522, 
page 499  
Stroh, J.R. 1968. Cultural methods for the establishment of  Elymus triticoides on saline -sodic soils. In Annual  Technical  
Report. USDA- SCS, Bridger Plant Materials Center, MT.   
USDA. 1949. Grasses and legumes for soil conservation in the Pacific Northwest.  Miscellaneous Publication No. 678. U.S.   Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.   
USDA -NRCS. 1991. Notice of release of ‘Rio’ beardless wildrye. USDA -NRCS Ecological Sciences Division, Washington,  
D.C. and California Agricultural Experiment Station, UC Davis.   
USDA -SCS. 1988. Management and uses of beardless wildrye ( Elymus triticoides). California Technical Note 524. US  
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Davis, CA.   
Zigmond, Maurice L.  1981.  Kawaiisu Ethnobotany, Salt Lake City. University of Utah Press, page 58 
 
Prepared By   
Anna Young- Mathews  
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Center   
Lockeford, California  
Susan R. Winslow   
USDA -NRCS Plant Materials Center   
Bridger, Montana  
 
Citation

Young-Mathews, A. and S.R. Winslow. 2010. Plant guide for beardless wildrye ( Leymus triticoides). USDA-Natural 
Resource s Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Lockeford, CA 95237.   
Published : October, 2009  
Edited:  [11Sep2009 djt, 15Sep2009 srw, 16Sep2009 aym, 18Aug2010 aym, 8Sep2010 srw, 13Sep2010 kdl, 13Sep2010 msk; 
20Sep2010 jab, 1 2 Dec2016 msk ] 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plan t- materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.  
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of rac e, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual&#39;s income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)   
 
If you wish to file an employm ent complaint, you must contact your agency&#39;s EEO Counselor
 (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the ca se of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the 
USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF),  found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632 -
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint  
please contact U SDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877 -8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail dir ectly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact  
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221 -5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers
.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER