Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREAT BLUE LOBELIA  
Lobelia siphilitica  L. 
Plant Symbol = LOSI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Iroquois used  the plant as a cough 
medicine.  The Meskwaki ground up the roots of this 
plant and used it as an anti-divorce remedy.  The 
mashed roots were secretly put into some common 
dish, which was eaten by both husband and wife.  
The Cherokee used a cold infusion of the roots of 
great blue lobelia and cardinal flower to treat 
nosebleed.  A poultice of the crushed leaves of the 
plant was used for headache  and a warm leaf infusion 
was good for colds. 
 
Wildlife : Hummingbirds are attracted to the nectar. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Bellflower Family (Campanulaceae).  This 
herbaceous perennial is 5 to 15 dm high with 
frequently branched, erect  stems.  The alternate 
leaves are toothed and narrowly oblong to elliptic to 
lanceolate or oblanceolate.   The leaves are 8-12 cm 
and narrow to a sessile base.  The irregular, two-
lipped flowers are blue.  They appear in long terminal 
racemes and are from 15-33 mm long.  The corolla 
has a slit on each side near the base.  The seeds come 
in a two-celled, many-seeded  capsules opening at the 
top.  The capsules have an ear-lobed or auriculate 
base.   
 ©  Hugh Wilson Vascular Plant Image Gallery @ Texas A & M University 
 
Distribution 
This plant is found in swamps and wet ground from 
Maine to Manitoba and Colorado, south to North 
Carolina and Texas.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
General : Great blue lobelia is comparatively easy to 
grow.  The capsules can be collected in autumn, 
usually October.  The stalks are cut below the 
capsules, and placed upside down in a per sack.  
Once, home, the bag is opened so that the capsules 
are exposed to the air for a few days.  Shake the bag 
to release the seeds.  The capsules that have 
remaining seeds can be retrieved and crushed with a 
rolling pin and seeds picked from the litter.  The 
seeds can then be planted right away. 
 
Propagation by seeds : The seeds will germinate 
without cold stratification, but they need light, so sow 
the seeds in a flat with a damp fine grade peat lite 
mix.  Keep the flats moist and under lights or in a 
greenhouse.  They should green up in a few weeks.  
Transplant them in 4-6 weeks into individual pots 
such as 70 cell plug trays, use the same potting mix 
and keep fertilizing.  The seedlings are tiny at first, so 
fertilize them every other week with a liquid 
fertilizer.  After another 4 weeks they can be put out 
in the garden or transplanted into larger pots of 4 to 6 
inch diameter.  Plant the pl ants in an outdoor spot 
that is in full sun or very light shade and never dries 
completely.  Space the plants 8 to 12 inches apart.  
Add plenty of peat moss when planting and mulch 
well to keep the soil cool and moist.  Protect the 
plants from deer.  Great blue lobelia will usually 
bloom in the first year.  Allow the plants to self-sow.

They are heavy feeders, so compost or apply granular 
fertilizer when they begin growth. 
 
Propagation by cuttings: Take two node stem 
cuttings (4-6 inches) before the flowers open and 
remove the lower leaf and half the upper leaf.  Treat 
the cutting with hormodin 2 or root-tone and place 
the cuttings in a sand and perlite medium, cover 
lightly, water, and keeping the medium moist.  Roots 
will form in 2-3 weeks, but the cuttings need to force 
a good new crown from the lower node to 
successfully over-winter. 
 
Management 
When well established, clumps of this plant can be 
divided in the fall or spring by separating the basal 
offshoots from the mother plant and replanting these 
divisions and watering them immediately. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Lobelia siphilitica are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Banks, W.H. 1953.  Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Masters Thesis, University of Tennessee. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Phillips, H.R. 1985.   Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.  The University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Species Author & Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.