Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILLOW PRIMROSE
Ludigia decurrens Walt. 
Plant Symbol = LUDE4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Upright primrose, wingleaf primrose-willow, 
primrose-willow 
 
Uses 
The common name primrose comes from the flower’s 
resemblance to evening primroses (Oenothera  
species), since most have 4 petals.  The more woody 
species of  Ludwigia are very good browse for deer, 
goats, sheep and cattle.  In fact, this species is rarely 
found in overgr azed pastures. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  
 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Evening Primrose Family (Onagraceae).  
Ludwigia decurrens , a native, is the tallest water 
primrose, reaching a height of 3-6 feet.  This 
perennial is somewhat “woody”, which is unusual for 
species of water primroses.  It is considered an 
annual to perennial.  It also  stands upright in contrast 
to most  Ludwigia  species, which trail along the 
ground or water.  The leav es are usually linear (hence 
the name willow primrose), alternate, and entire.  The 
flowers are yellow with 4-5 petals (usually 4).  Also, 
common to the  Ludwigia genus is the “seed box” 
located immediately below the flower.  In fact, some 
refer to the entire genus as “seedboxs.”  Willow 
primrose has a very distinctive stem that is 4-winged 
and can be distinguished from all other water 
primroses by this unique characteristic. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
There are approximately 11 species of  Ludwigia in 
Texas.  All species are found in wet sites and all but 
one species have yellow flowers.  Six species have 
erect growth habits.  Vegetatively,  Ludwigia 
alternifolia  is the most similar, but it does not have 
the distinctive winged stems and the seedbox is not 
nearly as long.   Ludwigia decurrens  has one of the 
longer “seedboxs” of all  Ludwigia, attaining lengths 
of up to ¾ inch. 
 
Distribution 
Found from Texas and Florida to Pennsylvania and 
Michigan.  For current dist ribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : This species is found throughout the 
eastern half of Texas and well into north central 
Texas.  It is found as individual plants scattered 
within the plant community , but can make up over 
50% of the plant community.  Unlike many of the 
floating water primroses, it is seldom found in sites 
that pond for long periods.  Usually, it occurs on 
saturated soils and sites the pond for short duration 
(3-14 days).   Ludwigia ducurrens  is commonly 
associated with species of  Polygonum (smartweed)

and Cyperus  (flat sedge).  It is typically found on 
wetter sites than  Ludwigia alternifolia , but dryer than 
the more herbaceous species of water primroses (L . 
peploides, L. repens,  and L. palustris ). 
 
 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Davis, L. 2000.   Texas plant fact sheet: Ludwegia 
decurrens .  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical 
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited: 22jun01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.