Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOTTED 
GAYFEATHER  
Liatris punctata Hook. 
Plant Symbol = LIPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Alternate Names  
Dotted blazing star, Nebras ka blazing star, blazing 
star, button snakeroot, starwort 
 
Uses 
Dotted gayfeather is a forage or browse species that 
is eaten by deer, antelope, and domestic livestock, 
especially sheep. The forage quality is rated as fair to 
good. This plant will decrease under continuous 
heavy grazing. Many species  of butterflies, bees and 
other native pollinators visit the flowers in full 
bloom.                                                            
American Indians used the  dotted gayfeather for food 
and medicinal purposes. Kindscher (1987) indicated 
that the root was used for food and was either baked 
or boiled before being consumed by Native American  tribes. Kindscher (1992) listed a host of medicinal 
uses that the Plains Indi
an tribes had for dotted 
gayfeather. The Blackfeet used boiled root to reduce 
swelling, the Omaha’s powdered the root and applied 
it as a poultice for external inflammation. They also 
made a tea from the plant to treat abdominal troubles. 
The Pawnees boiled the leaves and roots together and 
fed the tea to children with  diarrhea. The root was 
also used as an antidote for snake bites.                                           
Gayfeathers are becoming more popular for 
ornamental use, especially  fresh floral arrangements 
and winter bouquets (Stubb endieck et al. 1989). If 
picked at their prime and allowed to dry out of the 
sunlight then spikes will retain their color and can be 
used in dry plant arrangements. This species also 
offers much promise for roadside plantings in the 
Great Plains region (Salac 1978). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Dotted gayfeather belongs to the composite 
or sunflower family (Asteraceae). Dotted gayfeather 
is a native long lived herbaceous forb that is 20 to 80 
cm tall, with stems single or in clusters from a woody   
rootstock. This species taproot system is remarkably 
extensive; its lateral branches spread 1.0 to 1.5 
meters. Weaver (1954) found that the generalized 
root system more or less thoroughly occupied the 
first 2.5 meters of soil, absorbing little in the first 30 
cm, but sometimes reaching a depth of 5 meters. Its 
leaves have an alternate arrangement on the stem, are 
closely spaced and linear, bein g up to 15 cm long and 
1.5 to 5 mm wide. The leaves arch upward, have 
ciliate margins, and have dotted glands on the 
surface, thus the common  name dotted gayfeather. 
Flowering heads as tufts arranged in spike like 
groups at the end of stems. Flowering occurs from 
August to October. A spike blooms for a long time as 
flower heads bloom successively from the top down. 
Flower corollas are small, tubular, 9 to 12 mm long 
and rose-purple with five pointed lobes and strap like 
styles protruding. The collection of dotted gayfeather 
at the Manhattan PMC has the traditional corolla 
color of rose-purple as well as a percentage of   
individuals with white corollas. The fruits are 10 
ribbed dry achenes, measuring 6 to 7 mm long and 
each containing a tuft of feathery bristles.

Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Dotted gayfeather is found 
through much of the plains region from southern 
Manitoba to Alberta and from western Missouri to 
New Mexico and into northern Mexico.  
 
Habitat: It grows on many types of upland, rocky 
prairie sites in the open  where it will receive full 
sunlight. Weaver (1954) found this species on 58 
percent of the upland prairie sites he visited and in 10 
percent of those sites it ranked as the most common 
forb. 
 
 Photo byline: Steve Hurst @ USAD-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
Dotted gayfeather achenes with tufts of feathery bristles. 
 
Adaptation 
Seedlings grow slowly above ground, but with 
marked rapidity below ground. By mid-summer a 
seedling may be only 12 cm tall and have but two 
narrow, long, erect leaves, while its taproot may be a 
meter long already. It is extremely tolerant of shade 
and can grow under light intensities of 5 to 10 
percent of normal. Carbohydrates are being stored in 
the plants fleshy taproot at only a few weeks 
following germination. Dotted gayfeather is indeed 
ideally suited to grow in dry, coarse soils with its 
extensive root system and limited foliage of linear, 
narrow leaves. 
 
Establishment 
Liatris punctata  can be established using seed. 
Stratified seed can be planted in the field in spring or 
non-stratified seed can be planted in the fall. The 
typical seedbed preparations should be followed in 
order to optimize the seed lings success. Prepare a 
firm, weed free seedbed by disking, harrowing and 
cultipacking the site. Chemical weed control can be 
used prior to planting to minimize the weed 
competition. Plant the seed units of  Liatris punctata 
utilizing a drill with a legume or forb box and depth 
bands to ensure correct depth of planting (6 mm) and 
good seed to soil contact. If establishing this species  for seed production purposes planting in rows is 
desirable with a planting rate of 30 Pure Live Seed 
(PLS) per 30 cm of row. For prairie restoration or 
diverse plantings intended for wildlife, add 60 grams 
of PLS seed per ha into the seeding mixture. Apply 
no fertilizer the year of es
tablishment unless there is a 
severe deficiency of potassium or phosphorus 
indicated by the soil test. No nitrogen should be used 
the year of establishment to reduce the weed 
competition. Seedling vigor of this species is good, 
but first years growth is prioritized to the root system. 
Establishment is comparatively easy when weed 
competition can be successfully controlled. 
 
Management  
Barr (1983) indicated that  Liatris punctata often 
seemed to need lime or potash to strengthen its stems 
in moist environments. He stated that in its native, 
drier climate the stems were naturally erect.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Menhusen (1973) indicated that rodents will eat the 
flower buds, seedlings, new leaves and roots of this 
species. A medium amount of lodging can be a 
problem during seed maturity in a field monoculture 
situation.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns with dotted 
gayfeather. This species will reproduce by volunteer 
seedlings, but will not do so aggressively (Platt and 
Harder 1991). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed units can be sown in pots or flats in a 
greenhouse setting. The seedlings can be transplanted 
to pots when the first true leaves develop. Moist 
stratification is necessary  for consistent germination 
of dotted gayfeather. Salac  et al. (1978) reported 96 
percent germination of  Liatris punctata seeds after 
two weeks of moist stratification. They reported that 
the optimum temperature for germination was 26 
degrees centigrade. Sorens en and Holden (1974) 
found that a seed lot of  Liatris punctata collected in 
the wild contained 76.5 percent mature embryos and 
had a germination percentage of 47 over an 8 to 22 
day period. Salac et al. (1978) reported that this 
species can be propagated vegetatively by root 
cuttings taken during the dormant season or by soft 
stem cuttings during the growing season. Seed units 
of this species are quite small with 305,800 seeds per 
kg or about 139,000 seeds per pound. Dotted 
gayfeather can be hand stripped or harvested with a 
conventional combine. Seed units are usually 
processed by running through a hammer mill to 
remove the tuft of feathery bristles attached to the

end of the achene. The seed units can be processed 
further using a two screen fanning mill with a low air 
setting.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
There are currently no released varieties or 
germplasm lines of Liatris punctata from the NRCS 
Plant Materials Program. 
 
References 
Barr, C.A. 1983. Jewels of the plains . University of 
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie: An Ethnobotanical Guide . University Press 
of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.  Edible Wild Plants of the 
Prairie: An Ethnobotanical Guide.   University Press 
of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Menhusen, B.R. 1973. Ecology of the Prairie Species 
Liatris . Pp 60-62. In Hulbert (ed.)  Third Midwest 
Prairie Conference Proceedings.   Division of 
Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, 
Kansas. 
 
Platt, D.R. and L.H. Harder. 1991. Growing native 
wildflowers.  The Kansas Wildflower Society 
Handbook. Kauffman Museum, Bethel College. 
Newton, Kansas. 
 
Salac, S. S., P.N. Jensen, J.A. Dickerson, and R.W. 
Gray, Jr. 1978.  Wildflowers for Nebraska 
Landscapes.  Nebraska Agriculture Experiment  
Station. MP 35. 
 
Sorensen, J.T., and D.J. Holden. 1974. Germination 
of native prairie forb seed.  J. of Range Man. 27: 123-
126. 
 
Stubbendieck, J., J.T. Nichols, and C.H. Butterfield. 
1989.  Nebraska Range and Pasture Forbs and 
Shrubs.  University of Nebraska Cooperative 
Extension Bulletin EC 89-118-S. 
  
Weaver, J.E. 1954.  North American Prairie . Johnsen 
Publishing Co., Lincoln, Nebraska.   
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia, USDA 
NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Edited: 080229 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.