Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BASIN WILDRYE 
Leymus cinereus (Scribn. & 
Merr.) A. Love  
Plant Symbol = LECI4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
giant wildrye, Elymus cinereus  
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Basin wildrye is 
generally not recommended for spring or summer 
forage production, because  it has an elevated growing 
point and is easily damaged by overgrazing.  
 
Basin wildrye is palatable to all classes of livestock 
and wildlife.  It is a preferred feed for horses in 
spring and is considered a desirable feed for cattle, 
sheep, elk, deer, and antelope in the spring.  It is  considered a desirable feed for cattle and horses in 
early summer, late fall, and winter.  It reaches its 
peak production in protein per acre from mid-June 
through August.  Protein levels can be as high as 20 
percent and decrease to about 7 to 8 percent protein 
as it matures and cures out.  
 
This species is a high forage producer and can be 
used as winter forage when found in larger stands.  It 
is generally not recommended for haying, because it 
is difficult to harvest above its natural growing point.  
Leaving 10 to 12 inches of stubble height will help 
reduce grazing damage.  Once harvested it produces 
little re-growth.  
 Hitchcock (1950) 
 
Basin wildrye is ideal for providing wind protection 
in winter calving pastures.  It holds its nutrient value 
well at maturity (7-8% pr
otein) and can withstand 
heavy grazing and tr ampling in its dormant state.  Its 
tall stature and stiff stems makes this forage 
accessible in areas of deep snow.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Basin wildrye is well 
adapted to stabilizing disturbed soils.  It does not 
compete well with aggressive introduced grasses 
during the establishment period, but it is very 
compatible with slower developing natives such as 
Snake River wheatgrass ( Elymus wawawaiensis), 
bluebunch wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), 
thickspike wheatgrass ( Elymus lanceolatus ssp. 
lanceolatus ), streambank wheatgrass (Elymus 
lanceolatus  ssp. psammophilus ), western wheatgrass 
( Pascopyrum smithii ), and needlegrass species ( Stipa 
spp., Nasella  spp., & Ptilagrostis  spp.).  Basin 
wildrye’s drought tolerance, combined with fibrous 
root system and fair seedling vigor, make it desirable 
for reclamation in areas receiving 8 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  It is commonly used as a grass 
barrier for wind erosion or blowing snow control.  It 
has also been planted on hilly cropland as a 
vegetative terrace for water erosion control.  
 
Wildlife : Because basin wildrye is a tall upright 
bunchgrass, it is considered excellent cover habitat 
for small animals and birds, excellent nesting cover 
for upland birds, and excellent standing winter feed 
and cover for big game animals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s

current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Basin wildrye is a 
large, coarse, robust, perennial bunchgrass.  It is a 
long-lived cool season native with an extensive deep 
coarse fibrous root system.  
Basin wildrye has long leaf  blades (15 to 25 inches) 
and flat wide (up to 3/4  inch) leaves with long 
pointed auricles.  The repr oductive stems are dense, 
stout, and strongly erect.  Seed heads are 6 to 10 
inches long.  Basin wildrye clumps may reach 3 feet 
in diameter and 3 to 6 f eet tall (10 feet under 
excellent soil and climate conditions).  Growing 
points are 10 to 12 inches above the crown. 
 
Basin wildrye has fair seedling vigor.  It is one of the 
first grasses to initiate spring growth and produces an 
abundance of basal leaf growth until the development 
of seed heads in mid-June to mid-July.  Following the 
development of seed heads, basin wildrye produces 
very little additional basal leaf growth and rapidly 
becomes coarse and mostly stems.  Re-growth does 
not occur following seed production. 
 
Distribution : It is native to the Great Plains and 
Intermountain regions of the western United States.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Basin wildrye is very winter hardy and 
has a rather broad climatic adaptation.  It can be 
found at elevations from 2000 up to 9000 feet.  It 
grows best in areas with average annual precipitation 
of 8 inches to above 20 inches.  ‘Trailhead’ has been 
seeded in areas with as low as 5 inches of rainfall and 
reproduced to populate areas around original plots.  
In lower rainfall areas, it gr ows in run-in areas, along 
gullies or watercourses, or near sites with high 
seasonal water tables.  It does not tolerate areas with 
extended periods of inundation.  It will tolerate short-
term winter flooding.  It  is susceptible to leaf and 
stem rust in wetter climatic areas. 
 
Basin wildrye has a broad soil texture adaptation, but 
it is not adapted to shallow soils.  It is most common 
on deep soils with high water holding capacities. 
 
It is tolerant of low to moderate levels (< 10 
mmhos/cm3) of saline and sodic soil conditions and 
some low pH soils.  Established stands of basin 
wildrye can tolerate long periods of drought, and it 
prefers cycles of wet winters and dry summers.  It  tolerates partial shading and 
wildfire if soil moisture 
is not too dry. 
 
It does well as a pioneer plant and establishes 
seedlings in disturbed areas,  such as recent road fills 
and areas disturbed by wildlife (ex. rodent diggings). 
 
Species often associated w ith basin wildrye include 
the big sagebrush complex ( Artemisia tridentata), 
juniper species ( Juniper spp.), needlegrass species 
( Stipa  spp.), bluebunch wheatgrass, Snake River 
wheatgrass, thickspike wheatgrass, streambank 
wheatgrass, Indian ricegrass ( Achnatherum 
hymenoides ), and Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis). 
 
Planting: This species should be seeded with a disc 
or deep furrow drill at a depth of 1/4 to 3/4 inch on 
medium to fine textured soils and 1 inch or less on 
coarse textured soils.  Single species seeding rate 
recommended for basin wildrye is 8 pounds Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 24 PLS per square foot 
or 24 pls seeds per linear row foot at 12 inch row 
spacing.  If used as a com ponent of a mix, adjust to 
percent of mix desired.  For rangeland mixtures, 
approximately 10 to 20 percent of mix or 1 to 2 
pounds PLS should be considered.  
 
For mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the 
seeding rate should be doubled.  When seeding is for 
a vegetative windbreak, vegetative terrace, or wildlife 
cover, it is recommended that 3.0 to 3.5 pounds PLS 
be seeded in 36 to 48 inch rows.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Summer and late summer (July to mid September) 
seedings are not recommended.  Seedling vigor is 
fair, and stands may take 2 to 5 years to fully 
establish.  
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Bromoxynil may be applied at the 3-
4-leaf stage of grass for early suppression of young 
broadleaf weeds.  Application of  2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the 4-6-leaf stage.  
Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to reduce 
seed development.  Grasshoppers and other insects 
may also damage new stands.  Use of pesticides may 
be required.  All herbicides and pesticides should be 
applied according to the label. 
 
Management 
Basin wildrye establishes slowly and new seedings 
should not be grazed or hayed until at least late 
summer or fall of the second growing season.  Basin

wildrye makes its initial growth in early spring and 
matures seed by late summer.  It reproduces primarily 
by seed and tillers. 
 
Basin wildrye is palatable to all classes of livestock 
and wildlife.  New stands should not be grazed until 
plants are at least 10 inches tall.  Overgrazing, 
especially in spring, easily damages basin wildrye, 
and stubble of at least 10 inches should remain 
following grazing.  Basin wildrye is ideal for 
providing wind protection in winter calving pastures.  
It holds approximately twice the nutrient value (7-8% 
protein) of wheatgrasses (3-4% protein) at maturity 
and can withstand heavy grazing and trampling in its 
dormant state. 
 
Established stands can be grazed in late spring or fall 
(leave about 10 inches of stubble to protect plant 
health).  Following grazing, little re-growth can be 
expected, even when the stand is irrigated.  Basin 
wildrye is a low maintenance plant requiring little 
additional treatment or care.  However, it may benefit 
from low levels of fertilization.  Apply 30 pounds per 
acre on dryland plantings and 60 to 80 pounds per 
acre on irrigated plantings for optimum production. 
 
Environmental Concerns : Basin wildrye is long-lived 
and spreads primarily via seed distribution.  It is not 
considered "weedy" or an invasive species, but can 
spread into adjoining vegetative communities under 
ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  Most 
seedings do not spread from original plantings.  If 
they do spread, the rate is not alarming.  Basin 
wildrye accessions with the same chromosome 
number (28 or 56) will cross with each other but are 
not noted for crossing with other native species or 
basin wildryes of a different chromosome number.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of basin wildrye has been very 
successful under cultivated  conditions.  Row spacing 
of 36 inches (3.5 pounds PL S per acre) to 48 inches 
(3.0 pounds PLS per acre) is recommended.  
Cultivation will be needed for weed control and to 
maintain row culture.  
 
Seed fields are productive for five to seven years.  
Average production of 150 to 200 pounds per acre 
can be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch 
plus rainfall areas.  Average production of 300 to 400 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  Direct combining best completes 
harvesting.  The seed heads have moderate rates of 
shatter and require close scrutiny of maturing stands.  
Seed is generally harvested in mid-August to 
September.  Seed must be dried immediately after  combining (12 percent bins/15 percent sacks 
moisture content). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop
 Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
‘Magnar’ (Leymus cinereus ) was originally collected 
by the Pullman, Washington, Plant Materials Center 
(PMC).  It was developed by the Aberdeen, Idaho, 
PMC and released in 1979.  It is a selection of 
vigorous plant types over several generations.  It is 
adapted to the Northwest and Intermountain Regions 
of the Western United States where precipitation 
averages 8 inches or above.  It has survived in 
plantings with 7 inches annual rainfall.  It prefers 
deep clayey to loamy to sa ndy soils and can be found 
in weakly saline conditions.  It is noted for blue 
foliage, fair seedling vigor and establishment, high 
forage production, good winter cover, fair winter 
forage, and ability to survive and thrive under very 
dry conditions.  ‘Magnar’ is a 56-chromosome 
cultivar.  Certified seed is  available, and breeder seed 
is maintained by the Aberdeen PMC. 
 
'Trailhead' ( Leymus cinereus ) was selected by the 
Bridger, Montana, PMC and  released in 1991.  The 
original collection site was near Roundup, Montana, 
in a sub-irrigated range site.  It is adapted to the 
Northern Great Plains and Intermountain Regions of 
the Western United Stat es where precipitation 
averages 8 inches or above.  It has survived in 
plantings with 5 inches annual rainfall.  It was 
selected for its stand longevity and drought tolerance 
as compared to other basi n wildrye accessions.  It 
prefers deep clayey to loamy to sandy soils and 
tolerates weakly saline conditions.  It is noted for 
green foliage, fair seedling vigor and establishment, 
high forage production, good winter cover, fair 
winter forage, and ability to survive and thrive under 
very dry conditions.  ‘Trailhead’ is a 28-chromosome 
cultivar.  Certified seed is available, and the Bridger 
PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References  
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Carlson, J.R. & M.E. Barkworth 1997.   Elymus 
wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Triticeae, Poaceae) .  
Phytologia 83:312-330.  
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.   Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000417.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2006.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Accessed: 060802.  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State  Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited 19sep00 jsp;03feb03ahv; 060802 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.