Plant Guide
WHITEGRASS 
Leersia virginica Willd.   
Plant Symbol = LEVI2  
 
Contributed by:   USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Alderson, West Virginia  
 
 Robert H.  Mohlenbrock @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database / USDA SCS. 1989.  Midwest wetland flora: 
Field office illustrated guide to plant species . Midwest 
National Technical Center, Lincoln, USDA -NRCS 
PLANTS database  
 
Alternate Names 
Whitegrass, White Grass, Virginia Cutgr ass, Virginian 
Cutgrass, White Cutgrass, Leersie De Virginie  
 
Uses  
W hitegrass  is highly palatable to grazing and browsing 
animals.   However, it grows in wet, wooded areas that are 
not optimum pasture areas.   
  Wildlife:
  The caterpillars of the butterfly Enodia 
anthedon  (Northern Pearly Eye) feed on the foliage of 
whitegrass.  Aside from this, little is known about floral -
faunal relationships for this species.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  USDA 
Native Status:  L48 (N), CAN (N).  
 
Description  
General :  Grass Family (Poaceae)  Whitegrass is a 
perennial grass that is native to eastern North America.  It 
is 1 –  3 feet tall, branching occasionally; it is erect to 
spawling and flowers from July to October.  Whitegrass is 
a good example of the kinds of grasses that grow in 
wooded areas.  Such grasses usually have delicate tin -
tex tured foliage and their panicles or racemes are slender 
and lanky with small spikelets.  As a general rule, they are 
not very showy.  Whitegrass is fairly easy to identify 
because its spikelets are appressed together to form a 
single row along the upper ha lf of each branchlet.  Each 
spikelet is single -flowered, oblongoid, and often ciliate 
along the margins of its lemma.  Each floret of whitegrass 
produces only 2 anthers; this is unusual, because most 
grasses produce 3 anthers per floret.  It is easily conf used 
with the non- native and invasive Japanese s tilt grass 
(Microstegium vimineum) .  Whitegrass  may be 
distinguished from Japanese stilt grass by its lack  of a 
prominent shiny leaf midvein .  It has a short life span 
relative to most other plant species and  a moderate growth 
rate.  
 
Distribution :  Whitegrass is typically found in partially 
shaded low -lying wet areas.   For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :   Moist, shady areas in woo ded sites of fertile 
loamy soil with abundant organic matter, typically along 
water bodies.  
 
Adaptation  
White grass grows in USDA Hardiness Zones 2 through 
11.  It is shade tolerant and grows best in co arse to 
medium textured soils in moist areas.  
 
Establishment  
Whitegrass may be propagated from seeds or by plant 
division (rhizomatous).   The blooming period occurs 
from mid -summer to early fall.  Each floret develops a

single grain.  It has a slow ability to spread through seed 
production and the seedlings have medium vigor.  Cold 
stratification is not required for seed germination and the 
plant cannot survive exposure to temperatures below –  43 
degrees F and is not tolerant to drought.  
 
Whitegrass can be propagated by plant division through 
digging a nd mechanically dividing the rhizomatous root 
ball into sections.  The root system has scaly rhizomes 
(underground stems) and fibrous roots.  This grass 
occasionally forms vegetative colonies from its rhizomes.    
 
Management  
Whitegrass does not require fe rtilization but thrives in 
fertile lowlands.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests of this native grass.  
Whitegrass is not known to spread in an invasive manner.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seeds or bare roots may be obtained at nurseries or garden 
centers.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more informati on. Look in the phone book under United 
States Government. The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service  should be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  
 
References  
 Leersia virginica, Willd. Enclopedia of Life.  Accessed 12 
March 2012. Avai lable at 
http://eol.org/pages/1114464/overview  
(verified 
March 2012).  
Gardenguides.com. Copyright 1997- 2010. Whitegrass 
(Virginica).  Accessed 12 March 2012. Available at   
       http://www.gardenguides.com/taxonomy/whitegrass -
leersia -virginica/  (verified March 2012) . 
Strasbaugh, P. D.and E. L. Core. 1952. Flora of West  Virginia. West Virginia University Bulletin, series 65, 
No. 3 -1, p. 99 -100. Morgantown, West Virginia,100p.  
Hilty, John . Copyright 2002- 2012. Illinois Wildflowers . 
Leersia virginica.  Acces sed 12 March 2012.Available 
at  
http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/grasses/plants/wh
ite_grass.htm
USDA, NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS  Database( http://plants.usda.gov , 12 March  2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27402 -
4901 USA.  
 (verified March 2012). 
 
  Prepared By
 
Stephen E. Ritz , USDA, NRCS, Romney, West Virginia  
 
Citation  
Ritz, S. E. 2012. Plant guide for whitegrass  (Leersia 
Virginica) . USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Serivce, Appalach ian Plant Materials Center. Alderson, 
WV  
 
Published  March 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District  
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site  
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://Pla nt-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER