Plant Guide
MANYSTEM WILDRYE 
Leymus multicaulis (Kar. & Kir.) 
Tzvelev  
Plant Symbol =  LEMU11 
 
Contributed by:
 USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California & Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Montana  
 
 
Leymus multicaulis, Susan R. Winslow, Bridger PMC  
Alternate Names 
Many -stem lyme grass , Elymus multicaulis  
 
Uses  
Manystem wildrye is primarily used for reclamation of 
wet, saline soils.  It can be used effectively  on saline -
affected, irrigated cropland and pastureland , and on land 
where the water table is within 3 ft (0.9 m) of the soil 
surface.  Manystem wildrye is also used for reclamation 
of saline seep discharge areas on dry cropland, where 
water tables are typical ly deeper than 3 ft (0.9 m) and 
annual precipitation may range from 12 to 18 inches (30-
45 cm).   
 
This grass is recommended for use as forage, soil 
stabilization  for prevention of wind and water erosion , 
and  in wildlife cover plantings.  It is moderately palatable 
to all livestock, especially in the early spring before it 
becomes coarse.  It is compatible with creeping meadow 
foxtail  (Alopecurus  arundinaceus ) and slender wheatgrass 
( Elymus  trachycaulus) Status
 
  for cattle grazing ( Baldridge and 
Lohmiller 1990).     Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General :
 Grass Family (Poac eae).  Manystem wildrye is 
a n introduced,  perennial,  cool-season,  sod-forming grass.  
Plants are somewhat cespitose and rhizomatous, growing 
19 to 32  inches tall (50- 80 cm) ( Barkworth 2009).  Stems 
are usually smooth, but are occasionally hairy.  Leaf 
blad es are grayish  green, sometimes glaucous,  stiff and 
flat early in the growth season, becoming rolled later  in 
the year, and are 0.1 to 0.3  inch  wide  (3 -8  mm).  The 
spike is n arrow and 2 to 5.5  inches  long (5- 14 cm), with 
typically two or more spikelets  (up to 6) occurring per 
node .  Glumes and lemmas are sharp pointed, and lemmas 
are generally tipped with an awn  approximately 0.1 inch 
( 2 -3 mm)  in length.   
 
Taxonomy :  After its release, ‘Shoshone’ beardless 
wildrye ( Leymus triticoides ) was determined to  be 
Leymus multicaulis  (Asay and Jensen 1996).   L. 
multicaulis  is very similar to L. triticoides ; it differs 
primarily in having both primary and secondary veins in 
its blades (usually widely spaced) and small hairs on its 
calluses (about 0.2 mm long), while  L. triticoides has 
closely spaced, prominently ribbed subequal veins and 
calluses without hairs, or with a few short (0.1 mm) hairs 
(Barkworth  2009).  Hybrids between the two  species are 
highly fertile.  
 
Distribution : The native distribution of manyste m wildrye 
in Eurasia extends from the Volga River delta to Xinjiang, 
China (Barkworth 2009).   Because of the recent 
recognition of Shoshone as manystem wildrye, its 
distribution in North America is unknown , but it is likely 
found throughout the west ern US.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Manystem wildrye is adapted to  wet, saline meadows, 
where rainfall exceeds 9 to 14 inches (23 -35 cm), or 
where wet, saline -alkaline sub -irrigated sites exist (Ogle 
et al. 2008).  Manystem  wildrye does well on moderately -
coarse/sandy to poorly -drained soils, and ranges from 
uplands and slopes to bottomlands ( Baldridge and 
Lohmiller 1990).    
 
This species tolerates neutral to strongly alkali ne soils 
(pH 6.6 to 9.0) and soils classified as strongly saline 
(greater than 16 dS/m) ( Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990;