Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NOOTKA LUPINE 
Lupinus nootkatensis  Donn ex 
Sims 
Plant Symbol = LUNO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Name 
blue lupine 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The roots of Nootka lupine were 
roasted or pit cooked by the Nuxalk and 
Kwakwaka’wakw (Pojar & Mackinnon 1994).  The 
seeds were used as protein rich vegetable or savory 
dish in any of the ways that cooked beans are used, 
they were also roasted or ground into a powder. 
 
Wildlife : Grizzly bears relish the roots of Nootka 
lupine and make large feeding excavations on north 
coastal estuarine marshes where both lupines and 
bears thrive (Pojar & Mackinnon 1994). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Bean family (Fabaceae).  Nootka lupine is a 
native perennial that dies back annually to a thick 
rhizome (Pojar & Mackinnon 1994).  The leaves are 
palmately compound and up to six centimeters long.  
The flowers are blue (sometimes tinged pink or  white), pea-like, to two centimeters long; in dense 
clusters as much as thirty
 centimeters long (Ibid).  
They are hermaphrodite (have both female and male 
organs) and are pollinated by bees. 
 
Distribution : Known from Alaska in the U.S., but 
circumboreal.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
 © Dick Vuijk Flora of Iceland
Nootka lupine is commonly found in gravel bars, 
meadows, tidal marshes and open slopes.  This plant 
requires well-drained soil and prefers sandy, loamy 
and clay soils.  It grows best in a sunny position and 
cannot tolerate shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Nootka lupine seeds should be 
pre-soaked for twenty-four hours, to break down the 
tough seed coats, and then sow in the early spring in 
a greenhouse.  The seedlings should be thinned out as 
soon as the first true leaf appears (Heuser 1997).  
Division should be done in the spring, just before 
new growth commences (Ibid).   
 
Management 
Lupines are most valuable because of the masses of 
nitrogen fixing bacteria, which live in nodules on 
their roots and convert the free nitrogen of the 
atmosphere into compounds that are essential to plant 
and animal growth (Moldenke 1949). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Not readily available.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant’s edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Huxley, A.1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillian Press, New York, New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.

Moldenke, H.N. 1949.  American wildflowers.  D. 
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Turner, N.J.  Food plants of coastal first peoples .  
UBC Press, Vancouver, Canada. 
 
Vuijk, D. 2002.   Lupinus nootkatensis .  IN: Flora of 
Iceland.  Accessed: 10jan02.  
<http://www1.bos.nl/~dvuijk/plants/data/Lupinus-
nootkatensis/y992211.html> 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.