Utah Trefoil  Lotus utahensis Ottley 
Plan
t Symbol = LOUT3  
Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant Guide 
Common Names: 
Utah  lotus , Utah  bird’s -foot trefoil, Utah birdsfoot trefoil
S
 cientific Names:  
Lotus utahensis Ottley  
Description  
General : Utah  trefoil  is described as a perennial leguminous 
species with erect -ascending stems  from a shallow tap root.   
Plants senesce each winter with all above- ground growth dying back to the root crowns.  Plants reach full bloom in mid to 
late June to early July with seed pod s reaching full maturity in mid-July  when the pods naturally split  (Stettler , 2016a).   It has 
m any primary stems that have an upright growth pattern with  dense green foliage and pale yellow to dark yellow flowers, 
usually in groups of five  (Stettler , 2016a) .  Leaves are  sessile, palmate,  with 3 to  5 leaflets averaging  2 to  28 mm long, 1.5 to 
7  mm wide,  and spatula  shaped  to oblanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acute . The flowers are 12  to 16 mm long, yellow, 
suffused with red; calyx 4.5  to 8.7 mm long,  with a 3.3-4.5 mm long  tube.   The fruit is a narrowly oblong pod, 22 to 35 mm 
long, 2.5 to 3.5 mm  wide,  minutely strigulose to glabrate  (Welsh et al., 2003).       
Distribution : Utah  trefoil  occurs in s outhern Utah, Nevada 
and parts of Arizona ( Welsh et al., 2003).  It is plentiful  in 
the southern Great Basin and the Mojave Basin and Range 
(Stettler , 2016a ), where it is  found on the plateaus of Utah  in 
Beaver, Garfield, Iron, Kane, Millard, Piute, Sevier,        
Utah, Washington, and Wayne counties. It is also found on 
the Kaibab Plateau in northwestern Arizona , in the 
mountains of central Arizona,  and into Lincoln County, 
Nevada.  For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
Habitat :  U
tah trefoil  is found in semi-arid areas of the 
Intermountain West  among sagebrush, pinyon- juniper, 
mountain brush, aspen, and spruce -fir communities at 1470 
to 2850 m.  (4800- 9350 ft.)  (Cronquist  et al.,  1989;  Welsh et 
al.,  2003) .  
Adaptation  
permission. 
Utah trefoil is commonly found growing in open, dry, stony 
or sandy soils in sites receiving 30 -50 cm (12- 20 in.) of annual precipitation. Early trials of  14  accessions of Utah  trefoil 
suggest that plants will be adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions at restoration sites, which may improv e 
seedi ng success .  The average elevation of the 14  collection sites was  2261  m. (7 418ft.)  (Stettler , 2016a ).   
Uses  
Restoration : Utah  trefoil  may have potential for rangeland restoration and rehabilitation in the Intermountain West (Stettler , 
2016a ).  As a native legume, Utah trefoil would add a nitrogen -fixing component to rangeland plant mixtures.  
Closeup of Utah trefoil flower. Photo by Lee Dittmann, used with

Wildlife/forage: Regrowth in t rial plots of Utah trefoil  was heavily grazed by rabbits and/or mule deer , showing that this 
species  is useful for feed even  despite its relatively high levels of tannins (Stettler , 2016a ). Species  of the genus Lotus  L. have 
been recognized as important  to agricultur e due to their high digestibility and crude protein content ( Escaray et al., 2012). 
T heir condensed tannin content, which is important for forage quality because it reduces the risk of bloat, improves nutrient 
absorption, reduces protein degradation in the rumen (Undersander et al. , 1993; Smith and Kelmen , 1997), and controls 
intestinal parasites (Novobilsky et al. , 2011).  
Pollinator : Utah trefoil should be considered for use in Intermountain West  pollinator plantings and CRP. Native  bees  of the 
genera  Anthidium , Bombus , and Megachile  have been  most frequently  observed in association  with this species of trefoil 
( Ikerd , 2016) . 
Status   
Weedy or Invasive
: This  native forb/legume  has not been shown to become problematic within its native range. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use . Please consult the PLANTS Web  site  (http://plants.usda.gov/ ) 
and your  sta te ’s 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status , 
and wetland indicat or values). 
Planting Guidelines  
Ut ah  trefoil  seed used in preliminary field trials were  acid scarified for 10 -20 minutes, followed by inoculation with  a peat-
based  Rhizobium . Until  specific  propagation methods are developed  for Utah trefoil, one might use  the seeding 
recommendations made for birdsfoot trefoil seed production  as a guide  (Stettler , 2016 b).           
Management  
Utah trefoil  should be used as a minor component of 
restoration seed mixtures. Management strategies should be 
based on the  key species in the established plant community. 
Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at  least two 
growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests or potential problems associated 
with Utah trefoil.  
Environmental Concerns  
Utah trefoil is a natural component of many native plant 
communities in North America. There are no known 
environmental concerns regarding  Utah trefoil.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Utah trefoil seed. There  are approximately 122,000 seeds/lb.  There are approximately 122,580 seeds/lb of Utah trefoil Photo by Derek Tilley. and a bushel weight of approximately 60.5 lb/bu .  The full 
stand seeding rate is 9 lbs PLS/ ac, based  on a target rate of 25 to 30 PLS/ft .   Although currently there is no commercially 
available seed , certain collections have shown promise for agronomic seed production  because  they produce pods on tall 
upright stems, which should allow seed to be mechanically harvested (Stettler , 2016a).       
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)                                                                                         
At present there  have not been any cultivars selected or improved, but early trials conducted by the ARS Forage and Range 
Research Laboratory  in Logan, UT have shown promis e for future production of selected cultivars ( Stettler, 2016a ).  
C ultivars  may be selected based on the local climate, resistance to pests,  seedling establishment, seed production, and 
intended use. Consult with your local land -grant university, local extension office,  or local USDA-NRCS office for 
recommendations on adapted  sources for use in your area .       
 
Literature Cited 
Cronquist, A., A. Holmgren,  N. Holmgren,  J. Reveal,  P. Holmgren. 1989. Intermountain Flora: Vascular Plants of the 
Intermountain West US A. Vol. 3b Fabales. The New York Botanical Garden. Bronx, NY. 279p.

Escaray, F. J., A.B. Menendez, A. Gàrriz, F. L. Pieckenstain, M. J. Estrella, L. N. Castagno, P. Carrasco, J. Sanjuàn, O. A. Ruiz. 2012. Ecological and agronomic  importance of the plant genus Lotus . Its application in grassland sustainability and 
the amelioration of constrained and contaminated soils. Plant Science 182:121- 133.  
Ikerd, H. 2016. Personal comm unication. USDA-ARS Bee Biology and Systematics Lab oratory. Logan, UT.  
Novobilisky, A., I. Mueller -Harvey, S. M. Thamsborg. 2011. Condens ed tannins act against cattle nematodes. Veterinary 
Parasitology 182:213- 220. 
Smith, K. F., W. M. Kelman. 1997. Predict ing condensed tannin concentrations in Lotus uliginosus  Schkuhr using near -
infrared reflectance spectroscopy. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 75:263- 267.  
Stettler , J. 2016 a.  Utah Lotus: North American legume for possible uses in rangeland revegetation in the southern Great 
Basin of the western United States.   Unpublished M.S. thesis.  Utah State University.  Logan Utah.  
Stettler, J. 2016b. Personal communication.  PhD  candidate. Brigham Young University. Provo, UT.  
Undersander, D., L. Greub, R. Leep, P. Beuselinck, J. Wedberg, D. Smith, K. Kelling, J. Doll, D. Cosgrove, C. Grau, S.  Peterson, M. Wipfli, J. English. 1993. Birdsfoot trefoil for grazing and harvested forage. University Extension, Iowa 
State University, A mes, IA.   
Welsh , S., N.  Atwood,  S. Goodrich,  L. Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young University. Provo, UT. 912p.  
 
Citation  
Pickett, T. , and  D. Tilley. 2016.  Plant Guide for Utah trefoil ( Lotus utahensis ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation 
Service,  Aberdeen Plant Materials Center . Aberdeen , ID 83210. 
Published
:    November 2016  
 
Edited:
  
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/
 or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable , 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual&#39;s income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity condu cted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)   
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency&#39;s EEO Counselor
  (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information  can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the 
USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632 -
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the informati on requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint  
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 8 77-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail dir ectly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program informat ion (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact  
the USD A SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers
.  
For any other information not  pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER