Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
THICKSPIKE 
GAYFEATHER   
Liatris pycnostachya  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = LIPY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS Ea st Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, 
Texas. 
 
Alternate Names 
Tall gayfeather, prairie ga yfeather, blazing star, 
prairie blazing star, and  hairy button snakeroot, 
Kansas gayfeather 
 
Uses 
Cattle graze thickspike gayfeather and it is 
considered a decreaser in pastures under heavy 
grazing pressure (Menhusen 1973). Thickspike is a 
particularly beautiful member of the genus  Liatris 
with its height and large si zed flowering spike. These 
flowering spikes make long lasting cut flowers since 
the heads will proceed to open just as if they were 
still on the plant. If the spike is air dried rapidly in the 
dark the flowering spike will retain much of its color 
and can be used in attractiv e dry plant arrangements.  
 
Kindscher (1992) indicated that the corm of 
thickspike was used by Native Americans and others 
to treat gonorrhea. Art (1991) indicated that it could 
be used to treat kidney diseases. Birds use the seed 
for food and rodents eat the corms. Thickspike 
gayfeather can be used for roadside and park 
beautification, prairie rest oration, wildlife cover and  food, landscaping, and to increase plant diversity in 
natural and man made prairie communities.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Thickspike gayfeather belongs to the 
sunflower or composite family (Asteraceae).  Liatris 
pycnostachya is a tall, hardy, native perennial 
herbaceous species that has spectacular magenta 
inflorescences. Single to multiple stems arise from a 
solid corm that is 7 to 10 cm in diameter and supports 
the plants deep, fibrous root (5 to 15 common) 
system. The simple non-branched stems are up to 1.5 
meters tall. The species narrow, dark green leaves 
have a light colored mid-rib and are alternately 
arranged on the stem.  The numerous basal leaves are 
the longest and they gradually shorten in length 
farther up the stem.  Both stems and leaves normally 
display short, stiff hairs. The inflorescence is a long 
spike of sessile cylindrical heads 8 to 11 mm tall. The 
flower heads have 5 to 7 individual rose-purple 
flowers, each with 5 long, slender, pointed petals or 
bracts which tend to spread and curve back toward 
their bases. Bracts of this species may have a purplish 
tinge. The flowers are given a somewhat fuzzy 
appearance by extended white stamens (male flower 
parts) and pistils (female flower parts). The spike 
itself may be up to 60 cm of the stem length. The 
flowers bloom from the top down so flowering 
covers an extended period of time. The flowers are 
cross pollinated with bumble bees and native 
pollinators doing most of the work. The fruit of 
thickspike gayfeather is a narrow, brownish, 10 
ribbed achene that is 5 to 6 mm long, with tufts of 
bristles longer than the ache ne attached to its upper 
end. The seed heads should be harvested in the fall 
after they appear dry and fl uffy, but before they are 
blown away by the wind. There are 333,000 achenes 
per kg of seed or about 131,000 seed units per pound 
of thickspike gayfeather.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. This plant ranges from Kentucky 
to Minnesota and eastern North Dakota south from 
there to Louisiana and eastern Texas. It grows 
naturally in the eastern 1/3 of Kansas.

Habitat: Thickspike gayfeather grows best in low, 
moist, tallgrass prairies that are dominated by big 
bluestem (Andropogon gerardii). It may grow near 
the base of slopes since it requires more water than 
many of the other members of the genus  Liatris. Art 
(1991) reported that gayfeather grew best on moist, 
well drained, and slightly acidic to neutral (pH 5.5 to 
7.0) soils. Weaver and Fitz patrick (1934) found it on 
56 percent of low prairies and only 25 percent of 
upland prairies that they studied.  
 
Adaptation 
Weaver (1954) indicated that  Liatris pycnostachya 
was characteristic of areas supporting big bluestem 
and was rarely found in much drier or much wetter 
grassland areas. This species of  Liatris is probably 
the least drought tolerant and may need to be 
supplemented with irrigation to bloom vigorously in 
very dry weather.  
 
Establishment 
Thickspike gayfeather is established in field and 
prairie restoration projects  easiest from seed. A firm, 
clean, weed free seedbed should be prepared by 
disking, harrowing, and cultipacking the planting site.  
Chemical weed control can be used to reduce 
competition and limit the competition from perennial 
weed species. Seedbed should be firm enough to 
allow planting of the seed units at a depth of 6 mm.  
A drill equipped with a legume seed box and depth 
bands would allow for good  depth placement of the 
seed unit and good seed to soil contact. A seeding 
rate of 30 Pure Live Seed (PLS) units per 30 cm of 
row should provide a consistent full stand. To plant a 
prairie restoration or di verse wildlife planting a 
seeding rate of 65 gm PLS per ha incorporated into 
the seeding mixture would  be acceptable. Application 
of fertilizer the year of establishment is discouraged 
unless phosphorous and potassium are at extremely 
low levels on your soil test for the planting site. 
Absolutely no nitrogen fertilizer should be applied 
the first year to discourage weed competition from 
annual weed species.  
  
Management  
Mowing can be used to reduce weed competition in 
newly established fields as long as mower height is 
kept above seedling height. Cultivation and 
herbicides can be used if gayfeather is planted in 
rows for seed production. Dead plant residue can be 
burned if done prior to plant growth in the spring. A 
non-selective herbicide (i.e. Roundup) can be used in 
the spring to remove early  cool season species before 
plant regrowth begins.   Pests and Potential Problems 
Rabbit protection might be required for gayfeather 
seedlings and newly developing shoots in the spring. 
Thickspike gayfeather stems tend to lodge in a 
monoculture situation. In
 a natural prairie setting 
other grass and forb plants tend to support the stems 
and keep them upright. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Thickspike gayfeather does not spread vegetatively 
and seedlings are easy to control and maintain. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Thickspike gayfeather can be propagated by seed or 
division of its corm. Art (1991) divided the corm 
vertically into pieces which each contained at least 
one bud. Plant the divided corm vertically with 30 to 
60 cm spacing between individuals and the bud 5 cm 
below the soils surface. Seed propagation is easier 
than vegetative although the seed units require 
stratification. Seed germination will improve with 
aging of the seed for at least three years beyond the 
harvest date. Hesse (1973) obtained the best 
germination (up to 85%) with gayfeather seed units 
after 15 weeks of cold, moist stratification treatment.  
Stratified seed can be planted in the early spring or 
summer and non-stratified seed can be planted in the 
fall (Platt and Harder 1991). Seedlings can be started 
in greenhouses from stratified seed to produce 
transplants. Seed units plan ted 6 mm deep in flats can 
be transplanted out doors in 8 to 12 weeks. Some 
nurseries plant seed in June to have corms to 
transplant in a dormant st ate the following spring. 
Seed fields can be harvested by direct combining and 
seed processed using a scalper and fanning mills. The 
seed units (achenes) are run through a hammer mill to 
remove the tuft of bristles. Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center (PMC) production records indicate that a 
purity of 97 to 99 percent is normal with a 
germination percentage of 29 to 71 and dormancy 
number of between 3 and 22 percent depending on 
the year. An eight year average of seed production 
yield indicates that 73 kg per ha was produced at 
Manhattan, Kansas.    
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under “United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
‘Eureka’ thickspike gayfeather is a cooperative 
cultivar release by the US DA-NRCS Manhattan Plant

Materials Center (PMC) and the Nebraska 
Agricultural Experiment Station in 1975. The original 
collections of Eureka were made in November 1970 
in Greenwood County, Kansas. Plant height, vigor 
and stand of Eureka were consistently superior to the 
collections of materials it was tested against. Eureka 
is adapted to the eastern 1/3 of Kansas, western 
Missouri, southeastern Nebraska, northeastern 
Oklahoma, and southwestern Iowa. This species is 
used in range reseeding mixtures, roadside and park 
beautification and wildlife habitat enhancement. 
Foundation class seed is available from USDA, 
NRCS PMC at Manhattan, Kansas.  
  
Central Iowa Germplasm and Northern Iowa 
Germplasm are source identified releases made in 
1999 by the Elsberry PMC in cooperation with Iowa 
Department of Transportation, University of 
Northern Iowa, Iowa Crop Improvement Association, 
and the Native Roadside Vegetation Center in Cedar 
Falls, IA. In 2001, the Elsberry PMC released the 
additional source identified lines Southern Iowa 
Germplasm with all the same cooperators and 
Northern Missouri Germplasm and Western Missouri 
Germplasm in cooperation with the Missouri 
Department of Conservation and the Missouri 
Audubon Society of Jefferson City, Missouri. G1 
class seed is being produced in limited quantities by 
the USDA, NRCS PMC at Elsberry, Missouri.    
 
References 
 
Art, H.W. 1991.  The Wildflower Gardener’s Guide: 
Midwest, Great Plains, and Canadian Prairies  
Edition . Storey Communications Inc., Pownal. 
Vermont. 
 
Hesse, M. C. 1973. Germination of seven species of 
wildflowers as affected by different pregermination 
conditions.  Nebraska Department of Roads, Interim  
Report HPR-1(10 ).  
  
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie . University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 
 
Menhusen, B.R. 1973. Ecology of the Prairie Species 
of the Genus Liatris.  Pp 60-62. In Hulbret (ed.)  Third 
Midwest Prairie Conference Proceedings . Division 
of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, 
Kansas. 
 
Platt, D.R. and L. H. Harder. 1991. Growing Native 
Wildflowers.  The Kansas Wildflower Society 
Handbook . Kauffman Museum, Bethel College. 
Newton, Kansas.   
Weaver, J.E. and T.J. Fitzpa
trick. 1934. The Prairie. 
Ecological Monographs  4(2): 109-295. 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1954.  North American Prairie . Lincoln, 
NE: Johnsen Publishing Co. 
 
Prepared By 
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Jerry Kaiser, USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials 
Center, Elsberry, MO 
 
Edited: 080317 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer..