Plant Guide
NINELEAF 
BISCUITROOT 
Lomatium triternatum  ( Pursh) 
Coulter & Rose  
Plant Symbol = LOTR2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  and USDA -FS Rocky Mountain Research 
Station  
 
 
Nineleaf biscuitroot inflorescence.  Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS, 
Aberdeen, ID PMC 
 
Alternate Names  
Cogswellia triternata  
  Ternate lomatium  
Uses  
Wildlife  
Nineleaf biscuitroot begins growth very early in the 
spring, often just following snow melt, providing crucial 
early forage for many wildlife and domestic animals. It is 
considered one of the most valuable forage species of the 
genus due to its large stature and high production levels. 
It is rated as hav ing fair to very good forage for sheep and 
poor to good forage for cattle (USDA -FS, 1937). Ogle 
and Brazee (2009 ) rate it as desirable spring and summer 
forage for cattle, sheep, horses, elk, deer and antelope.  
 
Early green -up and flowering make this an im portant 
species for early spring pollinators and other insects. It is 
highly attractive to bees.  
 
This species has been identified as an important plant 
species in sage - grouse habitat because of its early  
growth  habit and the associated insects that provide a 
critical food source for sage -grouse  chicks.  
  Ethnobotanic
 
Nineleaf biscuitroot was u sed by Blackfeet Indians for 
healing vari ous ailments. An i nfusion of roots was taken 
for chest troubles, and the seed was  chewed by long 
distance runners to avoid side aches (Moerman, 1993).  
The seed s were also stuffed into a porcupine’s  foot and 
tied on a young girl’s hair as a good luck charm 
(Moerman, 1998 ). 
 
The r oots of nineleaf and other biscuitroot species are 
edible  and were used as an important food  source by 
Native Americans. Roots could be eaten raw, cooked as a 
vegetable, or ground into flour  for bread meal (USDA -FS, 
1937).  
 
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for thi s plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Carrot family (Apiaceae). Nineleaf biscuitroot is 
a n  herbaceous forb  that grows from a  large taproot. 
Mature plants  reach 70 cm ( 28 in) tall. Leaves are ternate -
pinnately compound with 9 to 21 leaflets or segments and 
petioles up to 20 cm (8 in) long  (Welsh et al., 2003) . The 
petiole has a dilated base which forms a sheath around the 
stem. Leaflets range from 1 to 13 c m (0.4 to 5  in) long 
and 1 to 1.5 cm ( 0.4 to 0.6 in) wide. The inflorescence is 
an umbel with 4 to 20 rays ending in bright yellow 
flowers. The f ruit is 8 to 15 mm ( 0.6 in) long and 4 to 11 
mm ( 0.16 to 0.43 in) wide with lateral wings from 1 to 3 
mm ( 0.04 to 0.12 in)  wide.  
 
The root is a long, narrow taproot which can extend  
several  feet into the soil.  Five -year old nineleaf 
biscuitroot grown at Aberdeen, Idaho had tap roots of up 
to 28 cm ( 11 in)  long and weighing  up to 125 g (0.27 lb). 
Th e taproot makes  nineleaf  biscuitroot extremely tolerant 
to grazing, trampling  and drought , and fire (Monsen et al., 
2004).  
 
Flowering takes place from late spring  through mid-
summer  with seed ripening in July and August.  There are 
approximately 42,000 seeds/lb (Monsen et al., 2004).