Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE FLAX 
LEWIS FLAX 
Linum perenne  L. 
Linum lewisii Pursh 
Plant Symbol = LIPE2 & LILE3  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office & 
National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Prairie flax 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Cultivated flax ( Linum usitatissimum) 
is grown both for fiber (flax) and seed oil (linseed). 
Linseed oil may cause skin irritation upon contact.   
 
Ingestion causes difficulty of breathing, paralysis, 
and convulsions (Russell et al. 1997). 
 
Grazing/rangeland: Blue and Lewis flax are noted to 
have fair forage value for livestock and wildlife 
during spring and winter.  Plants stay green 
throughout the growing season providing some 
forage value.  Birds use the seed and capsules in fall 
and winter.  All species  provide diversity to the 
seeded plant community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation/greenstripping : All flax 
species are noted for their  value in mixes for erosion 
control and beautification values. The six week 
flowering period and showy blue flowers make 
seedings more aesthetically pleasing and increase 
plant biodiversity. Due to the semi-evergreen nature 
of the species, flax can also be used as a fire 
suppressant species in greenstrip plantings. 
 
Wildlife : Flax is considered desirable forage for deer, 
antelope, and birds, either  as herbage or seed.  They 
may also provide some cove r for selected small bird 
species.   
 Derek J. Tilley Fig. 1: Maple Grove Lewis flax Linum lewisii 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Flax Family (Linaceae).  Linum perenne  is 
introduced from Eurasia.   Linum lewisii is a 
comparable U.S. native plan t (figure 1).  In general, 
flax is an annual or short-lived, semi-evergreen 
perennial forb, sometimes semi-woody at base with 
attractive flowers ranging from white to blue to 
yellow to red in color.  Common in the western 
United States, blue flax is considered a woody 
subshrub in the PLANTS database (USDA, NRCS 
2000).  According to Cronquist et al. (1997), “the 
only significant difference between  Linum lewisii and 
the Eurasian  Linum perenne  appears to be that the 
former is homostylic, and the latter heterostylic.” 
 
Flax plants have many narrow, small, alternate 
(rarely opposite), simple and entire leaves that are 
sessile (lacking stalks) on the stems.  The perfect and 
regular, generally showy flowers are borne in 
racemes or cymes.  The sepals, petals, and stamens 
are five, the fruit a capsule, and the seeds in most 
species are mucilaginous when wet.  
 
Distribution 
Lewis flax can be found from Alaska to California 
and east to Minnesota in mixed grass, sagebrush, 
shadscale, piñon-juniper, mountain brush and aspen 
communities and in openings in coniferous forests. 
Blue flax is native to Eurasia and has been planted 
successfully throughout the United States. For current 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.

Adaptation  
Flax species do best on  well-drained soils.  Most 
ecotypes do well on infertile, disturbed soils.  They 
have excellent cold winter and drought tolerance.  
They will tolerate weakly saline to weakly acidic 
sites.  Plants are usually found in open areas, but will 
tolerate semi-shaded conditions.  They are fire 
resistant due to leaves an d stems staying green with 
relatively high moisture content during most of the 
fire season.  
 
Establishment 
Planting : Flax should be seeded with a drill or 
broadcast at a depth of 1/4 inch or less into a firm 
seedbed.  The ideal seeding depth is 1/8 inch.  Flax is 
not recommended for single species seedings.  The 
full seeding rate (not recommended) for these forbs is 
4 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 24 PLS 
per square foot.  When used as a component of a mix, 
adjust to percent of mix desired.  For mined lands and 
other harsh critical areas, doubling the seeding rate 
component of flax is not required.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
late fall to very early spring (because of grass 
component of mix) on heavy to medium textured 
soils and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Late summer (August - mid September) seeding is 
not recommended.  Dormant fall seedings (preferred 
seeding period for flax) will pre-chill seed and reduce  seed dormancy which may 
be present.  Mulching, 
irrigation, and weed control all benefit stand 
establishment.  Seedling vigor is good, but not as 
good as most grasses.  Germination normally occurs 
the first growing season, but may not occur until the 
second growing season.  Full flowering should not be 
expected until at least the second growing season. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because flax is a broadleaf plant, use 
of 2,4-D is not recommended.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage.  Grasshoppers and other 
insects may also damage new stands and pesticides 
may be needed. 
 Derek J. Tilley Fig.2: Test plots of ‘Appar’ blue flax Linum perenne 
 
Management 
Growth of flax begins in early spring and flowers 
appear in mid May through early July depending on 
species.  Weed control and removal of very 
competitive species may improve chance of 
establishment.  Damage from wildlife and rodents 
may occur and they may need to be controlled.  
Disease problems are minimal with flax; however 
fungus problems have been noted for some native 
species. 
 
Environmental Concerns : Flax species establish 
relatively quickly and easily via seed under favorable 
climatic conditions.  They are not rhizomatous or 
considered "weedy" or invasive species, but could 
spread into adjoining vegetative communities under 
ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  They 
coexist with other species and add biodiversity to 
those plant communities.  ‘Appar’ blue flax seed 
normally germinates th e first growing season 
following planting under favorable temperatures if 
moisture is available and it generally does not 
maintain a viable seed-bank.  Native flax accessions 
tested maintain a portion of seed, which does not 
germinate the first growing season, as a viable seed-
bank. 
 
Seed Production 
Flax should be seeded in 24 inch rows at the rate of 
2.5 pounds PLS per acre or 36 inch rows at the rate of 
1.5 pounds PLS per acre (25 to 30 seeds per linear 
foot of row) to allow mech anical weed control.  It 
should be seeded in early spring (April - May). 
 
Hand rouging within row and cultivation between 
rows may be required.  Split applications of nitrogen 
in spring and fall and application of phosphorus in 
fall will enhance production.  For optimum 
production, do not stress plants for moisture during 
late bud stage, pollination and re-growth.

Seed is generally harvested in late July to mid-
August by wind-rowing before seed shatter and 
combining with pickup attachment once green stems 
have dried.  Seed is mature when capsules are dry 
and seed is hard and dark in color.  Flowering is 
indeterminate with mature capsules and the 
possibility of some flowers present at harvest period.  
Some seed will shatter once capsules open.  Seed 
should be allowed to dry to 12 (bins) to 15 (sacks) 
percent moisture and then stored in a cool dry area.  
Seed retains viability for several years under these 
conditions. 
 
Seed yields of 600 to 700 pounds per acre of blue 
flax can be expected under irrigated conditions and 
200 to 300 pounds per acre under dryland conditions.  
 
Seed yields of Lewis flax  from irrigated fields 
average 300 to 350 pounds per acre. Seed production 
of Lewis flax under dryland conditions is not 
recommended below 16 inches of average annual 
rainfall. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Foundation and registered seed is available for each 
variety through the appropriate state Crop 
Improvement Association or commercial sources to 
grow certified seed. 
 
'Appar' blue flax ( Linum perenne ) is a selected 
release from seed originally collected in the Black 
Hills of South Dakota.  'Appar' was selected by the 
Forest Service Forest and Range Experiment Station 
and Aberdeen Plant Materials Center for outstanding 
vigor, beauty, and competitiveness with grasses 
prevalent on sites wher e it was collected.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, University 
of Idaho Agricultural Experiment Station, Utah 
Division of Wildlife Resources, and the Forest 
Service Forest and Range Experiment Station 
released 'Appar' in 1980.  'Appar' was released as 
native flax ( Linum lewisii ), but was later determined 
to be a naturalized introdu ced species from European 
origins.  'Appar' was named in honor of A. Perry 
Plumber, Forest Service (r etired) who collected the 
original material.  'Appar' is a hardy, relatively short-
lived, introduced perennial forb, 12 to 36 inches tall, 
with deep blue flowers that bloom profusely for 
about six weeks beginning in mid May.  It is well 
adapted to sunny open slopes, well-drained soils from 
moderately basic to weakly acidic, 10 to 18 inch 
rainfall areas, at 1,000 to 6,000 feet elevation.  It has 
some shade tolerance, but is not tolerant of poor 
drainage, flooding, or high water tables.  It does well 
seeded in mixtures with other species.  Its intended  uses are erosion control, reclamation, highway right-
of-ways, homes, gardens, parks, diversity, and 
beautification.  Certified seed is readily available 
through commercial sources
 and breeder seed is 
maintained by Aberdeen  Plant Materials Center.  
 
Maple Grove Germplasm  Lewis flax (Linum 
lewisii ) is a recent (2003) Selected class Germplasm 
release of a native collec tion from the Maple Grove, 
Utah area. Maple Grove was  selected by the Forest 
Service Forest and Range Experiment Station and 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center for outstanding 
vigor, beauty, and competitiveness with grasses 
prevalent on sites wher e it was collected.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, University 
of Idaho Agricultural Experiment Station, Utah 
Division of Wildlife Resources, and the Forest 
Service Forest and Range Experiment Station 
released Maple Grove in 2003. Maple Grove is a 
hardy, relatively short-lived, native perennial forb, 12 
to 36 inches tall, with light blue flowers that bloom 
profusely for about six weeks beginning in mid May.  
It is well adapted to sunny open slopes, well-drained 
soils from moderately basic to weakly acidic, 10 to 
18 inch rainfall areas, at 1,000 to 6,000 feet elevation.  
It has some shade tolerance, but is not tolerant of 
poor drainage, flooding, or high water tables.  It does 
well seeded in mixtures with other species.  Its 
intended uses are erosion control, reclamation, 
highway right-of-ways, homes, gardens, parks, 
diversity, and beautification.  Certified seed is 
available through the University of Idaho Foundation 
Seed Program and Utah Crop Improvement 
Associations and Soil Conservation Districts in 
Idaho, Utah and Nevada. Certification of seed shall 
be limited to not more than two generations from the 
G3 seed. 
 
There are numerous flax sp ecies native to the U.S. 
that may be available through native plant nurseries 
and seed companies.  Th ese include the following: 
Linum alatum  (TX & LA), Linum arenicola  (FL), 
Linum aristatum (UT & AZ to TX), Linum 
berlandieri  (CO to LA), Linum catharticum  
(northeast US),  Linum compactum  (MT & ND to NM 
& TX), Linum intercursum  (Atlantic states), Linum 
lewisii  (central & west US),  Linum medium (east & 
central US), and  Linum virginianum  (east & midwest 
US).  Please check the PLANTS database for other 
native flax species. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources

Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cronquist, A., N.H. Holmgren, & P.K. Holmgren 
1997.  Intermountain flora.  Vol. 3, Part A.  Subclass 
Rosidae (except Fabales) .  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Mosquin, T. 1971.   Biosystematic studies in the North 
American species of Linum, section Adenolinum 
(Linaceae) .  Canadian Journal of Botany 49:1379-
1388. 
 
Rogers, C.M. 1968.   Yellow-flowered species of 
Linum in Central America and western North 
America .  Brittonia 20:107-135. 
 
_____, 1979.   A new combination in Linum .  
Phytologia 41:447-448. 
 
_____, 1984.   Linaceae.  N. American Fl. II. 12:1-58. 
 
Russell, A.B., J.W. Hardin, & L. Grand 1997.  
Poisonous plants of North Carolina .  North Carolina 
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina. 
 
USDA NRCS 2006.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 08MAR2006.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By  
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John , Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
J. Scott Peterson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Derek J. Tilley, Range Conservationist (Plants) 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho.  Edited 05dec00 jsp; 24Feb06 dgo; 24Feb06 lsj; 24feb06 djt; 08mar06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.