Plant Guide
BIG DEERVETCH 
Lotus crassifolius (Benth.) 
Greene  
Plant Symbol =  LOCR 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Figure 1. Big deervetch in flower,  © 2006 G.  D. Carr  
Alternate Names  
Buck lotus , broad leaved lotus , thick -leaved lotus,  
thickleaf trefoil,  thickleaf bird's -foot trefoil,  Otay 
Mountain lotus  [ L.  crassifolius  var. otayensis ] 
Taxonomic  Synonyms: Hosackia crassifolia Benth. ; 
Lotus aboriginus Jeps.  previously called Lotus 
crassifolius  (Benth.) Greene  var . subglaber  (Ottley) 
C.L. Hitchc.  
Uses  
Wildlife /livestock forage : The seed and foliage of big 
deervetch are eaten by elk, quail  and other game 
birds, nongame birds  and small mammals (Martin et 
al., 1951).  It is sometimes browsed by black- tailed 
deer, though it’s usually not a principal component of 
their diet (Miller, 1968).   Plants are palatable to 
livestock and withstand grazin g because of their  perennial roots and rhizomes (USDA
-Forest Service, 
1966).   Crude  protein content in Oregon clear -cut  test 
plots ranged from  12- 18%  on sheep -grazed plots to  
8 –10%  on ungrazed plots (Sharrow and Rhodes, 
1981).     
Pollinators : The f lowers attract hummingbirds, 
butterflies, honeybees and native bees , and can be 
incorporated into hedgerow or pollinator plantings .  
The plant also serves as a larval food source for the 
silver -spotted skipper butterfly (Las Pilitas Nursery, 
2011).  
Restoration/e rosion control : Big deervetch  is an early 
colonizer  of disturbed areas, and because it is a 
rhizomatous legume, it stabilizes soil while adding 
essential nitrogen and organic carbon  to  these 
depleted soils. P lants often volunteer on bare road 
cuts  (Graham, 1941), and can be direct -seeded  or 
established from root cuttings  onto disturbed sites 
such as old roadbeds,  road cuts, clear -cut s, fire -
damaged land, stream banks  and pastures  for erosion 
control cov er and critical area plantings .    
Status  
Otay Mountain lotus  [ L. c.  var . otayensis ] is  ranked 
as 1B  by the California Native Plant Society  ( Plants 
Rare, Threatened, or Endangered in California and 
Elsewhere ) because  its occurrence is limited to a few 
highly restricted populations  in the state  ( Reiser, 
1994 ).  Variety  crassifolius  is common and 
widespread.   Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
ind icator values).  
Description  
General :  Fabaceae (Pea family).   Big deervetch is a 
robust, native, herbaceous, rhizomatous  perennial 
legume.  Plants are sprawling  to erect , 1–5 feet tall, 
and stems have a hollow base.  Compound leaves 
have  (7) 9–15  (23)  l eaflets that are about 1 inch long, 
elliptic to obovate, with length  generally  1 –2.5  times 
the  width,  bright green on the upper surface and pale r 
below.  Flowers are arranged in umbels of (7)  12–20 
sma ll (about ½ inch), yellow -green  flowers that are 
often  dark red or purple -blotched , especially  with  
age.  A tubular, lobed calyx half encloses the petals 
and gives the inflorescences a pink to deep red color.  
Fruits are oblong (1.4– 2.8 inches long by 0.1–0.2 
inch wide) and hairless, with several dark brown 
seeds per pod.  Bloom period extends from May to 
August depending on latitude and elevation, with 
seeds generally ripening late June to September

(Gilkey and Dennis, 2001; Hickman, 1993; 
Hitchcock et al., 1961; Kozloff, 2005; Rosatti and 
Wojciechowski, 2011).    
Plants are winter dormant, even in mild growing 
regions .  They can easily regenerate from lateral roots 
and rhizomes, as well as deep taproots that may later 
become exposed near the soil surface following 
disturbance (Darris, personal observati ons, 2001).   
There are two currently recognized varieties of big 
deervetch , otayensis  and  crassifolius  ( Rosatti and 
Wojciechowski , 2011; USDA-NRCS, 2011) . V ar. 
otayensis  is covered in long, soft, wavy hairs  and is 
found only in southern San Diego County,  CA, while 
var.  crassifolius  is  hairless  (glabrous)  or  covered in  
straight, stiff, sharp hairs that lay flat against the stem  
(strigose) .   
There was formerly another recognized  variety of big 
deervetch,  L. crassifolius  var.  subglabe r ( Hitchcock 
et al., 1961) , but this is now generally considered a 
separate species, either L. aboriginus  (rosy bird’s -
foot trefoil; USDA -NRCS, 2011) or Hosackia rosea 
( Rosatti and Wojciechowski , 2011).  Rosy bird’ s-foot 
trefoil can be distinguished from L. crassifolius  by its  
lower elevation Coast R ange distribution (below 
2600 ft) , more diminutive stature (0.3– 2.3 ft), leaflet 
length 2 –3 times width, fewer flowers per 
inflorescence (6 –10),  and white flowers tinged with 
red or purple.  
 
Figure 2. Drawing of big deervetch seed pods, plant in flower, and 
calyx, r eprinted with permission of Univ.  of Washington Press.  
Distribution:  Big  deervetch is native  from southern 
Washington and  Oregon,  mostly west of the 
Cascades , through  California and Baja Cal ifornia, 
Mexico  at elevations  up to 8 000 feet  ( Hitchcock et 
al., 1961 ; Rosatti and Wojciechowski , 2011).  Variety  
otayensis  is found only on Otay Mountain, San Diego 
County, CA and into Baja California.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant P rofile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  Habitat
:  Big deervetch is common in openings in 
chaparral , pine or mixed woodlands as well as on 
stream  banks, disturbed areas  and  roadsides  ( Gilkey 
and Dennis, 2001; Rosatti and Wojciechowski , 
2011 ).  It often grows in association with Douglas -fir 
( Pseudotsuga menziesii ), fescues (Festuca spp.),  
oatgrass ( Danthonia  spp.), perennial pea ( Lathyrus 
latifolia ), pearly everlasting ( Anaphalis 
margaritacea), blackberry  ( Rubus  spp.) , elk sedge  
( Carex garberi ), bentgrass  ( Agrostis  spp.) , 
velvetgrass  ( Holcus lanatus ), vine maple  ( Acer 
circinatum ), bluehead gilia ( Gilia capitata) and 
figwort  ( Scrophularea  spp.) ( USDA -SCS, 1983) .    
Adaptation  
Big deervetch is a fast grower that does best in full 
sun  on fine - to  medium -textured,  well -drained soils.  
It grows in areas receiving 14 –80  inches mean annual 
precipitation, and tolerates temperatures down to  -3°F 
(USDA -NRCS , 2011) .   It is drought tolerant  and fire -
stimulated, germinating readily from the seed bank, 
even a fter intense fires (Rocca, 2009).    
A common garden study of 141 collections of big 
deervetch and rosy bird’s -foot trefoil from Oregon 
found little differentiation within  ‘varieties ’ (species) , 
suggesting one large seed transfer zone  should suffice 
for each  species within the area of collection  (Doede, 
2006) .  The var. crassifolius  zone encompassed the 
entire range of the collections within the central 
Oregon Cascades  ( Willamette  National Forest)  and 
part of the Willamette Valley, while the var. 
subglaber  ( L. aboriginus ) zone covered the 
Willamette Valley and north -central coastal range 
( Siuslaw  National Forest)  up to an elevation of 2000 
ft.   Because the adaptive variation of accessions from 
above about 2000 ft. elevation was  not tested in this 
study,  higher elevation coast range seed collections 
should be used for treatments in those areas.   In the 
Willamette Valley  overlap area, no reason was found 
to favor one species over the other, so seed source 
selection is left to the discretion of local knowled ge 
or preference for certain plant characteristics.     
Establishment 
Big deervetch seed has combined dormancy, meaning 
it has both physical and physiological inhibitions to 
germination, so seed should be scarified and stratified 
prior to sowing.  Seed can be scarified in a Forsbe rg 
seed scarifier  with 22 0 grit sandpaper for 10 to 15 
seconds in order to overcome physical seed coat 
dormancy, followed by cold- moist stratification for at 
least 60 –90 days to overcome the physiological 
dormancy  (Darris, unpublish ed data, 2000-2001).  
With these treatments , germination rates can reach 
80- 85% for good seed lots.   Treatment with boiling 
water has been proposed as an alternative to 
mechanical scarification in some Lotus  species, but 
further testing is required to eval uate the success of 
these treatments  on big deervetch germination.

Scarified seed can be direct-seeded in the fall to 
stratify  in situ, germinating in the spring when the 
soil begins to warm.   Like most legumes, 
establishment success , plant vigor and nodulation  
will be improved by inoculating seed prior to sowing.  
This can be accomplished by  making a slurry from 
soil and/or  root  nodules of existing big deervetch (or 
co -occurring legumes ), or purchasing rhizobium  
inoculants  from a commercial source.   Seedlings are 
often slow to establish initially, so a good weed 
management plan should be in effect prior to planting 
in order to minimize competition.   There are about 
48,600 seeds per pound.  Sown alone , the suggested 
seeding rate is 4 –8 pure live seed  (PLS) pounds per 
acre, or 4 –8 seeds per square foot.     
Management  
P lants require little management once establishe d; 
they are long -lived, drought -tolerant,  and re -sprout or 
germinate readily after fire and other major 
disturbances.  
Pests and Potential Pr oblems 
P ocket gophers  can do significant damage to 
plantings of big deervetch (Doede, 2006) .   There are 
no other records of specific pest or disease problems, 
but  plants  may be expected to be susceptible to insect 
pests and diseases similar to those found on other 
native  Lotus species.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with big deervetch.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed production fields can be established  in the 
spring  with transplants on 2 -foot  centers , or direct -
seeded in the fall on 2 -foot rows at a rate of about 4 –
6  pure live seed (PLS)  pounds per acre .  Because of 
its ability to spread widely from rhizomes, i n-row 
cultivation is difficult once stands establish.  
Therefore,  weed management  may be mostly limited 
to  hand weeding, very shallow surface cultivation, or  
dormant spraying with non- selective herbicides such 
as glyphosate  in the spring before shoots begin to 
emerge.  Please contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely. 
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information. USDA, NRCS does not  guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective.   
Seed can be direct -combined if ripening is fairly 
uniform (this can be managed to a certain extent with 
soil moisture management as pods begin to r ipen), or 
swathed and immediately  moved onto rolled out 
paper  or tarp to dry before combining.      For plant production, seed is scarified, sowed in 7
-
cubic -inch  cone-tainers  or plug trays,  and  moist 
stratified in a cooler  at 35 –38°F  for 60 to 90 days  
( Dar ris and Doede, 2000) .  Vegetative propagation is  
also possible from rhizome segments or root  cuttings 
containing at least one shoot bud, al though further 
testing is required  to determine the best practices . 
 
Figure  3. Big deervetc h seed pods, ©  2006 G.  D. Carr  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
There are no improved or selected materials of big 
deervetch, but container  plant s and/or seed are 
sometimes  available from commercial sources  on the 
West coast . 
References  
Darris, D., and D. L. Doede. 2000. Adaptive genetic 
variation in big deervetch, study no. ORPMC -T -
9901- CR. p. 22 -25. In Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center annual technical r eport: 2000. USDA-
NRCS, Corvallis, OR.  
Doede, D.L. 2006.  Lotus crassifoli us (big deer  vetch) 
common garden study . Unpublished report . 
USDA - F orest  Service,  Gifford Pinchot N.F.,  
Mt. Adams Ranger Dist.,  Trout Lake , WA. 
Gilkey, H.M., and L.R.J. Dennis. 2001. Handbook of  northwestern plants. Rev. ed. Oregon State Univ.  
Press, Corv allis. 
Graham, E.H. 1941. Legumes for eros ion control and 
wildlife. USDA Misc. P ubl. No. 412. U.S. Gov. 
Print. Office, Washington, DC.  
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993. The Jepson manual: higher  plants of California. Univ . of California Press, 
Berkeley.  
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W.  Thompson. 1961. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. Part 3: saxifragaceae to ericaceae. 
Univ. of Washington Press, Seattle.  
Kozloff, E.N. 2005. Plants of western Oregon,  Washington &  British Columbia. Timber Press, 
Portland, OR.   
Las Pilitas Nursery. 2011. Plants for a California or  western butterfly garden [Online]. Available at 
http://www.laspilitas.com/butterfl.htm  (accessed

15 Aug. 2011). Las Pilitas Nursery, Santa 
Margarita, CA. 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951.  American wildlife & plants: a guide to wildlife 
food habits. Dover Publications, Inc., New York.  
Miller , F.L. 1968. Observed use of f orage and plant 
communities by black -tailed d eer. J Wildl 
Manage  32(1): 142- 148.  
Reiser , C.H. 1994. Rare plants of San Diego County 
[Online]. Available at http://sandiego.sierraclub. 
org/rareplants/ (accessed 15 Aug. 2011). Aquafir 
Press, Imperial Beach, CA.   
Rocca, M.E. 2009. Fine -scale p atchine ss in fuel load 
can influence initia l post-fire u nderstory  
composition in a mixed conifer f orest, Sequoia 
National Park, California . Nat Areas J 29(2):126-
132.  
Rosatti, T.J., and  M. Wojciechowski  (ed.)  2011. 
Fabaceae (Leguminosae). In The Jepson manual: 
vascular plants of California. 2
nd  ed. Available at 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/tjm2/review/treatment
s/fabaceae_all.html (accessed 17 Aug . 2011). 
Jepson Flora Project, Berkeley , CA. 
Sharrow, S.H., and B. Rhodes. 1981 . The effect of 
grazing sheep on clearcuts in Oregon’s coast 
range and its impact on big game habitat. 
Progress Report 198 1-1982. Project No.  0066.  
Oregon  Agric. Exp. Stn. , Corvallis.  
USDA -Forest Service. 1966. Notes on western range 
forbs. Agric. Handb. 293. U.S. Gov. Print. 
Office, Washington, DC.  
USDA -NRCS. 2011. Conservation  plant 
characteristics of  big deervetch  ( Lotus  crassifolius
 [Benth.]  Greene) . In The PLANTS 
database [Online]. Available at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ (accessed 16 Aug. 2011). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC . 
USDA -SCS. 1983. Plant materials center pr oject 
plan: big deervetch initial evaluation project 
(IEP), no. 411037T. USDA -SCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR.   
Prepared By :   
Anna Young- Mathews and Dale Darris   
U SDA -NRCS Plant Materials Center   
Corvallis, Oregon  
Citation  
Young- Mathews, A ., and D. Darris . 2011 . Plant 
g uide for  big deervetch  ( Lotus crassifolius ). USDA -
Natural  Resources Conservation Service  Plant 
Materials Center , Corvallis , OR . 
Published  September  2011 
Edited:  [30Aug2011 klp ; 06Sep2011 jab ] 
For m ore information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials .nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER