SOUTHERN MAGNOLIA 
Magnolia grandiflora L. 
Plant Symbol = MAGR4  
 
 
Photograph of  southern magnolia . Photo by  William S. Justice ,  hosted 
by the USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:   evergreen magnolia; bull -bay;  big -
laurel  
Description
 
General :  Magnolias  are one of the oldest tree species in 
the world ( USNA, 2006). Southern magnolia is  a  
flowering ,  woody  evergreen tree, with a st raight, light 
brown/gray- brown trunk  with scales that are pressed close 
together. It has a conical crown that grows approximately 
50– 90  ft tall  and 2–4 ft in diameter; and it may live 80 –
120 years ( Maisenhelder,  1970; MFC, 2007) .  Some 
southern magnolias may grow as wide as tall ( Dirr, 1998). 
Sweetbay magnolia ( Magnolia virginiana) is similar in 
appearance, but has a smaller circumference and shorter 
height.  Southern magnolia has  moderately stout twigs that 
have  brown  wooly hairs . The stems have vertical lenticals  
and shield -shaped leaf scars. The pith is large, white, and 
blocky in appearance. T he 5–8 in (13 –20 cm) long , 2–3 in 
(5 –8 cm ) leaves are simple, alternate, and  oval to 
elliptical. They are very thick  and leathery , without teeth, 
and have a  smooth, shiny surface above and a fuzzy, rusty 
color below. Th e leaves have pinnate venation and the  
margins of the leaves are smooth. The leaves can persist 
on the tree for approximately two years (MFC, 2007).  The 
terminal flower bud is ¾ –1 ¼ in (2 –3 cm) long, is brown 
and pubescent, and tapers at the apex. The lateral/axillary 
bud is small (¼ in) and is slightly shrouded in hair. The 
tree flowers from late spring to fall; producing  6 –8 in 
(15 –20 cm) wide  fragrant,  showy, white, monoecious 
flowers  (having male and female reproductive organs on 
same plant)  on stout, hairy stalks.  The flowers may have  6
–15 petals. The fruit is an aggregate of dry, cylindrical , 
hairy,  3–5 in long (8– 13 cm) carpels that turn red/red -
brow n with age.  Each follicle contains one ½ in (1.3 cm) 
long bright red seed. The slightly flattened seed remains 
attached to the open pod by a thin, elastic thread. The 
roots are typic al of magnolias and are rope -like , and 
unbranched (USNA, 2006).  The roots can extend up to 
four times the canopy width ( Gilman and Watson, 1994).   
Southern magnolia can be sometimes confused in 
appearance  with the great  laurel ( Rhododendron 
maximum) . 
 
Distribution :  Magnolias  once made up a large part of 
North Temperate forest t rees before the last glacial period 
(Maisenhelder, 1970) . Southern magnolia primarily grows 
in the southeastern US and the Atlantic and Gulf Coastal 
Plain  in USDA Hardiness Zone 6 –10 (Dirr, 1998). 
Southern magnolia  is native from Maryland south to 
Florida  and west to Texas. Cold -hardy cultivars can be 
grown as far north as southern Ohio, northern New 
Jersey, and Long Island. It is also grown on the west coast 
from Washington State south to California. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  It is listed in most states as a USDA  facultative 
plant , meaning that it can occur equally often in both 
wetlands and non -wetlands.  I t often occurs in  moist 
woodlands, hardwood hammocks, bottomlands,  and in 
allu vium and outwashes from uplands;  but may also grow 
on mid dle slopes (Maisenhelder, 1970).  In contrast, 
sweetbay magnolia ( Magnolia virginiana) is similar in 
appearance but its distribution extends farther north and it 
is designated as a facultative w etland (FACW) plant 
which means it usually occurs in wetlands . It  does not 
occur in pure stands but  grows intermixed with other 
hardwood species, growing singly o r in small groups 
(Maisenhelder, 1970 ; Elias, 1980).  It can often be found 
g rowing with sweetgum, blackgum, yellow -poplar, oaks, 
white ash, hickories, red maple, sweetbay magnolia, and 
American and winged elms ( Maisenhelder, 1970). 
 
Adaptation  
Magnolia  spp. are native to Southeast  Asia, eastern North 
America, South and Cent ral America, and the Caribbean 
(Knox et al. 2013).  Approximately half of the 80  species 
of magnolia native to the eastern US and Southeast  Asia  
are in cultivation (USNA, 2006).  It  grows in fine –medium 
textured soil  with a pH of 4.5– 6.5 (Hodges et al., 2010). I t 
can survive in shade but has l ow drought tolerance. It 
does not survive in flooded conditions but can tolerate 
high moisture levels , aerosol salt, and has good tolerance 
of soil salinity (Maisenhelder, 1970; Wade, 2012;  Gilman 
and Watson, 1994) . 
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide

Uses 
Timber/wood:  Southern magnolia  is the hardest and 
heaviest of the magnolia species most commonly 
harvested in the US. Its wood is hard, heavy, even 
textured, and similar to yellow poplar in color and 
properties, but it browns when exposed to air (Elias, 
1 980). Its wood color is light, with white sapwood and 
light to dark brow n heartwood. It is highly resistant to 
shock, will not shrink, and holds nails well 
( Maisenhelder, 1970). It is  used for furniture, cabinets, 
paneling, veneer, boxes, and crates (Maisenhelder, 1970; 
Hodges et al., 2010).  
 
Urban forestry/o rnamental/shade:  Southern magnoli a is 
a very popular ornamental tree  that is used extensively in 
the south. It is resistant to damage by sulfur dioxide and 
can be used as a screen or hedge in urban and suburban 
areas  (Hodges et al., 2010; Dirr, 1998; Gilman and 
Watson, 2014).  Southern magnolia is promoted as a 
hurricane/storm resistant tree in urban areas,  right -of -
ways, parks, and yards  and  as an alternative to the once -
popular Bradford pai r (Pyrus calleryana ) and red and 
silver maples ( Acer rubrum; A. saccharinum ) which tend 
to break or topple easily (Brodbeck, 2015).  Southern 
magnolia is one of the most wind- resistant trees in the 
southeastern Coastal Plain and was one of the best 
survivor s of Hurricane Erin and Opal in 1995 (Duryea et 
al., 2007).  And while some trees readily lose limbs and 
leaves during hurricanes to increase wind -resistance and 
survival, southern magnolia has a high survival rate 
during hurricanes without having a high ra te of branch-
loss or defoliation relative to other species. Nevertheless, 
magnolia used in an urban setting also has its limitations. 
Although magnolia’s individual leaves are large  and 
persistent , its overall lea f surface area is relatively low, 
thus it d oes not provide substantial stormwater runoff 
r eduction benefits (McPherson, 2003 ).  A study by Nowak 
et al., (1990) also  finds that the slower growth of the 
southern magnolia may make it more susceptible to 
vandalism and mortality in urban planting when 
co mpared to alternative faster growing trees such as black 
locust ( Robinia pseudoacacia ) and the London plane trees 
( Platanus  x  hispanica ). The authors suggest that in urban 
contexts, mortality rates may be reduced by increasing the 
growth rate of new planti ngs through proper irrigation and 
fertilization , and by reducing competition  and minimizing 
pruning.  Lastly, in spite of its widespread use in urban, 
commercial, and municipal plantings, southern magnolia 
has been noted for its ability to occasionally  displace 
curbs and sidewalks (Burger and Prager, 2008 ).  
Carbon Sequestration:  As a potential residential or 
commercial shade tree, southern magnolia can provide 
significant energy savings for a home  or office  while 
helping to reduce carbon emissions.  A cost -benefit  study 
by McPherson (2003) found that 85% of total benefits 
provided by southern magnolia were due to energy 
savings. However, in the same study, magnolia provided 
much less benefit in terms of carbon dioxide (CO
2)  reductions due mainly to i
ts relative slower growth rate 
and smaller tree size.  In the Coastal Plain the southern 
magnolia can store 17,800 lb/tree per year (USFS, 2014).  
 
Wildlife:   Seeds are eaten by squirrel, opossum, quail, 
turkey, mice, and chipmunks (Hodges et al., 2010; Elia s, 
1980) . Seeds are high in fat and are a good energy source 
for migratory birds  (USNA, 2006) . They are eaten by 
eastern kingbirds, mockingbirds, robins, wood thrushes, 
and red -eyed vireos (Arnold Arboretum, 2011).  
Pollinators, especially beetles, are attr acted to the pollen 
that is high in protein.  
 
Other Uses:   A variety of extracts have been taken from 
leaves, fruits, bark, and wood for pharmaceutical 
applications (Hodges et al., 2010).  The thick, waxy, long -
lasting cut leaves are very aesthetically pleasing, and can 
be used in holiday flower arrangements.  
Ethnobotany  
The Choctaw Indians used a decoction of the bark of 
southern magnolia as a skin wash for heat, itching, and 
sores as well as in a steambath  for dropsy (Taylor, 1940) . 
Status  
Weedy or Invasive:   There are no known problems with 
magnolias becoming weedy.
 Please consult with your 
local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Ext ension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use . Please consu lt the 
PLANTS Web site ( http://plants.usda.gov/
) and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and  wetland indicator values).
 
Planting Guidelines  
Generally, magnolias are  moderately fast-growing trees 
that are easy to grow.  It may be propagated through bare 
root, container, stem cuttings, and grafts. Southern 
magnolia can be grown in a container and transplanted 
into field in late winter/early spring, in full sun or part-
shade, in slightly acid, well -drained soils , and covered 
with a  mulch to moderate soil temperature and moisture 
(Dirr,  1998; USNA, 2006).  In the S outheast, container 
plants can be suc cessfully transplanted throughout the 
year, and burlapped trees are transplanted from August to 
October (Wade, 2012).  Trees that are 2–4 ft tall are easier 
to transplant than larger specimens (MFC, 2007).  
 
Southern mag nolia should be planted 2 in. ( 5cm) above 
the surrounding soil to encourage roots to grow straight 
downwards.  The roots respond to planting depth, so if the 
roots are planted too deep, they will grow towards the soil 
surface or laterally, and few roots will grow straight 
downwards. This may cr eate a tree that is less stable in 
the landsc ape and more prone to toppling (Gilman, 2014) . 
It will take approximately 4 years to develop an 
established root system (Wade, 2012). W ater and apply 
3 –5 inches of mulch around the base of the plant to

prevent weeds (Wade, 2012).  Mulch should be keep at 
least one inch from the stem and w atering should continue 
for 3 –5 years until the roots are fully established (MFC, 
2007).  The tree may need to be stabilized with guy -wires 
for the first growing season. To prevent  damage to the 
tree, string the guy- wire through a section of old garden 
hose  before wrapping the tree (Wade, 2012).   
 
Seed can be collected in fall, soaked in water and baking 
soda (to prevent fermentation) for several days, de -
pulped, and stored for 3 months at 45°F  for the requisite 
period of cold- stratification (MFC, 2007). Afterwards, i t 
can be directly planted in a well -prepared seedbed in early 
spring.   
Management  
Container -grown plants should be transplanted in  spring 
or fall, mulched, fertilized  at  planting, and well -watered. 
A study by Hensley et al. (1988) did not find a  significant 
difference in growth measurements from fertilizer 
placement when placed at the bottom of the planting hole, 
mixed with backfill, or when applied to the surface  of 
southern magnolia transplants . They also observed that a 
combination of spring planting, mulching, and 
fertilization resulted in significant growth in stem 
diameter.  Applying ½ lb of 10- 10-10 fertilizer at the base 
of the tree in March, May, and July d uring the first year of 
establishment will accelerate growth (Wade, 2012). Avoid 
fertilizing the tree during its slowest time of growth in fall 
and winter. Continued watering and mulching is required 
for successful establishment, and many projects have 
fai led due to desiccation (MFC, 2007). Mulched  plants of 
southern magnolia  may  be shorter at the end of the first 
year of growth than non -mulched plants, however after 
approximately 2 years of growth, mulched plants will 
have grown significantly larger than non- mulched plants 
(Hensley,  1988).  
 
Generally, southern magnolia does not require much 
pruning  to develop a strong structure. If left unpruned, the 
tree limbs can reach the ground (MFC, 2007).  Pruning 
should be done during the growing season, after 
bloomi ng, as the tree does no t heal well during dormancy 
(NPIN , 2013) . Growing the plant against southern facing 
walls or as espaliers can help initiate blooms in more 
northern clima tes (Bir, 1992).  As a landscape plant it is 
somewhat messy, and will shed its old leaves in spring, 
and its seedpods in late summer.  These leaves can be 
raked under the tree and used as mulch. If there is 
evidence of leaf spot on the fallen leaves, those leaves 
should be raked up and disposed ( Gilman and Watson, 
1994).   
 
Few plants wi ll be able to grow in the  magnolia’s  dense 
shade, persistent leaf residue, and among its shallow roots 
so it should be planted alone and treated as a specimen 
plant. It  is well-suited for planting near ponds  or  in stream 
borders  (Bir, 1992).  Southern magno lia has coppice 
potential, which means  the canopy of the plant may be  fully removed (Hodges et al., 2010).
 D ue to its very wide 
root system, it will undergo significant damage and will 
likely die if relocated during construction projects 
(Gilman and Watson, 1994).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Magnoli as do not tend to attract pests, however when 
outbreaks occur, they may result in significant economic 
or aesthetic loss (Knox et al. 2013).  There are some 
reports of tulip -poplar  weevil damage , leaf spo ts  on 
young leaves , and the magnolia borer can girdle the trunk 
of young nursery stock  (Dirr, 1998; Gilman and Watson, 
1994 ). Magnolia serpentine leafminer moth  damage can 
effect plants throughout northeastern states (Knox et al., 
2013). Twigs and leaves may occasionally be heavily 
infested with scales that will not harm the growth of the 
plant , but may negatively affect its appearance (Gilman 
and Watson, 1994).  Southern magnolia may have 
occasional or light feeding damage from Japanese beetles 
(H eld, 2004) . D espite these potential problems, Magnolia 
spp. contain antimicrobial, insecticidal, and nematicidal 
properties that help to reduce potential threats from pests 
and diseases (Knox et al., 2013).  
 
Environmental Concerns   
There is little chance of this plant becoming invasive. 
Nevertheless, few plants will be able to grow in the dense 
shade and heavy leaf residue underneath the tree. The 
chipped mulch of southern magnolia contains 
allelochemicals that can interfere with the establishment 
and growth of certain crops like lettuce ( Rathinasabapathi 
et al., 2005).  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Magnolias are often pollinated by beetles. There is wide 
variation in bloom times and flower set between cultivars. 
In the case of previously planted trees, seed production 
may  take 10 –20 years depending on growth conditions 
(Dirr, 1998). After initial seed set, the tree can produce 
abundant seed crops every year. Under forested 
conditions, the initiation of seed production is delayed 
until approximately 25 years ( Maisenhelder, 1970). Cones 
may be collected and dr ied in paper bags until seeds 
emerge.  Seeds require 3 –6 months of cold stratification at 
32– 41°F (Dirr, 1998). Excessive  heating or drying can 
damage seeds. Seed may be soaked at room temperature 
for a week to speed the stratification process (Bir, 1992). 
Embryo dormancy is variable, so seed may not germinate 
the first year. Germination rate of southern magnolia  seed  
is approximately 50% ( Maisenhelder, 1970). Young 
cuttings  planted in sand or perlite mixes  with excellent 
drainage begin  rooting after 6 –10 weeks. Grafting and 
budding may also be used for propagation.  Seed dispersal 
in natural communities may occur through birds, 
mammals, heavy rains, and winds ( Maisenhelder, 1970).  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materia ls (and area 
of origin)

There are many cultivars of southern magnolia developed 
with different heights, growth habits, bloom times, bloom 
abundance,  and cold tolerance. Nursery growers tend to 
propagate this plant through vegetative methods, and the 
seedl ings can take up to 10 years or more to flower 
( Wade, 2012). Two  of the more popular cold tolerant 
cultivars on the market are ‘Bracken’s Brown Beauty” 
(originates from SC) and  ‘Edith Bogue’ (originates from 
NJ).  ‘Bracken’s Brown Beauty’ is a cultivar  highly prized 
for its brown,  tomentose (short-haired ) lower leaf surface 
(Williams et al., 2002) . ‘Edith Bogue’ is a broad -
spreading variety, with branches that will not break under 
snow accumulation. It is reported to bloom in 2– 3 years 
(Gilman and Watson, 1994).  The plant material originates 
in Montclair, NJ  but  can be grown as far away as the 
Pacific Northwest. T here is a long-lived clone of ‘Edith 
Bogue’ in the Morris Arboretum in Philadelphia, PA 
( Dirr, 1998). Consult with your local land grant 
university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office 
for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Arnold Arboretum. 2011. Fruits of autumn. Arnold 
arboretum seasonal guide . The Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Boston, MA.  
Bir, R. E. 1992. Growing and propagating showy native 
woody plants. Univ. of N. Carol. Press. Chapel Hill, 
NC. 
Brodbeck, B. 2015. Smart growth in urban forestry;  hurricane resistant trees. Urban & C ommunity 
Forestry. Alabama Coop.  Ext. Auburn Univ.  
Burger, D.W., and T.E. Prager.  2008. Deep-rooted trees 
for urban environments: selection and propagation. 
A rboric. Urb. For . 34(3):184–190.  
Dirr, M.A. 1998. Magnolia virginiana . Stipes Publishing. 
Champa ign, Illinois.  
Duryea, M. L., E. Kampf, and  R. C.  Littell. 2007 . 
Hurricanes and the urban forest:  I.  effects  on 
southeastern United States Coastal P lain tree species. 
Arboric . Urb. For . 33(2): 83. 
http://hort.ifas.ufl.edu/treesandhurricanes/documents/
pdf/EffectsOnSEUSCoastalPlainTreeSpecies.pdf  
  (accessed 02 Mar. 2015).  
Gilman, E. F. 2014. Roots responding to planting depth. 
UF IFAS Extension. Univ. of FL. Gainesville, FL.  
http://hort.ufl.edu/woody/r oot-coming- to-top -
more.shtml  (accessed 17 Feb. 2015).  
Gilman, E.F., and D.G. Watson.  1994. Magnolia 
grandiflora: southern magnolia.  Pub. #ST -371.  
USDA US Forest Service Factsheet. UF IFAS 
Extension. Univ. of FL. Gainesville, FL. 
http://hort.ifas.ufl.edu/da tabase/documents/pdf/tree_f
act_sheets/maggraa.pdf  (accessed 19 Feb. 2015).  
Held, D.W. 2004. Relative susceptibility of woody  landscape plants to Japanese beetle ( Coleoptera: 
Scaraba eidae). J. Arboric. 30(6):328 –335.   Hensley, D.L., R.E. McNiel, and R. Sundheim. 1988. 
Management influences on growth of transplanted 
Magnolia grandiflora. J. Arboric. 14(8):204– 207. 
Hodges, J.D., D.L. Evans, L.W. Garnett, A. Londo, and L. 
McReynolds. 2010. Mississippi trees. Miss. State 
Univ. Ext. Service. Miss. Forestry Co mmission. 
Jackson, Mississippi. 
http://www.fwrc.msstate.edu/pubs/ms_trees.pdf  
(accessed 17 Feb. 2015).  
Knox, G.W., W.E. Klingeman III, A. Fulcher, M. Paret. 
2013.  Insect and nematode pests of Magnolia species 
in the southeastern United States. Issue 94. Un iv. of 
Tenn. Knoxville, TN.  
http://plantsciences.utk.edu/pdf/Knox_etal -
Insects_Nematodes_Magnolia -94_2013.pdf  
(accessed 27 Feb. 2015).  
Mai senhelder, L.C. 1970. Magnolia: ( Magnolia 
grandiflora  and Magnolia virginiana ). American 
Woods FS –245. USDA Forest Service.  
McPherson, E.G. 2003. A benefit -cost analysis of ten 
street tree species in Modesto, California, U.S. J . 
Arboric . 29:1– 8. 
Mississippi Forest Commission (MFC). 2007. The  southern magnolia. MFC  Publication #38. Jackson, 
MS.  
Nowak, D. J., J. R.  McBride, and  R. A.  Beatty. 1990.  
Newly planted street tree growth and mortality. J . 
Arboric . 16(5): 124–129.  
NPIN (Native Plant Information Network). 2013. Lady  Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. The Univ. of Texas 
at Austin.   
Rathinasabapathi, B., J. Ferguson, and  M. Gal. 2005. 
Evaluation of allelopathic potential of wood chips for 
weed suppression in horticultural production systems. 
HortSci. 40(3):711 –713.  
Taylor, L.A. 1940. Plants used as curatives by certain  southeastern tribes. Botanical Museum of Harvard 
Univ. Cambridge, MA.  
USFS. 2014. Tree carbon calculator. Forest Service 
Tools. Climate Change Resource Center. USDA -
Forest Service 
http://www.fs.fed.us/ccrc/topics/urban -forests/ctcc/  
USNA (United States National Arboretum). 2006.  Magnolia questions and answers. National 
Arboretum. Washington, D.C.  
Williamson, J., D. Shaughnessy, B. Polomski, 2014.  Magnolia. Pub# HGIC 1015. Clemson Univ. Coop. 
Ext. Clemson, SC.  
Wade, G.L. 2012. Growing southern magnolia. Circular  974. The Univ. of GA Coop. Ext. Athens, GA . 
Williams, J.D., J.L. Sibley, C.H. Gilliam, and G. Creech.  2002. Evaluations of Magnolia grandiflora  selections 
in South -Central Alabama, U.S. J. Arboric. 
28(5):224 –228.  
 
Citation  
Sheahan, C.M. 2015 . Plant  guide for  southern magnolia  
( Magnolia grandiflora) . USDA-Natural Resources

Conservation Service, Cape May Plant Materials Center, 
Cape May, NJ.  
 
Published   09/2015  
Edited:  September2015 rg
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant- materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER