Plant Guide
EURASIAN  
WATERMILFOIL   
Myriophyllum spicatum  L.   
Plant symbol = MYSP2  
 
Contributed by  USDA NRCS Montana State Office  
 Photo by Alison Fox, University of Florida, available from 
Bugwood.org   
 
Caution:  This plant is weedy and may be 
invasive. 
Alternate Names:  none  
Uses:  Weed beds provide habitat for freshwater 
crustaceans and cover for bass.  Where removed by 
harvesting i t has been used as fertilizer, animal feed, and 
as a soil conditioner with limited success.   
Status:  Eurasian watermilfoil is a non -native, invasive, 
aquatic nuisance species listed as noxious or otherwise 
restricted in 17 states.  Please consult the PLAN TS Web 
site and your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and 
management.    
Description:  Myriophyllum spicatum  L., Eurasian  watermilfoil is a submersed, aqu
atic perennial in the 
Haloragaceae family that roots to the bottom of water 
bodies. The roots are slender and fragile.  Stems emerge 
from root crowns, are smooth and hairless, and grow up to 
21 feet to the water surface, where they branch profusely.  
Stems  have layers of specialized, partially lignified cells 
that enable the stem to self -fragment without mechanical 
disturbance.  Stem fragments are capable of forming new 
plants.  Leaves are whorled in groups of four at the stem 
nodes, are 0.5 to 1.5 inches l ong, and have 14 to 24 pairs 
of threadlike divisions giving the leaf a feather -like 
appearance.  Pollen and seed flowers are separate on 
eight -inch long spikes that form at the ends of the stem 
branches.  They emerge from the water supported by the 
stem th at is twice as wide as the lower portion of the 
stem.  Seed -producing flowers lack sepals and petals but 
have a four -lobed pistil.  Pollen -producing flowers have 
four pink petals that drop off early in development, and 
eight stamens.  Flowers are whorled in groups of four.  
The fruits are globelike in shape, 2 -3 mm long with four 
long narrow grooves and four seeds.  
The easiest way to distinguish Eurasian watermilfoil from 
native milfoils is by lifting a stem out of the water. The 
leaves of the invasive wil l relax and fall against the stem 
whereas the leaves of the native will remain rigid and 
spread from the stem.  Also natives have sparse stem 
branching near the water surface  
compared to the abundant branching of Eurasian 
watermilfoil.  Natives lack the conspicuous change in 
stem width below the inflorescence compared to the 
almost doubled stem width of Eurasian watermilfoil.  The 
specialized layers of stem cells that facilitate stem 
fragmentation are characteristic of the invasive species 
and not the native species.  Eurasian watermilfoil dies 
back to propagating root crown buds in the fall, whereas 
the natives form prominent cylindrical or cup -shaped 
perennating shoots (turions) attached to, or detached from 
the parent plant.  
Adaptation:  Eurasian watermilfoil can be found on 
every continent except Antarctica.  It is native to Europe, 
Asia, and northern Africa.  It colonizes rivers, lakes, and 
other water bodies.  It grows under a range of trophic 
conditions, but it is consider ed an indicator of eutrophic 
(low levels of dissolved oxygen, high levels of organic 
matter) conditions. Root anchoring may be impeded by 
sand, gravel, or flocculent substrate textures. Growth is 
limited by light, preventing colonization of deep waters or 
water with high suspended particles.  Optimum water 
depth for growth ranges from three to 13 feet, and a 
maximum depth for growth is 39 feet).  Cold temperatures 
have little influence on growth except  under reservoir 
drawdown conditions when plants are exposed to the air.