Plant Guide

RED MULBERRY

Morus rubra L. 

Plant Symbol = MORU2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
@ PLANTS 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Red mulberry was used by several 
Native American tribes to treat a variety of ailments.  
The sap was used to treat ringworm (Foster and Duke 
2000). The Cherokee made a tea from the leaves of 
the plant for treatment of dysentery, weakness, and 
difficulty urinating (Hamel and Chiltoskey 1975). 
The Comanche used the fruit of the red mulberry as a 
food source (Carlson and Jones 1940, Moerman 
1998). 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Mulberry Family (Moraceae). Red 
mulberry is a tree that can reach 20 m in height and 
45 cm in diameter.  Red mulberry has a short trunk 
and stout, spreading branches that form a round-
topped crown.  The bark can be smooth or scaly and 
is dark brown in color. The branchlets are covered 
with short hairs.  The leaves are simple, alternate, and 
up to 2 dm long.  The leaves are broad, egg-shaped, 
and lobed.  The base of the leaf is square, as if it has 
been cut off abruptly.  The tip of the leaf is pointed.  
The leaves have sharply serrated margins.  The upper 
leaf surface is rough to the touch.  The lower surface 
is soft and covered with short hairs. The petioles are 
2 to 3 cm long and produce a milky fluid when 
broken. The catkins that bear stamens are 2 to 5 cm 
long.  The catkins that bear pistils are 2 to 2.5 cm 
long.  Red mulberry has aggregate fruits that are 2 to 
3 cm long.  The fruits are juicy and have a dark 
purple color. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: Red mulberry is found in floodplains, river 
valleys, and moist hillsides. 
Adaptation 
Red mulberry is fire intolerant.  However, it 
colonizes post-fire sites when sufficient moisture is 
available. 
Establishment 
Red mulberry seeds can be sown in the fall without 
stratification or in the spring after 30 to 90 days of 
storage at temperatures between 33 to 41 °F in moist 
sand.  Red mulberry can also be artificially 
propagated from stem cuttings.  Red mulberry prefers 
deep well-drained soil that is high in organic matter.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, red mulberry should not be prone to 
debilitating pests. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

References 
Burns, R.M. & B.H. Honkala (Tech. Coordinators) 
1990.  Silvics of North America. Vol. 2. Hardwoods. 
Agriculture Handbook 654.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Washington D.C. 877 pp. 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians. Papers of 
the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas. Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
Foster, S. & J.A. Duke 2000. A field guide to 
medicinal plants of eastern and central North 
America. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 
Massachusetts. 411 pp. 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of the 
Great Plains. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas.  1392 pp. 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975. Cherokee 
plants their uses-a 400 year history. Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin, and F.M. 
White 1996.  Textbook of dendrology. 8th edition. 
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, New York.  534pp. 
Lamson, N.I. 1990.  Morus rubra L. red mulberry. 
IN: Burns, R.M. and B.H. Honkala (Tech. 
Coordinators) Silvics of North America, Vol. 2. 
Hardwoods. Agriculture Handbook 654. USDA 
Forest Service, Washington, D.C.  Pages 470-473. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany. 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
Moerman, D.E. 1999. Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples. The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn, Michigan. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb 
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2001.  Fire effects information system. 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Boise, Idaho. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/tree/morrub/index. 
html 
University of Arkansas. 2001.  Horticulture 3103 
summary sheet. Department of Horticulture, Little 
Rock, Arkansas. 
http://www.uark.edu/campus-
resources/cotinus/plants4_html/morurubr.html 
Prepared By: 
Matthew D. Hurteau 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
Edited: 30May2002 jsp;  060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.