Plant Guide
GRASSY TARWEED 
Madia gracilis (Sm.) D.D. Keck  
Plant Symbol = MAGR3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2012.  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common  Names :  slender tarweed,  slender 
gumweed,  grassy tarplant,  gumweed madia,  sticky madia  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Madia dissitiflora, Madia 
gracilis  spp. collina , Madia  gracilis  spp. pilosa  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: G rassy tarweed attracts many native 
pollinators and other beneficial insects.   It can  be included 
in roadside revegetation mixes and in pollinator 
hedgerows along farm edges.   
Wildlife:  The seeds are used as food by birds and small 
mammals.  
Restoration :  This native plant is useful to help control 
erosion  in areas with disturbed soil s that are low in 
nutrients .  It is  used for  NRCS Conservation Reserve 
Program (CRP ),  Wetland Reserve Program ( WRP), and  
Wildlife  Habitat Incentives Program ( WHIP) plantings.  
Ethnobotany  
People of the Mendocino, Miwok, and Pomo tribes used 
seeds of grassy tarweed to make pinole, which was  a 
staple food source  ( Moerman, 2012 ). 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Grassy tarweed is an aromatic annual herb 
growing up to 36 inches in height ; its stem s are branching 
and hairy  ( Cronquist, 1961; Jepson Flora Project, 2012) .  
The leaves are up to 4 inches long and covered in soft 
hairs and stalked resin glands.   The f lowers are racemes 
or panicle -like structures with 3  to  9 lemon yellow ray 
flowers and 2  to  12 disk flowers.  The seeds are brown  to 
black , often  mottled  achenes. 
Distribution :  Grassy tarweed is native to western North 
America from southern  British Columbia to  northern  Baja 
California  and east to Utah  and Mont ana, at elevations 
from sea level to 7, 800 ft  ( Cronquist, 1961; Jepson Flora 
Project, 2012; USDA -NRCS, 2012) .  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Grassy tarweed grows on open or partially 
shaded slopes or in flats in grasslands, meadows, 
shrublands, woodlands, forests, disturbed sites, stream 
banks,  and roadsides  (Jepson Flora Project ,  2012) .
  This 
species is found in full sun along roadsides and in other 
openings created by  natural or manmade disturbance.  
Adaptation  
Grassy tarweed is adapted to quickly cover recently 
disturbed land.  It often  grows  in coarse, sandy or gravelly 
soils , but is also  found  on silty/clayey soils , and 
sometimes on serpentine soils .  It prefers full sun , but  can 
tolerate light  shade (Cronquist , 1961).  
Establishment  
Seeds germinate in cool temperatures and naturally 
germinate in late fall .  Seeds should be broadcast on the 
site in the fall so they can germinate and become 
established over the winter .  There are approximately 
300,000 seeds per pound.   Sowing one pound of seed per 
acre will result in a  rate of 7 seeds per square  foot.   For 
solid stands, sow at a rate of 5 –7 pounds per acre.    
Management  
Control of weedy perennial species that may out -compete 
grassy  tarweed over time may be necessary.  
Encroachment of trees and shrubs will shade out this 
species.  Grazing and periodic burning or mowing will 
help to maintain the habitat.  Although this spec ies is an 
annual herb, it readily self -sows and persists.   It is 
avoided by livestock due to its odor , but is not known to 
be toxic.  
Pests and Potential Problems