Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CASSAVA 
Manihot esculenta  Crantz 
Plant Symbol = MAES  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana and Pacific Islands 
West Area  Office, Mongmong, Guam 
 
  
 
Alternate Names 
Cassada, manioc, yuca, tapioca, mandioca, shushu, 
muk shue, cassave, maniok, tapioka, imanoka, 
tapioca, maniba, kasaba, katela boodin, manioc, 
manihot, yucca, mandioca, sweet potato tree, 
Brazilian arrowroot, and tapioca plant. 
 
Caution: The root of the bitter variety is very 
poisonous when raw.  Cooking destroys the 
hydrocyanic acid; the cooking water must be 
discarded. 
 
Uses 
Food products: There are hydrocyanic glucosides 
(HCN) in all parts of the pl ant that are poisonous.  
These glucosides are removed by peeling the roots 
and boiling in water. 
 
Cassava is one of the leading food and feed plants of 
the world.  It ranks fourth among staple crops, with a 
global production of about 160 million tons per year.  
Most of this is grown in three regions: West Africa 
and the adjoining Congo basin, tropical South 
America and south and Southeast Asia.  The young 
tender leaves are used as a potherb, containing high 
levels of protein and vitamins C and A.  The leaves 
are prepared in a similar manner as spinach, while 
eliminating toxic compounds during the cooking 
process.  
 
It is mainly used for human consumption, less for 
animal consumption and for industrial purposes, 
though this may vary by country.  The roots are 
rarely eaten fresh but are usually cooked, steamed, 
fried or roasted when fr esh or after drying or 
fermenting.  It is advisable to peel, boil, grind or cut, 
and dry the roots in order to diminish the contents of 
cyanogenic glucosides.  All plant parts contain 
cyanogenic glucosides with  the leaves having the 
highest concentrations. In the roots, the peel has a 
higher concentration than the interior.  In the past, 
cassava was categorized as either sweet or bitter, 
signifying the absence or presence of toxic levels of 
cyanogenic glucosides.  Sweet cultivars can produce 
as little as 20 mg of HCN per kg of fresh roots, while 
bitter ones may produce more than 50 times as much.  
The bitterness is identified through taste and smell.  
This is not a totally valid system, since sweetness is 
not absolutely correlated with HCN producing 
ability.  In cases of human malnutrition, where the 
diet lacks protein and iodine, under processed roots 
of high HCN cultivars may result in serious health 
problems. 
 
Cassava provides a major source of calories for poor 
families, because of its high starch content.  With 
minimum maintenance, the  farmers can dig up the 
starchy root of the cassava and eat it 6 months to 3 
years after planting.  In Af rica, people also eat the 
leaves of the cassava as a green vegetable, which 
provide a cheap and rich source of protein and 
vitamins A and B.  In Southeast Asia and Latin 
America, cassava has also taken on an economic role. 
Various industries use it as a binding agent, because 
it is an inexpensive  source of starch.  
 
Cassava flour is used to make cookies, quick breads, 
loaf breads, pancakes, doughnuts, dumplings, 
muffins, bagels.  Cassava extracted juice is fermented

into a strong liquor called kasiri.  The peeled roots of 
the sweet variety are usually eaten cooked or baked. 
 
The juice can be concentrated and sweetened until it 
becomes a dark viscous syrup called kasripo 
(casareep).  This syrup ha s antiseptic properties and 
is used for flavoring. 
 
Livestock : Cassava leaves and stem meal are used for 
feeding dairy cattle.  Both fresh and dried cassava 
roots are consumed by ruminants in different forms 
(chopped, sliced, or ground).  Cassava bushes three to 
four months old are harvested as forage for cattle and 
other ruminants.   
 
Ornamental : One clone with variegated leaves is 
known to be planted as an ornamental. 
 
Commercial : Cassava starch is used in the production 
of paper, textiles, and as monosodium glutamate 
(MSG), an important flavoring agent in Asian 
cooking.  In Africa, cassava is used as partial 
substitution for wheat flour.  
 
Ethnobotanic : In Samoa, cassava was used to induce 
abortion.  The Amerindian s use the brown juice, 
obtained during processing, for burns. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Milkweed Family (Euphorbiaceae).  Cassava is a tall 
semi-woody perennial shrub or tree, up to 7 m high, 
dbh up to 20 cm, single to few stems, sparingly 
branching; branchlets light green to tinged reddish, 
nodes reddish.  The outer bark is smooth, light brown 
to yellowish grey; inner  bark cream-green; exudate 
thin, watery; wood soft, creamy straw.  The leaves: 
petiole light greenish to red; blade basally attached or 
slightly (up to 2 mm) peltate, dark green above, pale 
light greenish grayish underneath, sometimes 
variegated; lobes narrow, 2.9-12.5 times as long as 
wide; central unlobed part usually short, lobes 15-21 
times as long.  Inflorescences lax, with 3-5 together 
in fascicles; pedicels light green to red.  Staminate 
flowers: calyx divided to halfway or more, green to 
white to lobes white to reddish with white median 
band inside to red purple, glabrous except for apex of 
calyx tube and inner side of segments finely hairy; 
filaments white, anthers yellow; disc yellow to light 
orange.  Pistillate flowers: calyx green with red 
margin and midrib, hairy along the margin and on the  midrib inside; disc pink; ovary with 6 longitudinal 
ridges, green (with pinkish stripes) to orange; pistil 
and stigmas white.  
Fruit subglobose, green (to light 
yellow, white, dark brown) , rather smooth, with 6 
longitudinal wings.  Seeds up to 12 mm long. 
 
The tuberous edible root, grows in clusters of 4-8 at 
the stem base.  Roots are from 1-4 inches in diameter 
and 8-15 inches long, although roots up to 3 feet long 
have been found.  The pure white interior is firmer 
than potatoes and contains high starch content.  The 
roots are covered with a thin reddish brown fibrous 
bark that is removed by scraping and peeling.  The 
bark is reported to contain toxic hydrocyanic 
(prussic) acid, which must be removed by washing, 
scraping and heating 
 
In general, the crop requires a warm humid climate.  
Temperature is important, as all growth stops at about 
10ºC.  Typically, the crop is  grown in areas that are 
frost free the year round.  The highest root production 
can be expected in the tr opical lowlands, below 150 
m altitude, where temperatures average 25-27°C, but 
some varieties grow at altitudes of up to 1 500 m. 
The plant produces best when rainfall is fairly 
abundant, but it can be grown where annual rainfall is 
as low as 500 mm or where it  is as high as 5,000 mm.  
The plant can stand prolonged periods of drought in 
which most other food crops would perish.  This 
makes it valuable in regions where annual rainfall is 
low or where seasonal distribution is irregular.  In 
tropical climates the dry season has about the same 
effect on Cassava as low temperature has on 
deciduous perennials in other parts of the world.  The 
period of dormancy lasts two to three months and 
growth resumes when the rains begin again. 
 
Cassava is drought resistant and grows well in poor 
soil.  It is one of the  most efficient producers of 
carbohydrates and energy among all the food crops. 
 
Distribution : Cassava can be found from the United 
States to Africa, Asia, Eur ope, and the South Pacific. 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Cassava is a tropical root crop, requiring at least 8 
months of warm weather to produce a crop.  
However, under adverse conditions such as cool or 
dry weather it can take 18 or more months to produce 
a crop.  Cassava is traditionally grown in a savanna 
climate, but can be grown in extremes of rainfall; 
however, it does not tolerate flooding.  In droughty 
areas it looses its leaves to conserve moisture,

producing new leaves when rains resume.  Cassava 
does not tolerate freezing conditions, but does 
tolerate a wide range of soil pH 4.0 to 8.0 and is most 
productive in full sun.  
 
Propagation by seed: For agricultural purposes, 
cassava is propagated exclusively from cuttings 
because seed germination is usually less than 50 
percent.  Seedlings are raised from seed only for the 
purpose of selecting seedlings with fewer and smaller 
roots than those of the parents.  Botanically seeds are 
used only for breeding purposes. 
 
Propagation by cuttings : Propagate cassava by 
planting segments of the stem.  Cut stems into 9-30 
cm lengths; be sure to include at least one node.  
Segments can be buried vertically with 8-15 cm in 
the ground.  The selectio n of healthy, pest-free 
cuttings is essential.  Stem cuttings are sometimes 
referred to as 'stakes'.  In areas where freezing 
temperatures are possible, plant cuttings as soon as 
the danger of frost has past.  Cuttings can be planted 
by hand or by planting machines.  Hand planting is 
done in one of three ways: vertical, flat below the soil 
surface or tilted.  Under low rainfall conditions, 
vertical planting may result in the desiccation of the 
cuttings, while in areas of higher rainfall; flat-planted 
cuttings may rot.  In general, flat planting 5-10 cm 
below the soil surface is recommended in dry 
climates and when mechan ical planting is used.  
Germination seems to be higher; tubers tend to 
originate from a great numb er of points and grow 
closer to the surface of the soil, making better use of 
fertilizers applied on the surface and also making 
harvesting easier.   
 
Vertical planting is used in rainy areas and tilted 
planting in semi-rainy areas.  Observing the polarity 
of the cutting is essential  in successful establishment 
of the planting.  The top of  the cutting must be placed 
upright.  Typical plant spacing is 1m by 1m.  
Cuttings produce roots within a few days and new 
shoots soon appear at old leaf petiole axes on the 
stem.  Early growth is relatively slow, thus weeds 
must be controlled during the first few months.  
Although cassava can produce a crop with minimal 
inputs, optimal yields are recorded from fields with 
average soil fertility levels for food crop production 
and regular moisture availability. 
 
Responses to macro-nutrients vary, with cassava 
responding most to P and K fertilization.   Vesicular-
arbuscular  mycorrhizae benefit cassava by 
scavenging for phosphorus and supplying it to the 
roots.  High N fertilization, more than 100 kg of 
actual N/ha, may result in excessive foliage  production at the expense of storage root 
development.  Fertilizer should only be applied 
during the first few months of growth.   
 
In moist soil, sprouting takes place within the first 
week after planting.  Within a month of the beginning 
of planting, the substitution 
of new cuttings to replace 
those that did not sprout is still possible.  Cassava is 
grown mainly as a cash crop and farmers may for ten 
years or more grow cassava on the same land.  
However, if the price of  cassava roots drops, the 
farmers may shift to another crop (e.g., sugarcane, 
maize or sorghum) until cassava again becomes the 
more profitable crop. 
 
Management  
General: Cassava is either planted as a single crop or 
intercropped with maize, legumes, vegetables, 
rubber, oil palm or other economic important plants.  
Mixed planting reduces the danger of loss caused by 
unfavorable weather and pests by spreading the risk 
over plants with different susceptibilities. 
 
Cassava grows best on light sandy loams or on loamy 
sands which are moist, fertile and deep.  It grows 
well on soils ranging in texture from the sands to the 
clays and on soils of relatively low fertility.  Cassava 
can produce an economic crop  on soils so depleted by 
repeated cultivation that they have become unsuitable 
for other crops.  On very rich soils the plant may 
produce stems and leaves at  the expense of roots.  
Cassava will grow on a wide range of soils, provided 
the soil texture is friable enough to allow the 
development of the tubers. 
 
When cassava is grown as the first crop in forest land 
no further preparation is required than the clearing of 
the forest growth.  When cassava is grown after other 
crops it often can be planted without further 
preparation of the soil, on ce the preceding crop has 
been harvested or the soil has been plowed two or 
three times until free from grass and other plants. 
 
No fertilization is required when the land is freshly 
cleared or when there is enough land to enable 
growers to substitute new land for old when yields 
fall.  Like all rapidly growing plants yielding 
carbohydrates, cassava has high nutrient 
requirements and exhausts the soil very rapidly.  
When cassava is grown on the land for a number of 
years in succession or in ro tation the soil nutrients are 
reduced and must therefore be returned to the soil by 
fertilization.  Large commercial farmers replace the 
nutrients lost by applying ar tificial fertilizers that are 
usually too costly for the small farmer.  Small 
farmers replace the nutrient loss by using different

kinds of organic manures, such as cattle or duck 
manure or garbage to replace the nutrients taken from 
the soil. 
 
Cassava is frequently cultivated as a temporary shade 
plant in young plantations of cocoa, coffee, rubber or 
oil palm.  When cultivated as a temporary shade 
plant, no special attention is given to the cassava 
plant.  When grown alone, the plants require little 
maintenance after planting.  Irrigation may be 
required if there is no rain, and hoeing of the earth 
helps preserve the subsoil humidity, especially in dry 
sandy soils.  The chief problem is weed control 
which may be desirable to weed the crop two or three 
times until the plants are well developed and their 
shade prevents the  growth of weeds. 
 
Maturity differs from one variety to another, but for 
food the tubers can be harvested at almost any age 
below 12 months.  From the standpoint of maximum 
starch production, the optimum age for harvest is 18-
20 months.  During this growth period both root and 
starch production increase rapidly to their maximum 
value, after which root pr oduction decreases slowly 
and starch production much more rapidly on account 
of the declining starch content of the tubers. 
 
If the roots are left in the ground, starch content 
increases with age until, at a certain point; 
lignifications takes place, causing the roots to 
become tough and woody, so  that they are harder to 
prepare for consumption and other uses. 
 
Harvesting of cassava can be done throughout the 
year when the roots reach maturity.  In regions with 
seasonal rains, harvesting is usually done in the dry 
season, during the dormant  period of the plant; where 
rain prevails all year round, cassava is harvested 
throughout the year. 
 
There is no mature stage for cassava; because plants 
are ready for harvest as so on as there are storage 
roots large enough to meet the requirements of the 
consumer.  Under the most favorable conditions, 
yields of fresh roots can reach 90 t/ha while average 
world yields from mostly subsistence agricultural 
systems average 10 t/ha.  Typically harvesting can 
begin as soon as eight months after planting.  In the 
tropics, plants can remain  un-harvested for more than 
one growing season, allowing the storage roots to 
enlarge further.  However, as the roots age and 
enlarge, the central po rtion becomes woody and 
inedible. 
 
Harvesting is still generally a manual operation, 
although equipment to facilitate this operation is  being considered.  The day before harvest, the plants 
are "topped" the stalks are cut off 40-60 cm above 
ground by hand, machete or
 machine and piled at the 
side of the field.  This length of stalk is left as a 
handle for pulling.  Material required for the next 
planting is selected and the rest is burned.  In light 
soils the roots are slowly drawn from the soil simply 
by pulling the stems or with the help of a kind of 
crowbar and the tubers are cut off the stock.  In 
heavier soils a hoe may be required to dig up the 
roots before the plant is pulled out.  It must be noted 
that once the plants have been topped, lifting of the 
roots must not be delayed, as sprouting and a drastic 
fall in the starch content of the tubers will result. 
 
Once the roots are harvested, they begin to 
deteriorate within about 48 hours, initially owing to 
enzymatic changes in the roots and then to rot and 
decay.  The roots may be kept  refrigerated for up to a 
week or stored in the ground for longer periods if 
they are not detached from the plant. 
 
Mechanization 
In most of the tropical world cassava is grown on 
small plots; however, in some countries (e.g., 
Mexico, Brazil, and Nigeria) large plantations have 
been established.  The degree of mechanization 
depends on the amount of land, available labor in the 
area and general policy regarding the use of manual 
labor. 
 
The use of machinery for land preparation is 
preferable to manual labor to ensure the best possible 
seed bed for tuber development.  Subsequent 
operations of planting, weeding, topping and 
harvesting can be done by hand as well as by 
machinery. 
 
The following is an outline of the present use of 
machinery in cassava cultivation: 
-   The hoe remains the principal implement for 
cultivating, weeding and harvesting. 
-  Plowing and harrowing, are usually done by 
tractor. 
-  A mechanical two row planter using a tractor 
driver and two men on the machine to feed 
cuttings from the reserve bins into the rotating 
planting turntable.  In operation, the cuttings fall 
in succession through a hole into a furrow 
opened by a simple furrower.  A pair of disks 
throws dirt into the furrow and floats pulled by 
chains pack the soil over the cuttings.  The 
planter is able to cover about 5 hectares per day. 
-   A gasoline-powered table saw is used to prepare 
the cuttings for planting.  The machine has the

advantage of speed and regularity of produced 
cuttings. 
-  A topping machine consisting of a heavy screen 
mounted on the front of a tractor has been 
developed to push down the tops: then a rotary 
mower on the back of the same tractor can cut 
the downed top to make harvesting by hand 
possible.  The height at which the tops are cut 
back can be easily regulated with any rotary 
mower. 
-  Cassava is not a crop that lends itself readily to 
mechanical harvesting b ecause of the way the 
tubers grow.  They may spread over 1 m and 
penetrate 50 60 cm.  Careless use of machinery 
for harvesting can damage tubers, resulting in a 
darkening due to oxidation that will lower the 
value of the flour.  The mould-board plow has 
been used to make hand harvesting less tedious.  
Stalks can be cut successfully by a mid-mounted 
mower or a topping machine, and the roots are 
lifted mechanically with a mid-mounted disk 
terrace. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects, diseases and other pest: In many regions, the 
cassava plant is not normally affected by diseases or 
pests.  However, in others it may be attacked by the 
following: 
-   Virus diseases. Mosaic, the brown streak and leaf 
curl of tobacco may attack leaves, stems and 
branches.  Many parts of Africa harbor these 
diseases and attempts are being made to select 
resistant varieties. 
-  Bacterial disease.  Bacteria such as Phytomonas 
manihotis (in Brazil), Bacterium cassava (in 
Africa) and Bacterium solanacearum (in 
Indonesia) may attack roots, stems or leaves of 
cassava plants. 
-  Mycoses.  There are kinds which attack roots, 
stems, or leaves of cassava plants and cause 
various diseases. 
-  Insects.  Some insects affect the plant directly 
(locusts, beetles and ants); others affect the plant 
indirectly by the transfer of virus (aphids). 
-  Animals.  Rats, goats and wild pigs are probably 
the most troublesome; th ey feed on the roots, 
especially in areas adjacent to forests 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Affran, D.K. 1968.  Cassava and its economic 
importance .  Ghana Farmer, 12 (4): 172-178. 
 
Bellotti, A.C., L. Smith, and S.L. Lapointe. 1999.  
Recent advances in cassava pest management .  Ann. 
Review v. 44.  p343-370. 
 
Cock, J.H. 1985.   Cassava: new potential for a 
neglected crop .  Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
 
Kay, D.E. 1973 .  TPI Crop and Product Digest, 2. 
Root Crops .  Trop. Prod. Inst., London. 
 
Ngo Tien Dung, L. Inger and Nguyen Thi Mui 2005.  
Intercropping cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) 
with Flemingia (Flemingia macrophylla); effect on 
biomass yield and soil fertility .  Livestock Research 
for Rural Development. Vol. 17, Art. #6. Accessed: 
January 25, 2005, from 
http://www.cipav.org.co/lrrd/lrrd17/1/dzun17006.htm 
 
Onwueme, I.C. 1978.   The tropical tuber crops: 
yams, cassava, sweet potato, and coco yams .  Wiley, 
New York. 
 
Soerianegara s, I. and R. H. M. J. Lemmens, 1993.  
Plant  resources of Southeast Asia.   Timber trees: 
major commercial timbers . Pudoc Scientific 
Publishers, Wageningen. Proesea, 5 (1). 
 
University of Florida. (May) 1994 . Fact Sheet HS-
575. Horticultural Sciences Department, Florida 
Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and 
Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida. 
 
Welzen, P.C. van, Q.D. Nguyen & R.C.K. Chung. 
1997.   A revision of the introduced species of 
Manihot (Euphorbiaceae) in Malesia . Rheedea 7: 77-
-85 
 
Zarate, J.J. 1956.   The digestibility by swine of sweet 
potato vines and tubers. cassava roots and green 
papaya fruit . Philippine Agriculturist, 40(2): 78 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore , Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
And 
John H. Lawrence , Pacific Islands West Area Office, 
Pacific Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam 
 
Species Coordinator 
John H. Lawrence , Pacific Islands West Area Office, 
Pacific Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam

Edited: 09sept03 lmm; 070213jsp; 070322 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.