SCARLET BEEBALM 
Monarda didyma L.  
Plant Symbol = MODI  
 Natural stand of Monarda didyma . Photo by John C. Vandevender 2013.  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  s carlet beebalm, oswego tea, bergamot , 
crimson beebalm   
Scientific Names:  Monarda di dyma  
Description  
General :  Scarlet beebalm is a member of the m int family 
(Lamiaceae). This aromatic herbaceous perennial plant 
grows to a height of 2.0 to 5 feet (0.7 to 1 .5 m ) on 
branched, hairy, square stems. The leaves are opposite, 
ovate -lanceolate, acuminate, 3 to 6 inches ( 7.5 to  15 cm ) 
long and dark green. The flower s bloom from June 
through September in beautiful clusters of scarlet red. The 
flowers are solitary, terminal and rounded on the end of 
the branching stem s, supported by leafy bracts. The 
flowers  are tubular in shape, long and narrow with two 
lips . The upper lip is narrow and the lower lip is wider. 
They have 2 long stamens which protrude past the upper 
lip.  The flowers are  perfect ( c ontain ing both male and 
female  parts). 
Distribution :  Scarlet beebalm is native to Eastern Nor th 
America and Canada. The native range extends  from 
Quebec  south to Maine and down to Georgia and 
westward from Ontario to Minnesota and down to 
Missouri. It is also native to Washington and Oregon in 
the west.  
 
For current distribution, please consult th e Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  Habitat
:  Scarlet beebalm prefers moist but well drained 
so ils. It preforms be st in full sunlight but  is very adaptable 
to  partial  shade conditions . It can often be found along 
stream banks, thi ckets, road edges and at the borders to 
woodland openings.   
Adaptation  
The USDA hardiness zones for scarlet beebalm are 4 –  9. 
It grows best in a moist, rich loamy soil with high organic 
matter content but can tolerate almost any  well-drained 
soil. Scarlet beebalm prefers a pH in the 6.0  –  7.0 range. 
Although it can tolerate drought, scarlet beebalm 
performs better with adequate soil moisture.  
Uses  
Medicinally, i t is a natural source for the antiseptic 
Thymol, which is the active ingredient in  many modern 
mouthwashes  (Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 2015) . 
It is used as an anthelmintic, antiseptic, diaphoretic, 
diuretic, and a stimulant. Dried leaves and flower heads 
are used to make aromatic teas. Fresh leaves and shoot 
tips are used  to add  flavoring to salads.  It is suitable for 
use in fresh  and dried flower arrangements. Because of 
the minty  odor, it is frequently used to make  potpourri.   
 
Scarlet beebalm is an important plant for pollinators 
including hummingbirds, butterflies and, to a le sser 
extent,  moths,  bees  and other pollinating insects . Because 
of the  s tructure  of the  flower tubes, long proboscises are 
needed to be able to reach the nectar .  
Ethnobotany   
Scarlet beebalm  was used extensively  by Native 
Americans to treat a wide range of ailme nts. As the 
common name implies, scarlet beebalm was used to 
soothe bee stings by crushing the leaves of the plant and 
rubbing them on the s kin. The Blackf eet used the plant as 
an antiseptic for skin and mouth infections  (Georgetown, 
2015) . Poultic es were  applied directly to the  skin  to treat 
infections and minor wounds. Plant leaves were used to 
make  an  herbal tea  for infections in the mouth and throat  
( Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 2015) . The Cherokee 
and the  Teton Dakota used the herb to treat stomach 
ailments  (Georgetown, 2015) . The Winnebago concocted 
a tea from the plant which they used as a general 
stimulant  (Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 2015) . 
Scarlet beebalm was  used as a carminative to treat 
flatu lence  and  as an anthelmi ntic for treatment of internal 
parasites.  It has also been  used for  headaches, fevers, 
colds,  sore throats, insomnia,  nausea, vomiting, and 
bronchial ailments.  One of the common names, Oswego 
tea, is derived from to the Oswego Nativ e American tribe 
in upstate New York  who  taught the early settlers how to 
make the plant into an herbal tea.  Settlers used scarlet 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

beebalm when regular tea was scarce and as a 
replacement for black tea after high British taxation and 
the Boston Tea Party. 
Status  
Scarlet beebalm is exploitably vulnerable in New York 
and probably extirpated in Michigan.  
Wetland Indicator:  
F acultative (F AC) status  in Atlantic and Gulf Coastal 
Plains,  Eastern Mountains and Piedmont  and the  Western 
Mountains, Valleys, and Coast.   Status is facultative 
upland ( FACU) in Northcentral and Northeast , obligated 
upland ( UPL) in  the  Midwest . 
Weedy or Invasive
:   
T his  plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agricul ture 
department regarding its status and use . 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
th reatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Seed  ripen s in the late fall to a medium brown color with 
a firm texture. When the seeds are ripe, the seed heads 
should be clipped from the plants and  allowed to air-dry 
for several days. Once dry, inverting the seed heads and 
tapping them will dislodge most of the seed. This can also 
be accomplished by placing the seed heads in a paper bag 
and shaking to dislodge the seed. R emove the chaff from 
the seed  by running it through a sieve. Stratify the s eed 
for three months in wet sand or peat prior to planting at  34 
to  40 
0F (1 to 4 0 C). 
Seed  can be planted directly to the desired site by 
broadcasting in late winter through spring. Planting sites 
should be sunny with adequate soil moisture and reduced 
weed competition. Once seedlings emerge, apply  water 
during extended dry periods  to aid in survivability.  
G erminate  seed indoors by sowing in flats or plug trays 
containing a suitable soil mixture , e.g. one-thi rd sand and 
two -th irds commercial plug mix . The soil should be moist 
and firm before seed ing. C over  the seed  with a thin 1/8” 
(3 mm) layer of soil to  keep the seed moist. Seed  should 
germinate in 1 to 2 weeks. Add w ater to the flats  when the 
soil surface is dry to the touch. A pply a starter fertilizer 
when the seedlings are  2 to  3  weeks old. Transplant 
s eedlings  into larger containers after  6  – 8 weeks.  
Space plants transplanted  to the field  18 to 24 inches  (45 
to 60 cm)  apart . This allows for  sufficient air flow, 
reduc ing the chances of powdery mildew infection . A lso , 
providing  room for growth as the plants develop into 24 
to 36 inch  (60 to 91 cm) diameter  clumps .  Management
 
Scarlet beebalm is  a low maintenance plant but benefit s 
from care. Before plant ing, the addition of leaf mold and 
compost  increase s soil organic matter and improve s the 
moisture holding capacity.  F ertilize  plantings  in the spring 
with a n all -purpose  fertilizer  ( e.g.  10-10-10). Thinning 
stems early in the season will allow air circulation help ing 
reduce  mildew . Stems develop ing mildew  are remov ed at 
the base of the plant and discarded. In sunny locations, 
s carlet beebalm is a prolific producer of blooms.  Removal 
of the senesced flowers will prolong the blooming period 
and provide additional resources for pollinators. Clumps 
can be divided every 2 to  3 years in early spring while 
still dormant. It is also a good practice to mow the area, 
once a year, after the hardest killing frost. This keeps 
woody plants from encroaching and rem oves plants that 
have died back.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Powdery mildew is the most common disease problem 
associated with Monarda (Hawke, 1998) . Outbreaks are 
often caused by poor air circulation  because of the thick 
foliage and inadequate soil moisture.  Scarlet beebalm has 
moderate resistance to damage by deer.   
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety i nstructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effecti ve. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
Over 50 cultivars of scarlet beebalm are readily available 
from commercial sources. These cultivars have been 
developed for flower color, bloom period, plant height, 
disease resistance, flavor  (teas) , essential oil production , 
winter injury  and deer resistance.  
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA N RCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area . 
Literature Cited  
Georgetown University Medical Center. Urban Herbs: 
Medicinal plants at Georgetown University. 
(
http://units.georgetown.edu/gumc/urbanherbs/bee_b
alm.htm, 19 February 2015.  
Hawke, R.G. Issue 12, 1998. Plant evaluation notes –  
Monarda and powdery mildew resistance. Chicago 
Botanic G arden, Glencoe, IL.

Wikipedia contributors, “Monarda didyma ,” Wikipedia, 
The Free Encyclopedia, 
(
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarda
_didyma&oldid=641341505  (accessed August 21, 
2015).  
Wikipedia  contributors, “  Monarda,” Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia,   
(
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarda
&oldid=672369655 (accessed August 21, 2015). 
Citation  
Lester, Randall K. and  John Vandevender. 2015. Plant 
Guide for scarlet beebalm  ( Monarda didyma ). USDA -
Natural Resources Conservation Service,  Appalachian 
Plant Materials Center, Alderson, WV 24910.  
Published: July 2015    
Edited: 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER