BURCLOVER 
Medicago polymorpha L . 
Plant Symbol = MEPO3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS P lant Materials  Center, 
Big Flats, New York  
 
Taken in 2001 at Cold Springs Meadow, California. © 2001 Jeff  Abbas . 
 
Alternate Names  
Common  Names:  burr clover, bur -clover, burclover, bur 
medic, burr medic, burmedic , California bur clover, 
Southern bur clover, toothed bur clover, bur trefoil, rough 
medic, toothed medic, toothed medick, creeping burr  
Scientific  Names:  Medicago  polymorpha L. var 
denticulate ( Willd.) Kergue’len, M. polymorpha  L. 
brevispina (Benth.) Hey n, M. polymorpha L. var 
polymorpha,  M. hispida, M. lappacea, M. nigra, M. 
polycarpa  
Uses  
Green Manure/Cover Crop: Bur clover is a cool-season 
legume that originated in the Mediterranean region of 
Europe  and has become establishe d throughout most of  
the wor ld (Muir et al ., 2001).  It is very useful for soil 
restoration, green manure, and winter cover for erosion 
control , especially in drought ridden areas .  Bur clover 
will boost soil organ ic matter in well-drained soils (Clark 
et al).  Its rapid, dense growt h characteristics, ability to fix 
N and increase available soil nitrogen supply, make it 
very useful as a green manure .  (Denton et al ., 2007) .    
Total plant N yields range from 50- 125 lb N /acre, with 
1500- 8000 lb/acre /yr of dry matter (Clark, 2007 ) 
(S ARE P, 2013) .    
 
 
 
   
 
Forage/Livestock/
Ley-farming : Bur  clover is a nutritious, 
highly palatable and N
2  fixing forage plant  for slightly 
neutral to alkaline soils in M editerranean climate regions 
(Del P ozo, 2002) .  In central Chile, where it is broadly 
natura lized, it is considered the most valuable nitrogen -
fixing legume for pasture improvement (Graziano , 2010).  
 
Bur c lover is used extensively in  ley-farming system s. 
This system integrates  crop and livestock production in 
semiarid , dryland farmin g regions.  It is based on the 
rotation of cereal crops with reseeding  annual legumes 
( Cocks, 1992;   Graziano  et al.,2010).  D uring the 
fallow/pasture period, bur clover is used to in crease the 
amount of nitrogen in the soil,  due to its ability to fix  
atmospheric nitro gen in their root nodules, potentially 
removing the need for additional nitrogen fertilizers.  It 
also disturbs the life cycle of pests,  and protects soil 
against degradation .  In long -term crop/bur clover 
rotations, the persistence of its seed typically re generates 
during the pasture phase from seed banks in the soil 
(Denton et al ., 2007). Biomass production can be upwards 
to 8300 lb/acre with Nitrogen c ontent between 1.18%-
1.65% (SAREP, 2013 ).    
 
For hay production, it is mixed with oats and wheat and 
matu re stands are highly nutritious  (FAO , 2007)  .  
Peoples and Bladock (2001) indicated that inc luding bur 
clover in pasture could  increase total forage production 3 -
to5 -fold, grass dry matter yield s by 25- 100% and improve 
grass N concentrations by up to . 6% .  In a study in Texas, 
herbage yields differed considerably among years 
primarily due to rainfall differences, with dry matter 
herbage yields ranging from 1200- 4800  lb/acre.  Low 
productivity in poor rainfall years, may hinder its use in 
south- central US  ( Muir et al., 2009).    
 
Bur clover  has a mean protein content of 19% by weight 
and 6.25% of the protein is presumably N  (SAREP , 
2013 ).  It is very similar to alfalfa but there is less fiber 
and somewhat more fat and protein ( USDA Farmers 
Bulletin  693, 1915 ).  Crude fiber, protein, and ash 
contents are as follows, 15 -28%, 14- 28%, and 6- 25% 
respectively ( USDA Farmers Bulletin  693, 1915 ). 
 
Medics establish better under permanent pasture than 
under any rotation system involving tillage (Clark , 2010) .   
For perma nent pastures in the South, a combination of bur 
clover and Bermuda grass are used.  The Bermuda grass 
supplies pasturage during the warm weather . Bur clover 
begins to grow in the fall and provides feed  during the 
winter and spring.  Under favorable condit ions, bur clover 
will make  grow 18 to 24 i nches tall and will yield 2 -3 tons 
of hay/acre ( USDA Farmers Bulletin  693, 1915) . 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

In California , much of bur clover’s value  depends on the 
large crop of bur clover pods.   Sheep utilize the ripe pods 
in the summer,  when other forage is in short supply. 
When the pods are abundant, the pasture sheep will fatten 
rapidly.  The spines may bother the livestock, but the 
rains soften the coating making them more palatable 
( USDA  Farmers Bulletin , 693, 1915). However, the frui ts 
may become entangled in sheep’s  wool, making it less 
valuable.  Using spineless varieties, such as ‘ Santiago’, 
would benefit in these areas.    In Italy, Fois et al. (2000) 
studi ed the nutritional value of bur clover  when used in 
sheep farming systems. They found that the chemical 
composition of the forage was good throughout the years, 
with high  crude protein  values  (20- 29.6%)  and low 
nutrient detergent fiber  (33 -47%)  content.    
 
When bur clover is growing in dense,  cultivated lands it is 
best not to pasture it continuously, but to put the livestock 
on the land for only a few hours each day, as t his reduces 
injury by trampling  ( USDA  Farmers Bulletin  693, 1915) . 
Few cases have been recorded of bur clover causing bloat,  
where growth is lush, care should be exercised . 
 
Bur clover was studied in subtropical and sub- humid 
zones in Pakistan, to see if adapted to its climate.  Anwar 
et al.  (2012) found that bur clover could potentially be 
used  for rangelands and marginal crop lands and produced 
between  1-2 .3 tons per acre.   
 
For annual legumes , such as bur clover, even though 
intensive grazing lowers the size and number of its leaves, 
it also results in a more continuous leaf cover, increased 
dry -matter production, and increased number of flowers 
and seeds.  Rochon  et al. (1994) found that rotationally 
grazed paddocks sown with bur clover showed increased 
productivity under heavy grazing intensity.  Livestock 
must be carefully managed, however, during the 
flowering stage  in orde r to avoid depletion of the seed 
bank caused by seed intake (Rochon et al. 2004).  
Removing grazing  animals in the middle of flowering  
reduced  the consumption of flowers and a llowed for 
greater seed survival later in the growing season.    
 
Vineyards/ Orchards:Solid stands of bur clover have been 
observed in many non- tillage orchards and vineyards in 
California and can be promote d with lime, calcium, 
phosphorus, and sulfur additions  (SAREP, 2013).   It 
competes well with other winter  annual legumes and 
g rasses  in almond orchards in California.  In trials, from 
Northern California to Mexico, naturalized and imported 
bur clover varieties  were the best performing  legume 
cover crops ( Clark, 2007 ). 
 
In Italy, alternatives to herbicides and tillage have been 
exp lored in vineyards.  Using  bur clover as an  annual self -
seeding legume  in  orchards showed great success.  It 
established readily and had full cover in the winter and 
spring.  In three years, it produced between 1.65 -1.96 t/A 
of dry matter ( Nieddu et al., 2 000). In orchards,  seeding  commercial cultivars may be preferred because they are 
widely available and better suited to local climatic 
conditions (Clark
, 2007). 
 
Smother Crops :Bur clover grows quickly in the spring 
and will suppress weeds early in the grow ing season.  Fall 
weeds  can be controlled by its  re -growth after harvest, 
whether it is overseeded or interplanted with the grain or 
the grain is seeded into an established stand (Clark , 2007). 
In California , winters are rainy and not very cold, and 
when  used in mixtures with grasses  and other legumes , it 
will provide continuous cover that can crowd out weeds 
and  reduce weed seed populations (Clark , 2007).  
Olmstead et al. (2001)  found that good vegetative cover 
of  Santiago  bur clover restricted weed estab lishment in 
vineyards due to its highly prostate growth, early 
emergence, and high biomass production.  Because of 
these traits, it could be used as a viable cover for use in 
drip -irrigation vineyards in the dry conditions of the 
Pacific Northwest.   
 
Crop  Rotation :Inter -cropping bur clover into row crops of  
corn has been proposed as a strategy to suppress weeds, 
control soil erosion, and contribute N to companion or 
subsequent corn crops, in Michigan ( Jeranyama et al., 
1998 ).  Santiago  bur clover was succes sfully overseeded 
into no -till corn when planted 21- 42 days after corn 
planting duri ng a 2 year trial.   In t his study , bur clover 
provided  a good source  of N when  moisture condition s 
were low .  If there is abundant moisture during its 
growing season, bur c lover can produce 3 t/acre  of dry 
matter, and  3 -4% plant tissue N, contributing more than 
200 lb N/acre (C lark, 2007 ) 
 
Winter wheat -corn  rotations are common in the mid -west 
US .  The period between wheat harvest and corn planting 
is an ideal time for est ablishing bur clover . When pl anted 
after wheat , it has been shown to accumulate above 
ground biomass of between 1875- 4700 lb/acre  and 
increase no -till corn yields, when p lanted at least 14 days 
after corn plantings (F isk et al.,  2001).  B ur c lover and 
other medic’s planted after wheat harvest reduced weed 
density and dry weight of winter annual weeds before 
planting no -till corn. De Hann et al ., (1997)  found that bur 
clover yields ranged fro m 540- 2700 lb/acre  which 
compared  well with other for age legumes adapted to 
northern central USA, including hairy vetch.   Their results 
also  indicated that it is best to delay seeding  of  bur clover  
until about 28 days  after corn planting, a time normally 
coinciding with the last cultivation .  Seeding earlier tends 
to cause competition between the medics and corn, which 
results in lower corn yields.   
 
Emergency forages :Emergency forges are required when 
there is severe winter kill of alfalfa in northern locations.  
In a study in Michigan by Shrestha et al . ( 1 998)  they 
looked at bur clover for use as an emergency forage, 
based on its  wide use in other parts of the world  for  soil 
erosion control, livestock feed, and for supplying N to the

soil.  They found  that Santiago  bur clover was successful 
as  emergency  for age, when planted in early May  and 
yield ed 22 lb/acre  of N when seeded at 13 lb/acre.  It  is 
on ly useful for one harvest, and upright cultivars of bur 
clover  may be better suited for hay, since Santiago is 
more prostrate.  
 
Zhu et al. (1996), looked at Santiago and ‘Serena’ bur 
clover cultivars for their potential use in north central US.  
They concluded that ‘Serena’ and ‘Santiago’ have 
potential for producing high yields of quality forage in the 
north central US when seeded in spring or summer, but 
did  not survive the winter.  Bur clover’s variability in 
maturity, forage yield, and forge quality may be a great 
potential for selecting medics to meet specific 
management practices and environments.  
 
Agroforestry :There is also the possibility of utilizing  bur 
clover  in association with trees (Graziano  et al.,  2010).  It 
has been found particularly useful in the regeneration of 
degraded pastures in a  silvopasture system dominated by 
Acacia caven.  
 
Pioneer Species :Bur  clover  could be successfully 
exploited in  environmentally  appropriate  areas to 
rehabilitate  deteriorated grasslands affected by fires and 
overgrazing.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for bur clover’s  current 
status ( e.g., threatened or en dangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Bur clover  may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  In California, it is very 
troublesome in t urfgrass seedings. Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description 
Bur clover has wea k stems, trifoliate leaves, 
inconspicuous yellow flowers  and a shallow root system .  
(FAO , 2007)  It  is an autogamous, hard seeded , self re-
seeding   winter  or spring annual  legume that is native to 
the Mediterranean basin, where it is widely distributed as 
a wild plant (Graziano et al.,  2010).  It  branches profusely 
at  its base and can attain heights of about 6 -10 inches.  It 
is very prostrate, but if in dense stands may become erect.  
Bur clover is  a prolific seed producer, making it very 
useful in pastures and reclaimed  unproductive  lands.  It 
grows rapidly following rains, and can fix nitrogen.   
Bur clover
 leaves are mostly hairless.  The leaflets are 
wide and flat on top, which sometimes  have purple and 
white markings o n their upper surface or a small inverted 
V mark at the base of the leaf.  Bur clover has small 
yellow flowers that are arranged in clusters of 5 -10.  The 
fruits are hairless and have 2 -6 coils  and 6 -8 seeds per 
pod.   Well developed plants may contain more than 1000 
pods.  Mature fruits have coiled pods that have spines, 
forming the bur, wher e it gets its common name from. 
There are also  cultivars of bur clover  with short spines 
and no spines.  ( USDA Farmers Bulletin 693 , 1915). 
 
Bur  clover  flowers from 100- 126 days aft er planting 
depending  on  location, time of seeding,  and cultivars 
used.  In California,  flowering can occur from March -
October  with seed  ripen ing from July to September  
(SAREP , 2013).    
 
There are  differences in its phenology, morphology and 
agronomic traits , depending on where grown, and 
cultivars used  ( Graziano  et al., 2010). In studies in Chile, 
there were many patterns of ph enological  differences  
which  can be explained by the differences in bioclimatic 
and  edaphic  conditions  within each  environment .  
T emperature and photoperiod are the  main environment al 
factors controlling phenology  in bur clover , and both 
differ greatly in different parts of the world  (Del P ozo et 
al., 2002 ). 
 
In general, spiny accessions are  late flowering and 
pr oduce  high amounts of biomass.  The se plants mainly 
gro w in high rainfal l areas with lower temperatures, and 
l ower evapotranspiration rates (Del P ozo et al., 2002) .  
Lower  altitude  populations showed higher winter vigor 
than did the higher  altitude populations .  It appears that  
there is a common trend for this trait among annua l 
legumes of Mediterranean  origin  ( Del  P ozo  et al.,  2002) . 
L ater flowering, low winter vigor, and high frost tolerance 
appear to be selectively favored strategies for populations 
of annual legumes in predictably colder and wetter 
environments ( Del P ozo  et al.,  2002) . 
 
Ethnobotany  
Iran :Bur clover is endemic  to many areas in Iran. 
Historically and currently, the whole plant is utilized.  
The leaves of young shoots are used as herbs and fresh 
fodder (Ahmad et al., 2013).  
 
India:  Bur clover is used  for medicinal purposes for skin 
plagues and dysentery (Chaudhary, 2010).  
 
Pakistan : In tribal areas of Pakistan where many families 
have been displaced due to war, bur clover ’s leaves and 
stems are used as pot vegetables in its fresh and dry form .  
The  micronutrient content  of bur clover leaves were 
analyzed  and the results were: ash (11.3%); crude fiber 
(18.8%); acid detergent fiber (ADF) (53.6%); NDF

(42.8%); and crude protein (21.5%) (Khan and Khan, 
2012). 
 
China: Bur clover was introduced intentionally for  use as 
a crop (Wu et al., 2010).    
 
Bolivia : In the Bolivian Andes, bur clover has been used 
since the 16
th  century, for medicinal purposes, 
environmental uses, and animal feed (Thomas et al., 
2008).  
 
Italy : In Italy, bur clover leaf has been used for many 
centuries,  such as medicinal purposes for  treating 
rheumatic pains and wounds and is still used today (Leto 
et al., 2013).  
Distribution:    
Bu r clover is native to  Europe , Central Asia, China, 
Japan,  and Nort h Africa.  It is highly cultivated in 
Argentina, Australia  and areas of the US particularly  the 
pacific northwest , the southeast , and the  s outhw est.  It 
occurs in elevations up to 4900 ft  in the Himalayas , and to 
6200 ft   in Tanzania  (FAO, 2007) .  It is also cultivated in 
much of South America, especially in Chile.  (SAREP , 
2013 ). Both accidentally and voluntarily introduced to 
these areas, it is now found over a remarkable range of 
bioclimatic and soil conditions.   
 
For current distribution, please cons ult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat  
Bur clover is native to the Mediterranean region  and 
successfully naturalized in Mediterranean -like climates .  
It is often found i n desert regions, field borders, fallow 
fields, w aste places, ditches, irri gation channels, and 
roadsides  (FAO, 2007;  University of California, 2011) . 
 
Bur clover will succeed  in practically all types of  soils, 
but loams are most suitable ( USDA Farmers Bulletin  693, 
1915 ).  In the Southern  US , the plants  grow best in soils 
rich in lime, but  will survive in  poorer  soils.  It prefers 
moist, well drained soils, but in California it grows 
vigorously  in adobe soils, which are often poorly drained.  
The plants will mature much later in soils that have very 
high  moisture contents than on well -drained  sites ( USDA 
Farmers B ulletin 693, 1915 ).    
 
Adaptation  
Bur clover adapted to  regions where temperatures are low 
are likely to have low winter vigor.   Many studies noted 
it was more common to find frost toler ant species in mild 
regions (L oi et al., 1993;  Cocks, 1992).   It will  tolerate a 
freeze of 22 -24  F even in the seedling stage but  a t 18F it 
will be killed.   
 
B ur clovers are normally winter annuals, where species 
are seeded in late summer and germinate in ear ly fall, 
grow during the fall , winter and spring, and mature early  in the summer.  It is primarily adapted to regions with 
mild, moist winter
 and in the US, it  maintain s itself  
naturally in the south, southwest, and Pacific coast.  In 
Northern areas, they  will succeed fairly well when the 
seed is sown in the spring, but rare ly are able to maintain 
themselves by reseeding from year to year ( USDA 
Farmers B ulletin 693, 1915 ).    Optimal annual rainfall  is 
10- 25 inches  per year, but can do quite well in arid 
con ditions .  
 
Like other annual medics, bur clover is well adapted to 
alkaline  soils.  However, it is also able to grow on  
moderately acidic soils due to its tolerance of acidic 
conditions during the nodulation phase (Graziano et al., 
2010).  Favorable growth is usually restricted to soils with 
a pH of 4.7- 8 (Bullitta et a ., 1994) .  In Chile, it can occupy 
both moderately acid (in the South) and alkaline soils (in 
the North), as it does in other Mediterranean 
environments (Del Pozo et al., 2002) .  
The hardseedness of bur clover is important to this 
species especially in very dry  areas, as it allows the  seed 
to germinate  only when conditions are favorable 
(Graziano  et al., 2010) .   The  populations that originated 
from  areas with more annual rainfall,  had  smaller pod and 
seed dimensions tha n those from drier environments 
(Graziano  et al., 2010) .   These  results are also seen  in Loi 
et al ., (1995) and confirm that seed and pod dimensions 
have an adaptive  value.    
Flowering period usually begins in Feb ruary, when 
seeded as a winter annual .  On very moist soils, the plants 
are later  maturing than on well -drained soils  and will 
produce more t otal biomass and seed yields  (Graziano  et 
al., 2010) . Early flowering accessions tended to be from 
drier and warmer habitats, and many authors have found 
similar results in several other  annual legumes (Graziano 
et al., 2010, Ehrman and Cocks , 1990, 1996; Del Pozo et 
al .,  2002a, 2002b).  
Bur clover is most adapted  to h eavy loams but will 
survive in a wide range of soil types.  It  inhabits all 
exposures and grows well under light conditions varying 
from full sunlight to heavy shade  (Graziano  et al.,  2010) . 
It  is a common volunteer in the understory’s of California 
orchards, including walnut, which are heavily shaded 
from  April to November (SAREP , 2013). 
Bur clover, i n comparison to other  medics, is quite 
adaptable to poorly drained soils (Bu llitta et al., 1994) 
(Charman, 200 4). Although bur  clover is not widely sown 
on waterlogged soil s, naturalized strains in these areas  
preformed well.  B ur clover should be more widely sown 
in pasture mixtures on these soils types,  for their 
continued survival.    
These features coupled with highly variable flowering 
phenology are  clearly instrumental in this species ability

to expand its range and to survive unfavorable  periods in 
a wide variety of bioclimatic  zones .   
Establishment  
Bur clover  requires about  10- 25 inches  of rainfall per 
year , where ample moisture is available early in the fall.  
It will produce  plants in low -rainfall years if  winters are 
not too cold (SAREP , 2013).   
 
Bur  clover is  usually a winter annual legume that 
produces abundant hard seed, which may not germinate 
for 2 -3 years.  In dry years, 1 -2 irrigations may be 
required in ensure estab lishment prior to fall rains, in 
Mediterranean like climates  (SAREP , 2013).    
 
Seeding rates of bur clover vary dep ending on site 
conditions.  Bur  clover can be seeded from 9 -30 lb/A.  
The high end of the seeding rate may be needed if it has 
never been est ablished in that area.    Plant bur clover to 
depth s of ¼ - ½ inches at 8 -22 lb/acre , if drilled , and 12- 26 
lb /acre, if  broadcast ed (Clark, 2007 ).  Bro adcasting bur 
clover followed by light harrowing can be achie ved 
successfully, with a firm seed bed prepared  beforehand .  
Scarification of the seed may also be necessary to ensure 
proper establishment. Hulled seed may be sown by a grain 
drill with a press wheel attachment .    
 
Bur clover should always be sown in late summer or fall, 
except if being used in Northern climates as  emergency 
forage , where  late spring  seedings are recommended.  
Late seedings should be avoided if possible, because it 
provides little time for fall and w inter growth and plants 
are more susceptible to cold temperatures and frost 
heaving.  Earlier seeding s or unusually dry falls may ne ed 
a second irrigation to keep seedling from being lost to 
drought.    
 
Bur clover used in Michigan for emergency forage is 
p lanted in the spring, at a rate of 10 -14 lb/acre .  Seventy 
days after planting, it produced between 0.4 -1.4 tons/acre 
(Shrestha et al., 2010).When no -tilled planted into wheat 
stubble in early August, and weighed in October, Santiago  
bur clover yielded  1.1  t/acre of dry  matter.  
 
Bu r clover needs to be inoculated  with Rhizobial 
inoculate type s.  It is good at nodulating on acid ic soils 
when acid tolerant rhizobia are used  such as,   
Sinorhizobium melilti  and S. medicae , strains 
WSM688/WSM1115/WSM419  (Charman , 2004) . 
 
Bu r clover is self pollinating and self regenerating  (FAO , 
2007 ). 
 
Muir et al.  ( 2001 ) found that less than or equal to 200 
plants/m2 is probably sufficient for maximum DM yields 
under favorable growing conditions .  Cocks (1988)  
reported  that high seeding rates from 18- 36 lb/A, resulted  
in  greater  seed producti on despite seedling competition.  
Muir et al . ( 2001 ) found  similar result s only with P  fertilization.  Initial seeding rates must include 
consideration that persisting seed reserves of at least 179 
lb/A,
 are critical for long -term stand maintenance in some 
environments (C arter and Lake, 1985) . 
Management  
Normal tillage and mowing equipment are appropriate for 
managing stands, but pure stands may lie close to the 
ground and be difficult to mow (SAREP , 2013).  To 
maintain bur clover stands, the area should be mow ed 
leaving about 3 -5 inches on the surface .  Use phosphorus, 
and  sulfur  to encourage bur clover  in mixed grass /clover 
stands . Those nutrients are  often needed in establish ing 
and maintaining bur  clover seedings, as are potassium and 
nitrogen on poor er soils  (SAREP , 2013).  Once good 
stands are established, bur clover will re- seed year after 
year without any additional seeding.   Under some 
condition s bur clover seed will retain its vitality in the soil 
for 2 -3 years, so many volunteers are common. ( USDA 
Farmers B ulletin 693, 1915 )  
 
Seed yield can be reduced by excessive grazing, frost, and 
drought. Dense stands of sod forming warm season 
grasses gen erally limit re -establishment of bur clover 
under pasture conditions in high rainfall environments , in 
Texas  (Muir et al ., 2001).  
 
Based  on the high variability of this  species, Del P ozo 
( 2002) , recommends using mixtures of early - and late -
f lowering ecotypes with short - and  long -season growth, 
respectively.  This will help provide balanced production 
and survival  in subhumid, semiarid, or arid zones.   This is 
essential for long term agronomic success of any 
introduced annual legume species.    
 
Bur clover, as well as other pasture legumes, have a high 
requirement for phosphorus.  Adequate application of 
phosphate , at a rate of 26 -36 lb/acre, fertilizer is a primary 
requirement for areas that are low in this nutrient.  In 
addition, calcium and trace element deficiencies can also 
seriously limit its nitrogen fixation through direct adverse 
effects on plant growth.  Managing these nutrients is a 
must in bur clover stands (Rochon et al., 2004).   
 
Management practices of planting time, cultivar selection, 
and grazing  need to be planned to avoid   problems with 
later seeding s of bur clover   (Walsh et al.,  2001) .  With 
good spring management, in grazing systems,  more than 1 
t/ha of seed can be expected  (Fois  et al., 2000) . 
P ests and Potential Problems  
Alf alfa weevil damage can be very widespread and cause 
extensive damage.  Tarnished plant bug s and small 
loppers  ha ve  also been found on bur clover plants at 
extremely high densities  (SAREP , 2013).   Nematodes 
associated with bur  clover include Ditylenchus dip saci, 
Heterodera glycines, H. trifolii, Meloidogyne incognita, 
and Pratylenchus .

Bur clover can be afflicted by bean yellow mosaic virus, 
pea mosaic virus, and 13 species of fungi.    
 
The only insect  that does serious damage to bur clover is 
the  clover seed Chalcis  fly, which also attacks red clover 
and alfalfa ( USDA Farmers Bulletin  693, 1915) . It only 
attacks the seed and will not  harm  the herbage.   
 
Phoma black stem disease  is common in bur clover  stands 
after t he first year of establishment a nd will cause almost 
complete  defoliation  in pastures in Western  Australia  
(Barbetti and Fang, 1991) .  This fungal disease is known 
to  stimulate  the production of phytoestrogenic compounds 
in all medics and if in the diets of livestock  such as sheep 
can decrease ovulation rates.  The severity of Phoma 
black stem disease  and coumestrol content is also 
correlated .  C oumestrol levels as low as 25ppm , in the 
diet of sheep , has  significantly  affect ed ovulation rate s 
( Barbetti and Fang , 1991).  
Environmental  Concerns 
Bur clover can  become  a weed on cultivated lands and 
pastures  in California  and Arizona  (FAO, 2007)  (Del 
P ozo  et al.,  2002) . 
C ontrol  
Most medics, including bur clover, can be controlled with 
2,4 -DB, Eradicane, and Buctril before emergence 
(Shresth a et al., 2010).  Please contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and con trol measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seeds are produced in roun d, coiled burs surrounded by 
spiny  hooks, which can cling to animal coats, assisting 
seed distribution.  There can be 3 -11 seeds per bur  and  are 
separated by partitions.  The seeds are 2 -4 mm long and 
oval.  The average seed yield in California is 300 -500 
lb/acre of hulled seeds ( USDA Farmers Bulletin 693, 
1915 ).   The seed weight  of 1 bushel of clean dry burs 
weig hs 6-13 lbs and contains 2- 4 lb of seed ( USDA 
Farmers B ulletin 693, 1915 ).   Depending on the cultivar  
being used , these characteristics can be variable.   
 
Bu r clover seed is hard, which helps ensure stand 
regeneration, and may need to be scarified or boiled 
before seeding to increase germination .  There are 
145,000- 280,000 seeds per lb,  depending on the specific 
variety being used  and environmental conditions .  Seed 
maturity is in mid -April -M ay if sown in the fall, in warm 
climates  (SAREP, 2013). 
  Most of the commercial seed available in the US, is in 
California.  The 
seed is harvested as an impurity with 
wheat and other grain crop s from which is separated at a 
seed processing facility ( USDA Farmers Bulletin  693, 
1915 ).   The simplest method in harvesting pure stands of 
bur clover is by sweeping by hand with large still brooms.  
Among mach ines that have been used are mowers, self 
rake reapers, combines, and special ly devised suction 
machines.   Commercial seed suppliers are limited, but 
certain cultivars may be locally available.   
 
 
Image f rom Del P ozo et al. (2002) showing the range in size and shape 
of bur clover seeds in Chile. Environmental factors, such as photoperiod 
and temperature, have a significant effect
.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Even though there are many cultivars , few are 
commercially  available in the US , and  most of the 
existing ones were developed in Australia, an d have 
show n poor  adaptability  to  other  Mediterranean climates 
( Graziano  et al., 2012. )  
 
‘ Santiago’:  Santiago bur clover  was collected near 
Santiago , Chile in 1962 and relea sed in 1988.  It was 
initially selected for its high seed yield and spineless 
pods .  Santiago  has small basal purple anthocynanin 
markings  on  its leaflets.  Its  leaflets have  a protruding 
terminal tooth .  Santiago flowers in 84  days after late May 
sowing in Western  Australia a nd slightly later in cooler 
areas.  When moisture limits growth in the spring, it ca n 
remain vegetative longer than  other cultivars of similar 
maturity.  High seed yields have resulted in  high plant 
densities in regeneration pastures,  meaning higher dry 
matter  production, especially in winter and spring .  
Santiago bur clover  is well adapted to a wide range of 
soils . It has some resistance to blue green aphid, and is 
resistant to Staganospora meliloti , which causes root and 
crown root.  (Ewing et al., 1989) . Santiago is used in 
fleece producing sheep operations, so wool value is not 
lowered.   
 
‘Scimitar’ : is a crossbred medic produced by the South 
Australian Research and Development Institute from 
existing ger mplasm and was officially released in 2002. 
Its leaves are dark green and are  characterized by 
purplish -red coloring on the mid -rib and lateral vein on 
the front and back of the leaf. It flowers in 90  days, which 
is a week later than Santiago, but will var y in different 
environments.  Scimitar pods are grey -brown and have no 
spines and their coils are counterclockwise in appearance.

The seeds are yellowish brown, kidney shaped, and weigh 
4 mg. It has a more erect growth habit, and its adaptable 
to many soi l types.  Scimitar demonstrates excellent salt 
tolerance during critical growth periods and its adapted to 
short -lived waterlogged conditions ( See Cavalier for 
seeding, management, and other properties) (Department 
of Agriculture Farmnote 83, 2004) .   
 
‘Ca valier’  was also released in 2002 by the South 
Australian  Research and development Institute.  It has 
some brown -purple fleck on its leaflets.  It is paler in 
color than Santiago.  It flowers in 90 days, and produces 
significantly larger pods than the othe r varieties  and are a 
light brown color.  The seeds are slightly larger, are 
yellow brown, kidney- shaped and weigh about 4.5mg.  It 
is adapted to sandy clay loams and red clay loams,  with 
soils having a pH 4.8 -8.  Cavalier can tolerate some 
waterlogging,  but not extended periods of flooding.  It is a 
mid -season maturing plant and is adapted to areas where 
rainfall is between 15 -22 inches in the growing season.  
Cavalier produces high seed and herbage yield.  Its hard 
seed  will soften more readily, which allows for better 
pasture regeneration.  It also has some salt tolerance.  It 
has little resistance  to blue -green aphid and is  susceptible 
to spotted alfalfa  aphid and cowpea aphid.  Cavalier 
shows moderate  resistance to root lesion nematode.  It 
also contai ns low levels of coumestrol (up to 35 ppm), 
which is acceptable.   
 
Cavalier needs good weed control prior to seeding.  Seed 
shallow and fertilize with phosphate, potash and trace 
elements when needed.  It can be successfully established 
when seeded with o ther medics and clovers. Sow at 15 -22 
lb/acre when used in monocultures or seed at 4 -9 lb/acre 
in mixtures.  All new seedings must be inoculated with 
proper Rhizobial strains in group AM.    
 
Cavalier  can tolerate moderate grazing 6 -8 weeks after 
germinatio n.  Remove grazing animals during flowering 
in first year to allow seed production.  A dry , shallow 
cultivation at the end of the summer will ensure seed pods 
become buried allow for successful regeneration  
(Department of  Agriculture Farmnote 83, 2004) .   
 
‘ Serena ’: Serena bur clover is prostrate or semi erect  and 
attains  heights up to 8 inches  depending on plant density.  
Stems  that  are exposed to sun may have purple 
anthocyanin flush.  Stems, petioles, and peduncles  are 
glabrous,  with sparse hairs.   
 
‘ A rmad illo’: S elected from naturalized population in 
south- central Texas , Armadillo bur clover was released in 
1998 by Texas A&M Unive rsity Agricultural Research 
Station at Beeville   ( Ueckert et al., 2003 ).   It is adapted 
for south Texas  with seed being available through Pogue 
Seed Company. It provides earlier grazing than clover and 
will continue to grow  until early May.  It may re -seed 
itself for many years with proper grazing.  Armadillo is 
best suited for clay or clay loam soils with a pH higher  than 6.5.  It has shown some hardiness when seeded with 
warm season grasses.  Plant Armadillo bur clover 
between October 1
st 
and  November  30th , at a depth of  ¼  - 
¾ inches using a seeding rate of 6 -10 lb/acre, when 
drilled.  If broadcasted , inc rease the seeding rate to 8 -12 
lb/acre , and even higher rates up to 16 lb/acre if 
broadcasting into sod of warm season pastures.  Fertilize 
the soil with 40 -60 units per acre of nitrogen, phosphor us 
and potassium (Buehring, 1999).  Armadillo produced 
over  3600 lb/acre during the winter months ( Ocumpaugh, 
1997) . Forage crude protein for Armadillo  bu r medic was 
16. 2% in the initial seeding year and  24.6%  in the  second 
year when harvest ed at 2 inches .  Armadillo performs 
poorly on sandy , acid soils (Evers, 2010).  
References : 
Ahmad, K., Ahmad, M., and C. Weckerle. 2013. 
Ethnobotanical studies of the eastern plains of Takht -
E -Sulaiman hills.  Pak.J.Bot.  45(S1):197- 205. 
Anwar, M., M.A. Ullah, A.S. Rana, and S. Maqsood.  2012. Evaluating the performance of  Australian 
annual medics in sub -tropical and sub -humid 
ecological zones of Pakistan. Pak.J.Agri.Sci 
49(2):185- 188. 
Buehring, Harvey. 1999. Release of a new cool season  forage legume. Southern Livestock.com [Online]. 
Available at http://www.southernlivestock.com/
 
articles/columnists/farm__ranch_happenings.  
3688.sls  (accessed 2 Feb 203).  
Bullitta,S., M.D. Hayward, A. Loi, C . Porqueddu, and F. 
Veronesi.  1994. Morphological and biochemical 
variation in Sardinian  populations  of Medicago 
polymorpha  L. suitable for rain fed  Mediterranean 
conditions. Euphytica. 77:263 -268 
Charman , N. and R.A. Ballard. 2004. Burr medic 
( Medicago  polymorpha  L.) selections for improved 
N2 fixation with naturalized  soil rhizobia. Soil 
Bi ol.Biochem. 36:1331- 1337. 
Chaudhary, Richa Singh. 2010. Taxa of family Fabaceae:  A potential of local medicinal values in Vindhya 
region Uttar Pradesh, India. International Journal of 
Pharma and Biosciences . 1:46-53.  
Clark, A.2007. Managing cover crop profitably. 3
rd  ed.  
SARE Outreach, College Park, Maryland.  
Cocks, P.S. 1992. Plant attributed leading to persistence  in grazed annual medics ( Medicago spp.) growing in 
rotation with wheat. Aust.J.Agric.Res. 43:1559- 1570. 
De Hann, R.L., C.C. Sheaffer, and D .K. Barnes.1997. 
Effect  of annual medic  smother plants on weed 
control and yield in corn. Agron.J. 89:813- 821. 
Del Pozo, A., C. Ovalle, J. Aronson, and J. Avendano.  2002. Ecotypic differentiation in Medicago 
polymorpha  L. along an environmental gradient in 
central Chile. I. Phenology, biomass production and 
reproductive patterns. Plant Ecology. 159:119- 130. 
Del Pozo, A., C. Ovalle, J. Aronson, and J. Avendano.  2002. Ecotypic differentiation in Medicago 
polymorpha  L. along an environmental gradient in 
central  Chile. II. Winter growth as related to

phenology and temperature regime. Plant Ecology. 
160:53-59. 
Del Pozo, A., C. Ovalle, J. Aronson, and J. Avendano.  2000. Developmental responses to temperature and 
photoperiod in ecotypes of Medicago polymorpha  L. 
co llected along an environmental gr adient in central 
Chile. Ann.Bot . 85:809-814. 
Denton, M., C.R. Hill, W.D. Bellotti, and D.R. Coventry.  2007. Nodulation of Medicago truncatula  and 
Medicago polymorpha  in two pastures of contrasting 
soil pH and rhizobial populations. Soil Ecology. 
35:441- 448. 
Department of Agriculture, Western Australia. 2004.  Scimitar and Cavalier annual burr medics.  Farmnote 
No. 83.   
Ewing, M.A.,C.K. Revell, and C.W. Thorn. 1989. 
Medicago polymorpha  L. var. brevispina  (Benth.) 
Heyn (burr m edic) cv. Santiago. Aust.J.Expe.Ag. 
29(2):297- 298. 
Graziano, D., G. DiGiorgio, P. Ruisi, G. Amato, and D.  Gianbalvo. 2010. Variation in pheno- morphological 
and agronomic traits among  burr medic ( Medicago 
polymorpha  L.) populations collected in Sicily, Ital y. 
Crop and Pasture Science. 61:59 -69.  
Evers, Gerald W. 2010. Descriptive information on cool -
season forage legumes. Texas Agrilife research and 
Extension Center.  
http://overton.tamu.edu/files/2011/04/cool- season-
legumes -spp.pdf  (accessed 16 Feb 2013).  
FAO  2007.  Medicago polymorpha. 
http://ecocrop.fao.org/ecocrop/srv/en/cropView?id=7
657  (accessed 3 Feb 2013).  
Fisk, J.W., O.B. Hesterman, A. Shrestha, J.J. Kells, R.R. 
Harwood, J.M. Squire, and C.C. Sheaffer. 2001. 
Weed suppression by annual legumes cover crop s in 
no -tillage corn. Agron.J. 93:319 -325.  
Fois, N . S. Ligios, and M. Sitzia.2000 . Stubble 
management  of  Medicago polymorpha  L. and pod 
consumption by grazing ewes during summer.  
In:Sulas  L.(.ed). Legumes for Mediterranean forage 
crops, pastures, and alter natives uses. 
Zaragoza:CIHEAM.45:365 -368(Cahiers Options 
Mediterraneennes).  
Fois, N. S. Ligios and M. Sitzia. 2000.  Burr medic: An 
annual legume in Mediterranean sheep systems.  
n:Sulas  L.(.ed). Legumes for Mediterranean forage 
crops, pastures, and alternat ives uses. 
Zaragoza:CIHEAM.45:191 -194(Cahiers Options 
Mediterraneennes)   
Hekneby, M., M.C. Antolin, and M. Sanchez- Diaz. 2006. 
Frost  resistance  and biochemical changes during cold 
acclimation in different annual legumes. 
Environmental and Experimental Bota ny. 55:305-
314.  
Loi, A., J.G. Howieson, P.S. Cocks and S. Caredda. 1993.  The  adaptation  of  Medicago  polymorpha  to a range 
of edaphic and environmental conditions: effect of 
temperature on growth, and acidity stress on  nodulation and nod gene induction. 
Aus
t.J.Exper.Agric. 33:25- 30. 
Jeranyama, P., O.B., Hesterman and C.C. Sheaffer. 1998.  Medic planting date effect on dry matter and nitrogen 
accumulation when clear -seeded or intercropped with 
corn. Agron.J. 90:616- 622. 
Khan, R. and M.A. Khan.  2012. Nutritional 
Quantification of four common broad leaved weeds 
consume as a food source in war affected I.D.PS 
camps in Peshawar, Pakistan.  In Proc. In the 
International  conference on Agriculture, Science and 
Engineering (ICASE2012),  Port Harcourt, Nigeria. 3-
7 Sept 2012.   
Leto, C., T. Tuttolomondo, S. LaBella, and M. Licata.  2013. Ethnobotanical study in the Madonie Regional 
Park (central Sicily, Italy) -Medicinal  use of wild 
shrub and herbaceous plant species. J.Ethnopharm. 
146:90- 112. 
Molle, G., M.  Decandia, U. Solter, J.M. Greef, J.J. 
Rochon, M. Sitzia, A. Hopkins, and A.J. Rook. 2008. 
The effect of different legume -based swards on 
intake and performance of grazing ruminants under 
Mediterranean and cool temperate conditions. Grass 
and Forage Science. 63:513- 530. 
Muir, J.P. and J.R. Bow. 2009. Herbage, phospho rus, and 
nitrogen yields of winter -season forages in high 
phosphorus soil. Agron.J. 101:764- 768. 
Muir, J.P., W.D. Pitman, and D.F. Coombs. 2001.  Seeding rate, phosphorus fertilization, and locat ion 
effects on ‘Armadillo ’ burr medic. Agron. J. 93:1269-
1275.  
Muir, J.P., W.R. Ocumpaugh, and T.J. Bulter. 2005.  Trade -offs in  forage and seed parameters of annual 
Medicago  and Trifolium  species in North -Central 
Texas  as affected by harvest intensity. Agr on.J. 
97:118- 124. 
Nichols, P.G.H., A.I. Malik, and M. Stockdale. 2009. Salt  tolerance and avoidance mechanisms at germination 
of annual pastures legumes: importance for 
adaptation  to saline environments. Plan Soil. 
315:241- 255. 
Nieddu, G., O. Graviano, M. Lostia, and C. Porqueddu.  2000. Effect of  Medicago polymorpha  L. cover 
cropping in Sardinia vineyards.  In:Sulas  L.(.ed). 
Legumes for Mediterranean forage crops, pastures, 
and alternatives uses. Zaragoza:CIHEAM.45:445 -
448(Cahiers Options Mediterraneennes).  
O lmstead, M.A., R.L. Wample, S.L. Greene, and J.M. 
Tarara. 2001. Evaluation  of potential cover crops for 
inland pacific northwest vineyards. Am.J.Enol.Vitic. 
52:292- 303. 
Peoples, M.B. and J.A. Baldack. 2001. Nitrogen dynamics  of pastures; nitrogen fixation inputs, the impact of 
legumes on soil nitrogen fertility, and the 
contributions of fixed nitrogen to Australian  farming 
systems. Aust.J.Exper.Ag. 41:327- 346. 
Rochon, J.J., C.J. Doyle, J.M. Greef, A. Hopkins, G.  Molle, M. Sitzia, D. Scholefield, and C.J. Sm ith. 
2004. Grazing legumes in Europe: A review of their

status, management, benefits, research needs and 
future prospects. Grass and Forage Science. 59:194-
214.  
SAREP Cover Crops. 2013. Burr Medic. 
http://www.sarep.ucdavis.edu/database/covercrops  
(accessed  3 Feb 2013).  
Shrestha, A. O.B. Hesterman, J.M. Squire , J.W. Fisk, and 
C.C. Sheaffer. 1998. Annual medics and berseem 
clover as emergency forages. Agron.J. 90:197 -201.  
Shrestha,A., J.W. Fisk, P. Jeranyama, J.M. Squire, and 
O.B. Hesterman. 2010. Annual Medics.   Michigan 
State University’s Kellogg Biological Station, 
Hickory Corners, MI.  
http://www.covercrops.msu.edu/species/medics.html  
(accessed 8 Feb 2013).  
Thomas, E., I. Vandebroek, P. Goetghebeur, S. Sanca, S. 
Arrazola, and P. Van  Damme. 2008. The re lationship 
between plant use and plant diversity in the Bolivian 
Andes, with special reference to medicinal plant use. 
Hum Ecol. 36:861- 879.  
Ueckert, D.N., J.L. Petersen , and W.R. Ocumpaugh. 
2003.  Production and natural regeneration of annual 
medics in W est-Central Texas. Texas j. of 
Agriculture and Natural Resources. 16:86 -92.  
USDA Farmers Bulletin. 1915. Bur clover. Bulletin 693.  Washington, D.C. pg 1 -15.  
University of California  Agriculture and Natural 
Resources IPM Online. 2011. California burclover  
h ttp://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/WEEDS/californi
a_burclover.html  (accessed 3 Feb 2013).  
Wu, S., H. Sun, Y., Twng, M. Rejmanek, S. Chaw, T.A.  Yang, and C. Hsieh. 2010. Patterns of plant invasions 
in China: Taxonomic, biogeographic, climatic 
approaches and anth ropogenic effects. Biol. 
Invasions. 12:2179- 2206.  
Zhu Y., C.C. Sheaffer, C.P. Vance, P.H. Graham, M.P.  Russelle, and C.M. Montealegre. 1998. Inoculation 
and nitrogen affect herbage and symbiotic properties 
of annual Medicago species. Agron.J. 90:781- 786. 
 
Prepared By : Shawnna Clark; USDA NRCS , Big Flats 
Plant Materials Center near Corning, New York   
Citation  
Clark, Shawnna,2014. Plant g uide for bur clover 
( Medicago polymorpha  L.) USDA -Natural  Resources  
Conservation Service , Big Flats Plant Materials  Center, 
corning New York. . 
Published:   March, 2014  
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation  District 
at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER