Plant Guide
MACFARLANE’S FOUR-
O’CLOCK  
Mirabilis macfarlanei  Constance 
& Rollins  
Plant Symbol = MIMA2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure 1. Macfarlane's four- o'clock (Mirabilis macfarlanei).  
 
Alternate Names  
This species has no known alternate names.   
   
Status   
MacFarlane’s four -o’clock was listed endangered in 1979 
when only 3 populations were  known totaling 
approximately 25 plants (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 
1979).   Since listing, additional populations have been 
found as a result of increased monitoring, and in 1996, the 
species was downlisted to threatened (USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service , 1996).  The species is considered 
threatened in Idaho (State of Idaho, 2009) and endangered 
in Oregon (Oregon Department of Agriculture, 2009). 
Natureserve gives the species a global status of G2 
(imperiled), and state rankings of S2 (imperiled) in Idaho 
and S1 (critically imperiled) in Oregon (Natureserve, 
2009).   Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
 
Description   
General : Four-o’clock family (Nyctaginaceae).  
MacFarlane’s four -o’clock is a perennial herb that forms 
hemispheric clumps from 23 to 32 inches across  (Spellenberg, 2003). 
 The inflorescence is a cluster of 3 to 
7 magenta flowers, each  approximately 1 inch in 
diameter.   Flowering typically occurs from May to early 
June.   Leaves are opposite, green above and waxy below. 
Lower leaves are widely ovate to deltoid with a rounded 
to heart -shaped base.   The plants arise from a thickened 
tuber (1. 5 to 3 inches thick) which sends out shoots to 
produce daughter clones.  
   
Distribution :  
There are currently eleven known populations in Idaho 
County, Idaho and Wallowa County, Oregon.   The total 
geographic range covers approximately 29 by 18 miles 
(Kaye,  1992).  For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
   
Habitat :   
The species occurs in grassland habitats in steep river 
canyons from 1,000 to 3,000 feet in elevation. 
Populations occur primarily in bun chgrass communities 
dominated by bluebunch wheatgrass, Snake River 
wheatgrass,   Sandberg bluegrass, sand dropseed and 
Fendler threeawn.   Other species growing in association 
include cheatgrass, smooth sumac and rabbitbrush (USDI 
Fish and Wildlife Service, 20 00).    
 
Adaptation   
MacFarlane’s four -o’ clock grows in regions with warm 
and dry conditions where precipitation occurs mostly as 
rain during winter and spring.   Sites are dry and generally 
open, although scattered shrubs may be present.   Average 
annual precipitation for the region is approximately  12 
inches.   The soils vary from sandy to talus substrate 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 1996).   
   
Establishment   
Plants are established via seed dispersal as well as 
asexually from a thick woody tuber.   Seed is dispersed in 
June through July, falling near  the parent plant and may 
be spread further by water, gravity or animals. 
Germination occurs in the spring under proper 
environmental conditions.   Asexual reproduction however 
appears to be the primary mechanism for spread of the 
plants.  
 
M anagement   
This species is currentl y being managed through the 
reduction of livestock grazing and the restriction of 
recreational use (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2009). 
Due to the steep habitats on which the species occurs, 
weed control and wildfire suppression is difficult. Site 
speci fic monitoring and management plans are being 
developed by BLM and Forest Service.   Additional