Plant Guide
MANCHURIAN CRABAPPLE  
Malus mandshurica (Maxim.) 
Kom. 
Plant Symbol = MAMA37  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota
 
 
Photo Credit: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck,  
North Dakota  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Nam es: None  
Scientific Alternate Names: Malus mandshurica ( Maxim.) 
Kom . var.  sachalinenis  (Juz.) Ponamar ; Malus  bacata  (L.) 
Borkh. ssp. mandshurica  (Maxim.) C.K. Schneid. 
Uses  
Conservation/ Windbreaks: Manchurian crabapple can be 
used in single or multiple row windbreaks.  Its  dense  
branches provide wind and snow protection for 
farmsteads and cropland.  
 
Wildlife:  This species p rovides cove r and habitat  for 
wildlife . Manchurian crabapple is rated excellent as a 
food supply for wintering wildlife (Henderson, 1987 ).The 
fruit is a small apple generally less than ½ inch in 
diameter that that can “raisin” on the tree an d provide a 
winter food source for many birds and mammals.    
 
Agroforestry Products : The wood i s used in smoking 
meats and  makes e xcellent quality firewood .  Fruit can be 
used fresh, dr ied, or processed into juices, jellies, sauces,  
pies, cakes, and cider.  
  Urban/Recreational
: The species can be  used both in 
urban and recreational settings for shade and screening.   
 
Ethnobotany
:  Apple juice is used for liver problems, gout, 
dysentery, and diarrhea.  The fruit is used to dispel gas, 
dissolve mucous, cure flux, and a s a tonic for colic  
(Herman  et al. , 1996).  
Status  
Manchurian crabapple is a plant hardiness zone 2 species  
that originates  in  northeast Asia .  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endan gered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Weediness  
Manchurian crabapple  may become weedy or invasive in 
some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.   The fruit is highly 
edible by birds and mammals ,  and seed may be spread 
locally.   P lant s are  not rhizomatous.   Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
i nformation is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description 
Manchurian crabapple is a small, non -suckering, bushy 
tree with many showy, white petals.  The small fruit is 
edible by wildlife.  Manchurian crabapple needs well -
drained, moist soils. It is a hardy,  spring - flowering tree 
that has played a big part in the development of many 
new crabapple varieties (Knowles, 1 995).  
 
The  buds are small,  ⅛ to ¼ inch, alternate, and redd ish-
brown, with imb ricate scales .  The leaves are simple, 
ovate to elliptical- oblong with finely serrated edges.  The 
leaf surface is smooth or pubescent.   Leaves are 1½ to 3 ¼ 
inches long and  1  to 2 ½ inches wide.  They are dark or 
olive -green above and paler green below.  The leaves turn 
yellow in the fall.  The flower is an umbel  with white 
blos soms.  The fruit is a pome , and generally smaller than  
½  inch  (Herman  et al., 1996) .  It has a tend ency toward 
pendulous branches  with rather narrow leaves , slender 
branches, and bright red fruit (Bourdo, 1999).  
 
It has a form that ranges from spreading to densely 
globose .  It  reach ed a height of 20 feet  and a width of  20 
feet  in 20 years on a  well-drained  loam  soil  in  east -central