Plant Guide
POWDERPUFF 
Mimosa strigillosa  
Torr. and A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = MIST2  
Contributed by:  U SDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Powderpuff  foliage and blooms . 
Photo courtesy: USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  
   
Alternate Names  
Powderpuff, h erbaceous mimosa or sunshine mimosa  
Uses  
Livestock:  Cattle will graze the leaves (Everitt and 
Lonard , 1999).  
 
Wildlife : Caterpillars of the little sulphur butterfly 
( Pyrisitia lisa ) and white tailed deer feed on the 
foliage (Norcini and Aldrich, 2007)  and (Everitt and 
Lonard, 1999) . Honeybees also utilize powderpuff 
for  pollen (Lieux,  1978).   Staff at the East Texas 
Plant  Materials Center has  noticed large amounts of 
insects in production fields of herbaceous mimosa 
during the spring and summer.  This combined with 
its low growth form create  excellent potential as a 
bugging area for  wild turkeys and poults.   Seed may 
also  be utilized by both game and non- game birds. 
 
Reclamation/Revegetation : As powderpuff stems 
spread, they form an overlapping vegetative mat. The 
plant, once established, exhibits a low amount of 
evapotranspiration (Chang, 1997) and ability to 
recover  from drought  stress (Chang, 1995). These 
two characteristics along with its growth pattern  suggest
 powderpuff is a potential species for 
reclamation and revegetation projects (Chang, 1995).  
 
Landscape : Besides being drought tolerant, 
powderpuff is able to withs tand moderate  foot traffic. 
Other attributes of this plant include low growing 
height  and attractive pink blooms during late spring 
and summer.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
curren t status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Powderpuff is a native, warm season 
perennial , legume which grows to a pproximately 
eight  inches  in height . P owderpuff  lacks the small 
thorns along its stems  found on other mimosa species 
(Ajilvsgi, 2003).  Powderpuff reproduces  by  seed and 
stolons  which root to  the ground along their length  as 
they spread from the mother plant  (Norcini and 
Aldrich, 2009). The leaves are alternately  arranged 
along the stem and are  bipinnate . The leaflets are 
sensitive to contact, folding up quickly after being 
disturbed (Ajilvsgi, 2003). The plant produces a 
showy pink bloom about one inch long during the 
spring and sum mer. The flowers develop into sm all, 
flattened, oblong seed  pods which turn brown when 
mature.  
Distribution :  Powderpuff is found in the 
southeastern United States.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :   Powderp uff is adapted to a wide range of 
soils and soil textures, but  favors sandy loams. 
Suitable habit at includes  prairies, grasslands, 
meadows, forest openings (Ajilvsgi, 2003) , and 
road sides (Norcini and Aldrich, 2009).  
Adaptation  
Powderpuff is adapted to wel l- drained sandy soils  
with a pH greater than 4.1 . It grows best  in full  sun, 
but will  tolerate some shade.  
Establishment  
A soil analysis should be conducted prior to planting 
to determine if soil amendments of phosphorus and 
potassium are needed  and that s oil pH is 4. 2 or 
greater.  Avoid fertilization with nitrogen as it will 
promote weed competition, especially from  warm