Plant Guide
 OSAGE ORANGE  
Maclura pomifera (Rafin.)  C.K. Schneider   
Plant Symbol =MAPO  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Fruit and leaf of Osage orange plant from the PLANTS Database 
website. Photo by Jeff McMillian. 
Alternate Names: bodark, hedge apple, horse -ap ple, 
naranjo chino, hedge, and Bois d’A rc.  
Uses  
Historically it was used by Native American  tribes  to 
produce wooden bows thus the French name bois 
d’arc or ‘wood of the bow’. Large scale use of the 
tree for hedges was first proposed in the 1850’s by 
John A. Wright, editor of the  Prairie Farmer and his 
friend professor Jonathan B. Turner  (Smith and 
Peri no, 1981) . Professor Turner was convinced that 
Osage orange was the perfect plant to fence the 
prairie. By 1855 Osage orange made fencing entire 
prairie farms practical, and the practice had spread 
rapidly  throughout  the prairie states to most of the 
eastern states. Then the invention of woven and barb 
wire caused the hedge row to be used less from 1875 
forward. Today Osage orange trees are used for fence 
posts, due to their unusual ability to resist decay from 
soil born organisms, to provide livestock encl osures. 
Both song birds and upland game birds find shelter 
and food below its low hanging branches. Squirrels 
tear the fruit apart to get at the seeds which they use 
for food (Stephens, 1973).  Recently Osage orange 
has been getting attention as a plant that contains 
chemical properties that are economically important. 
Oil extracted from the seed of Osage orange was 
investigated as an alternative for the production of  biodiesel fuel. Fuel properties of the methyl ester of 
Maclura pomifera 
were found to be ve ry similar to 
the values set forth by the American Society of 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) for petroleum diesel 
(No. 2) by Saloua et al. in  2009. Smith and Perino 
(1981)  noted that a potentially important economic 
use for Osage orange is in the proteolytic  enzyme 
found in the fruit. These enzymes break down 
proteins into peptides and amino acids for use in 
cheese making, meat tenderization, clearing and chill 
proofing beer, and other industrial and commercial 
uses.  Phytochemicals  from plants have been 
extensively studied for their antioxidant activities. 
The intake of antioxidant -rich diets has been 
associated with reduced incidence of chronic diseases 
such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Tsao      
et al. (2003) studied the  two predominant isoflavones, 
osajin and pomiferin, in Osage orange for their 
antioxidant activity. Pomiferin was found to be a 
strong antioxidant comparable to the antioxidant 
vitamins C and E. Osajin showed no apparent 
antioxidant activity. Although Osage orange is not a 
human food source, it is considered to be safe and, 
therefore,  a potentially good source of  antioxidant 
nutraceutical s and functional food ingredients.   
Status  
Osage orange is a pioneering species forever 
invading exposed mineral soils, particularly 
overgrazed pastures and abandoned crop fields. Other 
tree species frequently found in these areas include: 
Juniperus virginiana, Robinia pseudoacacia, 
Gleditsia triacanthos and  Crataegus sp.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
De partment of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Osage orange has the potential to invade areas abused 
by poor management and the over grazing of range or 
pasture land. The plant may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office,  
Cooperative Extension Service office, sta te natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Relat ed Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information.