Plant Guide
GULFHAIRAWN 
MUHLY 
Muhlenbergia filipes
Plant Symbol = MUFI3 
 M.A. 
Curtis 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant Materials 
Center 
 
 
Tommy Socha, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Charleston 
District
 
 
Alternate Names 
S weetgrass, purple muhly, Muhlenbergia capillaris  
(Lam.) Trin. var. filipes  (M.A.Curtis) Chapm. ex Beal, 
Muhlenbergia sericea  (Michx.) P.M. Peterson  
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic:  The leaves of this grass are used by the 
Gullah community, descendants of enslaved Africans in 
the South Carolina coastal area, as the base material for 
their coiled basketry.  The Gullah is a recognized cultural 
group with distinctive sociological traditions.  The craft of 
making these baskets came from the slave’s African 
homelands and has been passed down through the 
generations.  The raw materials used were harvested 
locally and include the leaves of this grass, which they 
named sweetgrass, longleaf pin e (Pinus palustris Mill.) 
needles, and needlegrass  or black  rush  (Juncus 
roemerianus  Scheele) stems.  Clusters of these base 
materials were sewn together with narrow strips cut from 
the leaves of saw palmetto [ Sabal palmetto (Walter) 
Lodd. ex Schult. & Schult. f. ) plants.  The original 
purpose of these baskets was entirely functional, mainly 
to carry out rice production activities; however, they are 
now recognized as an artform and their marketing 
provides a major source of income for the Gullah  basketmaker
s.  The South Carolina gulfhairawn muhly 
populations have been seriously impacted by urbanization 
and remaining populations are located in areas that have 
no or extremely limited access.  Currently, the basket -
makers are purchasing the majority of their sw eet-grass 
leaves out of other geographic areas, such as Florida.  
Establishment of sweetgrass populations in publicly 
accessible areas to provide a source of basketry material 
has been recognized as a major cultural need in the 
coastal South Carolina area.  
 
Ornamental:  Gulfhairawn muhly is especially well suited 
for planting in landscape areas that receive minimal 
maintenance and is generally marketed by the nursery 
trade in the southeastern U.S. under the common name 
purple muhly.  
 
Erosion  Control : This sp ecies is an important component 
of the coastal ecological community.  Its root system 
provides structural stability to the soils.  
 
Wildlife Use : There are no documented instances of 
wildlife using gulfhairawn muhly for food.  However, it 
provides cover, ne sting sites, and travel corridors for song 
birds, water fowl,  and small mammals.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Gulfhairawn muhly is a clump -forming, 
perennial, warm -season grass that does not have 
rhizomes.  The erect culms of this grass are usually 2 - to 
5 -feet tall and are mostly unbranched ; culms are generally 
glabrous, but may be minutely pubescent at the internodes 
and at the sheath.  Leaf blades are 13 - to 39 -inches long 
and 1 - to 3 -cm wide, usually involute (rolled inwards), 
dark green in color, and smooth on the upper surface and 
rough  on the lower.  The elongated panicles are 7 - to 24-
inches long and diffuse or open, with fine branches.  
Spikelets are 3 - to 5 -mm long and purplish in color.  The 
glumes of the spikelet are 1 - to 2- mm long.  Both glumes 
are awned; the awns of the lower gl ume are 0.5- to 10-
mm long and those of the upper glume are 2 to 25 mm in 
length.  Lemmas are 3 - to 5 -mm long, lanceolate in shape, 
and have an awn that ranges from 8 to 35 mm in length.  
Each lemma has two delicate setaceous (hair -like) teeth, 
one on either side of the awn, that are 1 - to 5 -mm long.  
Paleas are 2 - to 4.5- mm long, also lanceolate, and are 
generally awned (up to 2 mm long).  Caryopses are 
brownish and 2 to 2.5 mm in length.