Plant Guide 
BIGELOW'S 
TANSYASTER  
Machaeranthera bigelovii  
(A. Gray) Greene  
var.  bigelovii  
Plant Symbol =  MABIB 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure 1: Bigelow’s  tansyaster,  Machaeranthera bigelovii  var. bigelovii  
Photo ©Al Schneider, www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with 
permission.  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  Tansy aster, Bigelow ’s aster , 
s ticky aster , purple aster  
Scientific Alternate Names:  Aster bigelovii, 
Machaeranthera mucronata,  Dieteria bigelovii var. 
bigelovii 
Uses  
Restoration/reclamation : 
Bigelow ’s tansyaster is used as a forb component for 
restoration  and wildlife  enhancement projects. Once 
established it exhibits  extreme drought tolerance.  As an 
early  seral species , it  compete s with  undesirable non-
native species such as cheatgrass ( Bromus tectorum) and 
knapweed species ( Centaurea spp.).   Its tall stature and 
showy flowers  provide structural  diversity in a mix  for 
wildlife.   As an early colonizer  for disturbed sites , it may 
be used for erosion protection for restoration projects 
post -wild fire, and reclamation projects. It can be planted 
to enhance  species diversity in rangeland;  however, i t is  not noted as
 having value as forage for livestock  (Ogle et 
al 2011 ).    
 
 
Figure 2:  Leaf -cutter bee (Megachile ssp.) visiting Bigelow’s 
tansyaster.   Photo by Diane Wilson, Applewood Seed Company, used 
with permission.  
 
Pollinator 
A variety of g eneralist bees, such as  honey and leaf -cutter 
bees , which  are active late in the summer or early autumn , 
utilize the prolific blooms of Bigelow’ s tansyaster  (Cane, 
2012).     
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General :  Aster Family ( Asteraceae) .  This genus has 
been recently circumscribed to Dieteria , to better 
incorporate the current under standing of the complex 
evolutionary history ( Cronquist et al 1984;Turner 1987; 
Hartman 1990;  Morgan 2009 ; Morgan and Hartman 20 03; 
Stevens 2001; and  Weber and Wittmann, 2001).  
Bigelow’s tansyaster is a native biennial  to short-lived 
perennial with deep vio let to blue-white colored flowers.  
Plants are 1 to 3  feet  tall (15cm to 90cm) and arise from a 
taproot.  Cauline (stem) leaves are 0.4 to 3  inches  long 
(1cm to 7.5cm) and 0.30  in. (1.5mm to 8mm) or less  in

width, lance - to oblanceolate -shaped  with sharply toothed 
margins.  Flower heads  are subtended by overlapping 
rows  of bracts  (phylliaries)  with curved tips  which are 
green for at least half of the length of the phylliary.   The 
flower stalks, (peduncle) and bracts  are covered with 
sticky gland ular hairs (trichomes) .  The pappus attached 
to the achene is off -white and there are 1,283,000 seeds 
per pound ( Wilson 2012).    Blooms from July to October.  
 
Bigelow’s tansyaster ( Machaeranthera bigelovii ) and 
hoary tansyaster ( Machaeranthera canescens ) are 
challenging to distinguish due to overlapping habitats and 
hybridization  and the many varieties of M. canescens .  
Weber and Wittmann ( 2001) distinguish  between the two 
species as follows:  
 
M. bigelovii:  P resence of glandular trichomes on both the 
peduncles and phylliaries.  Phylliaries with green tips 
equaling or exceeding the colorless base (Figure 4).   
M. canescens : Well-developed glandular trichomes absent 
from peduncles.  Phylliaries with a relatively  short green 
apex (Figure 5) , (Schneider 2004) .  
 
Ethnobotany  
Ma cha era nthera ssp. have been utilized by Native 
American Tribes for a variety of purposes from a 
stimulant to gastrointestinal aid to respiratory aid. The 
flowers used to make necklaces (Native American 
Ethnobotany , 2012).  Plants were used by Navajo Indians 
for nose an d throat troubles (Moerman, 1998).  
 
Distribution:  
According to Morgan and Hartman (2003), o f the three 
recognized varieties of 
Dieter ia  bigelovii  only Dieter ia  
bigelovii 
var. bigelovii, (Bigelow’s tansyaster), occurs in    
Figure 5
: Hoary tansyaster ( Machaeranthera canescens)  
  showing the lack of glandular hairs on the peduncle and the  
phylliary with relatively short  green  apex .   Photo ©Al Schneider, 
www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with permission . 
 
the Southern Rocky Mountain region of Wyoming, 
Colorado and New Mexico  (Welsh 2003) .  While 
Bigelow’s tansyaster is very similar to the hoary 
tansyaster, it is much more restricted to habitat and range  
(Schultz 1987, Welsh 2003, Turner 1987) . 
 
Habitat :  
Bigelow’s  tansyaster is common in plant communities 
such as  meadows, open areas, subalpine coniferous 
forests, oak woodlands, grasslands, creosote bush or 
sagebrush scrublands, often found along streams and 
roadsides  (Hartman 2012) .   In the fall  months,  vast 
flower  displays of Bigelow’s tansyaster may  be observed 
in  foothill fields and along roadsides.
  
 
Adaptation   
Bigelow’s  tansyaster is adapted to fine  to coarse textured 
soils with a pH of 6.0 to 8.5 ( USDA Plants Database; 
Tilley  et al, 2010).  Bigelow’ s tansyaster requires full 
exposure to sunlight, and a minimum 6  inch rooting 
depth. The species is commonly found in  areas receiving 
6 to 18  in . (15cm to 45cm) of annual precipitation  at 
7,500 to 11,500  feet ( 2300m to 3200m)  in elevation .  
 
Establishment   
“ Loring  (2012)  observed  80% to 90%  typical germination 
from fresh seed  at 15 ° C for 21 days, ” Hall (2012) noted 
93% and 98% seed  viability from Tetrazolium tests.   
 
For conservation and restoration projects s eed should be 
drilled or  broadcast seeded in late fall into a firm, weed -
free seed bed at a depth of 0 to 6 mm (0 to 0.25 in .)  To 
establish a solid stand for seed production , target delivery 
of 20 to 30 pure live seeds (PLS) per square foot, seed at a 
rate of 2 lbs (0.9 kg) PLS pe r acre. If seeding as part of a 
mix, adjust seeding rate to the desired percentage of the 
Figure 4: Bigelow’s tansyaster (Machaeranthera bigelovii) detailing the differences between the coloration on the bracts to distinguish from 
h oary tansyaster, also note the sand particles on the glandular hairs .  
Photo ©Al Schneider, www.swcoloradowildflowers.com,  used with 
permission .

mixture. Broadcast seedings should be followed with a 
culti-packer to ensure good seed to soil contact.   For 
establish ment of fields for seed production, use irrigati on 
for the first two weeks to establish plants from seed, 
conduct seeding in spring,  with monsoonal moisture in 
summer , or in fall (Swift, 2012) . 
 
Seed should be mixed with a carrier  such as rice hulls to 
assist seed flow through seeding equipment. When 
calculating rice hull amounts based on seed bushel 
weights, it is important to determine the condition of the 
seed. Hoary tansyaster seed which has not had the pappus 
removed has a bushel weight of approximately 3 lb/bushel 
(Tilley, et al 2010).
 
 
Management  
When planted in a wildlife habitat or reclamation  seeding, 
use Bigelow’s tansyaster as a quick establishing species  
that provides competition to nonnative weedy species.  As 
longer -lived perennials become established , Bigelow’s 
tansyaster  will become a mi nor component in the 
established  plant community; therefore ,  management 
should be based on ot her key species.  Defer grazing on 
seeded lands for at least two growing seasons to allow for 
full stand establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Pr oblems  
Moth caterpillars from the genus Cucillia  were observed 
on observational plots of 
M. ca nescens  at  Aberdeen, 
Idaho. These were seen eating flower heads, but did not 
appear to do extensive damage to the plots or decrease 
seed production significant ly (Tilley et al, 2010).  
Caterpillars  were also observed eating flower heads on 
production plots of 
M. bigelovii, in the San Luis Valley of 
Colorado, however, the species of caterpillar was not 
identified (Swift,  2012).  
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Seed production fields of  Bigelow’s tansyaster can be 
planted into weed barrier fabric at 23 to 46 cm (9 to 18 
in .) spacing  (Tilley et al 2010) . Seed should be planted in 
late fall into slightly roughened soil and then lightly 
packed.  For seed production and under irrigation, se ed 
may be planted in the spring with row spacing for 
between row cultivation.  After establishment no 
additional moisture is required and plants are extremely 
drought tolerant (Swift,  2012).  When using irrigation , 
Swift  2012, noted the presence of  caterpillar infestations  
on  the flowers  observing them  to be absent when 
irrigation is not utilized.  
 
Seed can be harvested by hand, direct combined, or by 
using a vacuum harvester (Bair and Tilley , 2010)  
beginning  mid- to late October . Vacuum harvesters allow 
multiple, non -destructive harvests to take place as seed 
matures. Seed can be cleaned by sifting collected 
materials over ½ inch hardware cloth to separate seed 
from stems and flower heads. Using this method, it is 
possible to collect seed of high en ough quality that additional processing may not be necessary. Seed 
processed in this manner will have an intact pappus and 
fair to moderate purity; however, when mixed with a 
carrier
 such as rice hulls, the seed flows well through 
grain and no -till drills and other seeding equipment.  Seed 
harvests of experimental plots  of M. canescens , yielded 
approximately 200 lbs of clean seed per acre (Tilley et al , 
2010).   
 
Weed control efforts should begin prior to planting. 
Planting into a weed -free seed bed, or using  weed barrier 
fabric greatly reduces management inputs. Weeds can be 
controlled using pre -emergent herbicides and by hand 
rouging. Weedy grasses can be controlled with selective 
herbicides  (Tilley  et al, 2010) .  
 
Always read and follow label and safety ins tructions for 
each control method. USDA -NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty any products or control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.   
 
As with  M. canescens , Bigelow’s tansyaster  is a difficult 
species to clean. Seed is small with  a flexible pappus that 
is not easily removed. Tilley et al 2010, describe 
“h ammer -milling removes some of the pappus, but mostly 
results in creating a mat of pappus hairs, seed, and inert 
matter. The USDA Forest Service at the Bend, OR Seed 
Extractory use s a Westrup Model LA -H laboratory brush 
machine with a #40 mantel at a speed of 3 to dislodge 
seed from the flower heads and remove the pappus. The 
gate is left completely open to allow the seed to move 
quickly through the machine and avoid damaging the 
achenes. ” This is followed by air -screening (Barner , 
2009).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Common  wild land collected seed is available from 
commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of Bigelow’s  tansyaster. 
 
Prepared By :   
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist,  USDA 
NRCS  Denver, Colorado.  
 
Citation  
Taliga, Christine E. 2012.  Plant Guide for Bigelow’s 
tansyaster  (Machaeranthera bigelovii ). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State Office.  
Denver,  CO 80225- 0426. 
Published  September, 2012  
 
Edited: 20Sep2012jab , 21Sep2012cga

References 
Bair, C. and D. Tilley.  2010. The Jet Harvester: A New 
Tool for Harvesting Native Forb and Shrub Seed . 
USDA -NRCS. Technical Note 55. Boise, ID.  
Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of  Machaeranthera canescens (Pursh) A. Gray Seeds; 
USDA FS -R6 Bend Seed Extractory , Bend, OR. In: 
Native Plant Network. [Online] at :  
  http://www.nativeplant network.org (accessed 26 
July 2010). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery.  
Butler, Jennifer; Frieswyk, Christin. 2001. Propagatio n 
protocol for production of Machaeranthera  seeds; 
USDI NPS -  Rocky Mountain National Park, Estes 
Park, Colorado. In: Native Plant Network.   [Online] 
at : http ://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (A ccessed 20 
September 2012). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
Coll ege of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery.  
Cane, J. 2012. Personal communication. Logan (UT) . 
USDA -Agricultural Research Service, Bee 
Systematics and Biology Laboratory.  
Cronquist, A. J., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. L.  Reveal &  P. K. Holmgren. 1984. Vascular Plants of 
the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 4: 1 –573. In A. J.  
Hall, De nny. 2012.  P ersonal communication.  Powell, 
(WY)  University of Wyoming, Seed Analysis  
Laboratory.    
Hartman, R. L. 1990.  A Conspectus of Machaeranthera 
(Asteraceae:  Astereae)  P hyt ologia 68( 6):439-465. 
Hartman, R.L. (2008 onwards). University of Wyoming.  Rocky Mountain Herbarium Database.  Dieteria 
bigelovii, accessed:  9/4/2012.   
Loring, Mary, 2012.  Personal communication .  Wheat 
Ridge, CO.  Precision Seed Testing.   
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany.  Timber Press. 927 p.   
Morgan, D.R., R. Korn, S. Mugelston. 2009.    Insights 
Into Reticulate Evolution In Machaerantheae 
(Asteraceae: Asterea):  5S Ribosomal RNA S pacer 
Variation Estimating Support for Congruence and 
Constructing Reticulate Phylogenies. American 
Journal of Botany 96(5): 920 –932.  
Morgan, D.R., and R.L. Hartman.  2003. A synopsis of  Machaeranthera  (Asteraceae: Astereae), with 
recognition of segregate  genera. Sida 20:1837–1416. 
Morgan, D.R.   2003.   Dieteria .  In: eFloras (2008). 
Published  [Online] at:  http://www.efloras.org  
( accessed 9 September 2012 ). Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University 
Herbaria, Cambridge, MA.  
Native American  Ethnobotany Database. Un iversity of 
Michigan, Dearborn.  [Online] at:    http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ 
(Accessed September 3, 
2012 ).    
Ogle, D., St. John, L., Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth.  
2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species 
for the Intermountain West. USDA -NRCS, Boise, 
ID -Salt Lake City, UT -Spokane, WA. ID -TN 24. 
57p.   
Schneider, Al.  (2004 onwards).  Southwest Colorado  Wildflowers.  [Online] at: 
www.swcoloradowildflowers.c om, (Accessed 20 
September 2012).  
Schultz, L.M., E.E. Neely, J.S. Tuhy. 1987.  Flora of the  Orange Cliffs of Utah.   Great Basin Naturalist.  Vol. 
47 No.2.  
Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny  
Website. Version 12, July 2012, [Online] at:  
http ://www .mobot.org/MOBOT/research/APweb/ ,(A
ccessed 20 September 2012).   
Swift, Dean.  Dean Swift Seed Company.  http://deanswiftseed.com/  
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2010. Plant guide for  hoary tansyaster ( Machaeranthera canescens ). 
USDA -Natural  Resources Conservation Service, 
Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210.   
Turner, B.L. 1987.   A  Taxonomic Study of 
Machaeranthera Sections Machaeranthera and 
Hesperastrum Asteraceae.  Phytolo gia: Vol. 62, No. 
3, p 207-  266 .   
USDA, NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database  (http://plants.usda.gov, 21 September 2012). National 
Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401- 4901 USA. 
Weber, W.A. and R. C. Wittmann, 2001. Colorado Flora:  Western Slope and Eastern Slope. Colorado 
Associated Universit y  Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
530pp.  
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C.  Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
Wilson, Diane.  2012.  Personal communication.  Arvada, 
CO.  Applewood Seed Company.    
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web sit e at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER