Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MANGO 
Mangifera indica  L. 
Plant Symbol = MAIN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Kangit, idele, mago, mangot, manako, mango, 
manggah saipan, manko, meneke, mangko, mangou, 
manga, mangga, manja, mangoro, manguier, mangue, 
manguiera, paho, mempelam, te mangko, asai, 
damangko, mago, edel, kanit, kehngid, tumi vi. 
 
Caution: The mango skin and sap can be allergic to 
some people and should be eaten with caution as they 
can produce the same type of allergic reactions as 
poison ivy/oak/sumac, including skin lesions or the 
more serious swollen lips and tongue.   
 
Uses 
Human Food : The fruit is used in jams, preserves, 
pies, chutney, ice cream, jellies, canned fruits, and in 
frozen or dried fruits.  However, fresh consumption is  the most important and widest use of the fruit.  The 
fruit is a good source of vitamins A and C. 
Green mangoes are often cooked and eaten like 
vegetables or made into a delicious chutney or dried 
and ground into a powder called "amchoor" and used 
to impart a sour flavor to food.  
 
The kernels can be boiled and eaten with greens or 
ground and eaten roasted, dried, or pickled; but are 
generally eaten in times of famine or by the poorest.  
 
Forest & Kim Starr (USGS) 
@ www.hear.org 
 
Livestock Food : Mango leaves are occasionally fed to 
cattle, but large quantities can cause death. 
The fruits are relished by both cattle and pigs; 
however, the kernels are fairly rich in tannins, which 
progressively lead to reduced growth rates and less 
efficient feed utilization when included as a major 
component in diets for pigs and poultry. 
 
Mangoes that are not fully mature are sliced and 
ensiled in pits 1.5 m3 dug in the ground and lined 
with large leaves.  One percent salt should be added.  
The pits are tightly covered with leaves and soil.  
This silage can be used for off-season pig feeding. 
 
Ethnobotanic : Dried mango flowers, containing 15% 
tannin, serve as astringents in cases of diarrhea, 
chronic dysentery, catarrh of the bladder and chronic 
urethritis.  The bark was used against rheumatism and 
diphtheria.  The resinous gum from the trunk was 
applied to cracks in the skin of the feet and on 
scabies.  Mango kernel d ecoction and powder were 
used as vermifuges and as astringents in treatment for 
diarrhea, hemorrhages and bleeding hemorrhoids.  
Leaf decoction was taken as a remedy for fever, chest 
pains, diarrhea, diabetes,  and hypertension.  Extracts 
of bark, leaves, stems, and unripe fruits were used as 
antibiotics for many ills.   
 
When mango trees are in bloom, it is not uncommon 
for people to suffer itching  around the eyes, facial 
swelling and respiratory difficulty, even though there 
is no airborne pollen.  The few pollen grains are large 
and they tend to adhere to each other even in dry 
weather.  The stigma is small and not designed to 
catch windborne pollen.  The irritant is probably the 
vaporized essential oil of  the flowers which contains 
the sesquiterpene alcohol, mangiferol, and the ketone, 
mangiferone. 
 
The twigs and leaves, used to clean the teeth, are said 
to be beneficial to the gums, while the bark is said to

be useful for toothaches.  The astringent stomachic 
bark is also used for internal hemorrhages, bronchitis, 
and catarrh.  The resin is used for cracked feet, 
ringworm, and other fungi, syphilis, and to induce 
sweating.  Smoke from the burning leaves is believed 
to cure various throat disorders, from asthma to 
hiccups.  Dried mango flowers, containing 15% 
tannin, serve as astringents in cases of diarrhea, 
chronic dysentery, catarrh of the bladder and chronic 
urethritis resulting from gonorrhea.  
 
Green fruits are considered anticholeric (baked and 
mixed with sugar and taken internally and also 
rubbed over the body), antidysmenorrheic, 
antiscorbutic, astringent, and diaphoretic.  Roasted 
green fruits are dissolved in sugar water and taken 
internally to prevent sunstroke.  Ripe fruits are 
considered diuretic, laxative, and unguent.  A gruel 
made of the seeds is taken internally for bleeding 
piles.  The wood is favored for making shovels. 
  
The bark contains mangiferine and is astringent and 
employed against rheumatism and diphtheria in India. 
The resinous gum from the trunk is applied on cracks 
in the skin of the feet and  on scabies, and is believed 
helpful in cases of syphilis.  
 
Mango kernel decoction and powder (not tannin-free) 
are used as vermifuges and as  astringents in diarrhea, 
hemorrhages and bleeding hemorrhoids.  The fat is 
administered in cases of stomatitis.  Extracts of 
unripe fruits and of bark, stems and leaves have 
shown antibiotic activity.  In some of the islands of 
the Caribbean, the leaf decoction is taken as a remedy 
for diarrhea, fever, chest complaints, diabetes, 
hypertension and other ills.  A combined decoction of 
mango and other leaves is taken after childbirth. 
 
Seed fat: Having high stearic acid content, the fat is 
desirable for soap-making.  The seed residue after fat 
extraction is usable for cattle feed and soil 
enrichment.  
 
Bark: The bark possesses 16% to 20% tannin and has 
been employed for tanning hides.  It yields a yellow 
dye, or, with turmeric and lime, a bright rose-pink.  
 
Wood:  Kiln-dried and preservative treatment wood is 
used to make window frames, rafters, joists, 
plywood, shoe heels, boxes, boats, and canoes. 
 
Wildlife : Mango fruit and leaves are eaten by deer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: The cashew family (Anacardiaceae), of 
which mango is a member, includes a number of 
species which can cause severe skin irritation in 
humans.  Poison ivy ( Rhus toxicodendron), found in 
North America, is one particularly notable example.  
For  most people, mango has no such effect, but in 
sensitive individuals ingestion of the fruit, or skin 
contact with its juice, may cause a poison ivy-like 
rash. 
 
Mango is a large evergreen tree that can reach 15 to 
30 m tall.  They are fast growing erect trees with 
slender to broad and rounded upright canopy that can 
be used for landscape and shade.  The trees are long -
lived with some still producing fruit at 300 years old.  
The tree is anchored by a long unbranched taproot 
can descend to a depth of 6-8 m plus a mass of feeder 
roots.  The feeder roots send down anchor roots 
which penetrate the soil to a depth of 1.2 m and 
spread lateral as far as 7.5 m. 
 
The leaves are alternate, simple, leathery, oblong-
lanceolate, 29-30 cm long X 3-5 cm wide on 
flowering branches, up to  50 cm on sterile branches. 
The young leaves are red, aging to shiny dark green 
above, lighter below, with yellow or white venation.  
 
The inflorescence is a much-branched panicle 
bearing many very small (4 mm) greenish white or 
pinkish flowers. Both male and bisexual flowers are 
borne on the same tree. The flowers are radially 
symmetrical, and usually have 5 petals, streaked with 
red. There is usually only 1 fertile stamen per flower; 
the 4 other stamens are sterile. The flower has a 
conspicuous 5-lobed disk between the petals and 
stamens.  
 
The fruit is an irregularly egg-shaped and slightly 
compressed fleshy drupe, 8-12 (-30) cm long, 
attached at the broadest  end on a pendulous stalk. 
The skin is smooth greenish-yellow, sometimes 
tinged with red.  The underlying yellow-orange flesh 
varies in quality from soft, sweet, juicy and fiber-free 
in high-quality selected (clonal) varieties to 
turpentine-flavored and fibrous in unselected (wild) 
seedlings.  The single, compressed-ovoid seed is 
encased in the white fibrous inner layer of the fruit. 
 
Mangoes can be round, oval, heart-shaped, or kidney-
shaped; and can weigh as little as a few ounces or as 
much as five pounds.  Their highly aromatic flesh 
surrounds a very large inedible flat seed.  At its best,

it has a pleasant resinous quality, but at its worst can 
smell like kerosene.  The soft pulp is juicy and sweet, 
although it can sometimes has an acid overtone. 
Some mangoes have fibrous flesh, while others are 
buttery all the way through. 
 
The round or oval fruit is somewhat flattened and can 
weigh up to 0.5 kg. The flesh of good fruit has a 
pleasant aromatic flavor, but inferior varieties have a 
turpentine flavor and can be rather fibrous.  In the 
centre is the large fibrous flat seed containing a 
kernel.  
 
Distribution and Habitat : The mango is native to 
southern Asia, especially Burma and eastern India. It 
spread early on to Malaya, eastern Asia and eastern 
Africa. 
 
Mangoes are grown throughout the tropics, from the 
Caribbean to Africa, South-East Asia, Australia, as 
well as India, where the history of the fruit goes back 
over 6,000 years and closely connected to the Hindu 
religion.  As long ago as the 16th century, mangoes 
had been distributed via cultivation throughout the 
Indian subcontinent, and eventually to all tropical 
regions of the world.   
 
It performs best at elevations from 0-1200 m. with a 
pronounced rainy season for vegetative growth, a dry 
season for flowering and fruiting, and on well-
drained soils ranging in pH between 5.5 to 7.5.  It 
was not until the 19th century that traders introduced 
the fruit to the West Indi es, Africa, South America, 
Mexico, Florida, and Hawaii.  Mangoes were 
introduced to California (Santa Barbara) in 1880. 
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Extensive information on propagation and 
establishment, particularly  through grafting for the 
Pacific Basin Islands can be found in Bally (2006).  
This document is available on the Web at 
<
www.traditionaltree.org>.  
 
In deep sandy type soil the tap root will decend to 20 
feet with the feeder root s growing in descending 
order.  The mango requires full sun and perfect air 
drainage in winter.   
 
Mangos will grow in almost any well-drained sandy, 
loam or clay soil but does not grow well in heavy wet 
soils.  Soil ph must be between 5.5 and 7.5.  They are 
somewhat tolerant of alkalinity.  Plantings  established during the dry season will require rainfall 
or irrigation everyday.  The amount of irrigation 
required will depend on soil type, amount of rainfall, 
and temperature.  Light sandy soils will require 
almost continues watering until the fruit is harvested.  
Irrigation should be discontinued when rainfall is 
sufficient enough to keep the soil moist.  Young 
seedlings require applications of nitrogen fertilizer to 
promote healthy growth and flower production.  
However, care must be taken not to create fertilizer 
burn.   
 
Propagation by seed
: Remove the husk and plant the 
seed with the hump at soil level.  Seed will normally 
germinate in two to four weeks.  Seedlings developed 
from seed will bloom and bear in three to six years. 
 
Propagation by grafting:  Small plants with a 
diameter about the size of a pencil graft well with the 
common whip graft.  Crown groove graft allows 
several scions to be put on at once.  Fully grown trees 
may be top-worked by crown groove bark graft or 
prune hard and whip graft sprouts later.  Plastic 
bagging with a few drops of moisture will improve 
the graft’s chances of being successful.  Grafts are 
most successful if the leaves are allowed to remain 
below the graft, but removed suckers.  When top 
working, do not dehorn the entire tree, leave several 
braches fully leafed.   
 
Management  
Extensive information on the management of mango 
in Hawaii and the Pacific Basin Islands can be found 
in Bally (2006).  This document is available on the 
Web at <
www.traditionaltree.org>.  
 
Mango trees managed for commercial fruit 
production should be irrigated once weekly in coastal 
areas and almost continuously in dry areas until the 
fruit is harvested.  After harvest, irrigation should be 
reduced to a level that prevents wilt.  This process 
should continue for about two months before 
increasing irrigation to initiate new bloom and 
growth cycle.  While irrigation is important for tree 
establishment and survival, it must be part of an 
overall management plan that includes fertilization.  
These trees require a feeding program similar to the 
one used for citrus.  This feeding program must 
include nitrogen and the micronutrient especially 
iron. 
 
Once plantings are established pruning can be used to 
stimulate new growth, provide for uniform annual 
fruit bearing, and control size.  Pruning should be 
preformed in late winter and early spring to avoid 
loss of fruit.  When pruning or removing litter avoid

getting the sap on unprotected skin, because the sap 
can cause severe dermatitis.  Pruned material and 
other mango litter should not be burned to avoid 
breathing affected air.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
In the Pacific Basin, the mango fly (Bactrocera 
frauenfeldi  Schiner) is quite widespread (Pest 
Management in the Pacific Project 2007).  Also, the 
mango shoot caterpillar ( Penicillaria jocosatrix 
Guenee) affects mango throughout the area (Nafus 
2005). 
 
Major insect pests are:  mites [avocado red mite 
( Oligonychus yothersii  McG.), tumid mite
 
(Tetranychus  tumidus  Banks), and broad mite 
( Polyphagotarsonemus latus  Banks)]; scales [lesser 
snow scale ( Pinnaspis strachani  Cooley); soft scales: 
pyriform scale ( Protopulvinaria )p pyriformis  Ckll.), 
mango shield scale ( P. mangiferae Green), acuminate 
scale ( Kilifia acuminata  Sign.), Florida wax scale 
( Ceroplastes floridensis  Comst.); armored scales: 
Florida red scale (Chrysomphalus ficus  L.), and 
dictyospermum scale ( C. dictyospermi Morg.)]; and 
thrips [red-banded thrips ( Selenothrips rubrocinctus 
Giard.), and Florida flower thrips ( Frankliniella 
cephalica  D.L. Crawford)]. Ma ngo trees are also 
affected by mango decline,  a problem associated with 
micronutrient deficiency. Diseases include: 
anthracnose ( Colletotrichum gloeosporioides  Penz.), 
which affects fruits, inflorescences and foliage; 
powdery mildew ( Oidium sp.) on inflorescences; and 
mango scab ( Elsinoe, mangiferae, Bitanc & Jenk.). 
Internal breakdown of the fruit is an important 
problem, the cause of which has not yet been 
determined.  Alga spot ( Cephaleuros sp) attacks 
flowers, young fruit, twigs and leaves. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Popular varieties in Hawai‘i include ‘Haden’, ‘Ah 
Ping’, ‘Gouviea’, ‘Momi K’, ‘Fairchild’, ‘Pope’, 
‘Rapoza’, and ‘Harders’. In the Solomon Islands and 
Fiji, the Australian variety ‘Kensington Pride’ has 
been introduced and grown successfully. In Samoa, 
the mango varieties ‘Momi K’, ‘Fiji’, ‘Mapulehu’, 
‘White Pirie’, ‘Rapoza’, ‘Jara’, and ‘Kensington 
Pride’ are common. In Tahiti, ‘Kopu Reva’ is a 
popular variety (Bally 2006).  Bally provides an 
extensive discussion of recommended varieties for 
Hawaii and the Pacific Basin Islands on the Web at 
<
www.traditionaltree.org>.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under  ”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bally, I.S.E. 2006. Mangifera indica (mango) . In: 
Elevitch, C.R. (ed.). Species Profiles for Pacific 
Island Agroforestry. Permanent Agriculture 
Resources (PAR), Hō lualoa, Hawai‘i. 
<http://www.traditionaltree.org> 
 
Bompard, J.M. 1993.  The Genus Mangifera 
rediscovered: the potential contribution of wild 
species to mango cultivation .  Acta Horticulturae 
341, 69-77.  
 
Campbell, R.J., C.W. Campbell, and N. Ledesma. 
2002.  Tropical mangos: Growing the world’s most 
delicious fruit . Fairchild Tropical Garden, Coral 
Gables, Florida. 
 
Clarke, W.C. & R.R. Thaman. 1993.  Chapter 6: 
Agroforestry in Micronesia . In: Agroforestry in the 
Pacific Islands: Systems for Sustainability. Accessed: 
070213. United Nations University Press, Tokyo. 
<http://www.unu.edu/unupress/unupbooks/80824e/80
824E0f.htm>. 
 
Collins. 1903.  The mango in Puerto Rico . USDA BPI 
Bulletin 28. 
 
Crane, J.H. and C.W.  Campbell. 1994.  The mango. 
Fact Sheet HS-2. Horticultu ral Sciences Dept. Florida 
Cooperative Extension Serv., Inst. of Food and Agri 
Science. University of Flor ida, Gainesville, Florida. 
 
Gangolly, S.R. et al. 1957.  The mang.  Indian Council 
of Agriculture Research, New Dehli. 
 
Higgins. 1906.  The mango in Hawaii.  AES Bulletin 
No.12., Honolulu, Hawaii. 
  
Knight, R.J., Jr. and R.J. Schnell. 1993.   Mango 
(Mangifera indica L.) introduction and evaluation in 
Florida and its impact on the world industry . Acta 
Horticulturae 341, 125- 135. 
 
Kostermans, A.J.G.H. 1997.  The mango: Botany, 
production and uses .  University Press, Cambridge.  
 
Litz, R.E. (ed.). 1997. The mango: Botany, 
production and uses. 1st Edition. CAB International, 
Wallingford, UK. 
 
Morton, J.F. 1987.   Fruits of warm climates . Creative 
Resources Systems, Inc. pp. 221-237.

Nafus, D. 2005. Tree pests of the Marianas series. 
University of Guam, Cooperative Extension Service. 
http://www.crees.org/plantprotection/AubWeb/bugw
eb/i248.htm 
 
Naik, K.C. and S.R. Gangolly  1950.. Monograph on 
classification and nomenclature of South Indian 
mangos.   Supt. of Government Press, Madras.  
 
Pest Management in the Pacific Project. 2007.  Pacific 
fruit fly web . Accessed: 070213.  
http://www.spc.int/pacifly/ 
 
Popenoe, W.1917.  Pollination of the mango . USDA 
Bulletin No. 542, Washington, DC. 
 
Ruehle, G.D and R.B. Ledlin. 1955 . Mango growing 
in Florida . Univ. of Florida AES Bulletin No. 542, 
Gainesville. 
 
Samson, J. A.1986.  Tropical fruits.  2nd ed. 
Longman Scientific and Technical.  pp. 216-234.  
 
USDA Forest Service. 2006.  Mangifera indica L., 
Anacardiaceae .  Pacific Island Ecosystems At Risk. 
Accessed: 070213. 
http://www.hear.org/pier/species/mangifera_indica.ht
m 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore , Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore , Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 12aug20004 lmm ; 070212 jsp; 070213 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.