Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON MADIA 
Madia elegans D.Don ex Lindl.
Plant Symbol = MAEL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden 
 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: There are several  Madia species and 
several subspecies of  Madia elegans.  They are each 
called “tarweed,” because of the intense stickiness of 
the plant.  The tarweeds produce abundant seed, are 
agreeably aromatic and oily , and form an important 
part of the small seeds used in pinole.  Tarweed and 
other seeds in pinole formed a staple food in the diet 
of the Indians of the Pacific  Coast.  In particular, the 
seeds of gumweed ( Madia elegans ssp. densifolia  (E. 
Greene) Keck) were among the most valued by the 
Miwok people for pinole.  The Hupa, Cahuilla, 
Digueño, Chumash, Costanoan, Kawaiisu, and Maidu 
tribes in California made pinole from  Madia species. 
 
Common madia seeds were harvested by women in 
late summer during a period of a fortnight.  A seed 
beater and a basket were used to gather the seeds.  
Then, the seeds were winnowed and ground very fine 
in a bedrock mortar with a stone pestle.  Both 
winnowing and sifting were done in a flat circular  basket plaque.  The sifting was done by jiggling the 
plaque so that the big fragments separated from the 
fine meal.  The large fragments were pulverized into  
meal and eaten dry.  The seeds were kept in storage 
in every household, and eaten all year.  Common 
madia roots were also eaten. 
 
When the seeds had matured but the plants were still 
green, the Hupa burned
 the areas where common 
madia grew.  Seeds gathered  from the scorched plants 
needed no further parching before being crushed into 
flour.  The Yokuts added common madia seeds to 
manzanita cider for flavoring. 
Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
Wildlife : The dark seeds (achenes) of tarweeds are 
used as food by many birds and small mammals, 
including mourning doves, quail, blackbirds, finches, 
Oregon juncos, California horned larks, western 
meadowlarks, American pi pits, sparrows, towhees, 
chipmunks, ground squirrels, and mice.  Cottontail 
rabbits, ground squirrels, and chipmunks eat the 
plants. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).   Madia 
elegans is an annual herb, 1-2.5 dm tall, and strongly 
scented.  The stems are simple to branched, often 
very leafy, softly hairy below, and with sparsely to 
densely stalked glandular sticky hairs above.  Leaves 
are 2-10 cm long, linear, en tire to serrate, soft-hairy 
to bristly, sometimes with glands.  The floral heads 
are in open, flat-topped cymes with 5-21 yellow ray 
flowers and 25-30 yellow or maroon disk flowers 
with yellow or black anthers.  The 2.5-5 mm fruits 
are black or dark brown achenes, sometimes mottled, 
and compressed or 3-angled. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Madia elegans  occurs in grasslands and open 
forest below 3350 m in elevation.  It flowers in 
summer and early autumn, and grows from northern 
Oregon through the California Floristic Province and 
Great Basin Province south to Baja California.

Establishment 
Adaptation: Madia elegans  ssp. densifolia  grows on 
grassy slopes and valleys at elevations below 1000 m.  
This subspecies occurs in the California Floristic 
Province and Great Basin Province and in Oregon.  
This plant flowers in summer and early autumn. 
 
General : Madia species seeds ripen in late summer, 
usually in August in California.  After gathering, 
seeds can be stored in a cool, dry place for at least a 
year and still maintain viability.   Madia species 
require well-drained, fairly dry soils with full sun.  
These annual species produce prolific seeds, and can 
be planted directly in the soil or in seed flats.  Plant 
seeds at the soil surface or plant 1/8" to ¼" in a well-
drained soil.  Water seedlings as the soil dry to 
stimulate growth.  It is best to plant seeds in the fall.  
Fertilization stimulates growth and seed production. 
 
Management 
Traditional Resource Management: Resource 
management of common madia includes the 
following: 
•   Seeds were distributed during the process of 
gathering seeds through seed beating.   
•  Burning occurred during September-October 
after seeds ripened and were harvested.  
Grassland species were burned for plant 
improvement by the tribes throughout California. 
•  Seeds were planted from wild plants.  A 
Diegueño woman reported her people always 
cleared a small spot near their dwelling to plant 
seeds of plants with gr eens, seeds, and roots. 
•  Ownership of seed-gathering grounds promoted 
long term care and sustainable harvest practices.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available  from selected native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Anderson, K. 1993.   Native Californians as ancient 
and contemporary cultivators .  IN T.C. Blackburn 
and K. Anderson (eds.) Before the wilderness.   Environmental management by Native Californians.  
pp. 151-174.  Ballena Press. 
 
Barrett, S.A. &E.W. Gifford 1933.  
Miwok material 
culture Indian life of the Yosemite region .  Yosemite 
Association, Yosemite National Park, California.  
388 pp. 
Barrows, D.P. 1977.   Ethno-botany of the Coahuilla 
Indians .  Malki Museum Press. Morongo Indian 
Reservation, Banning, California.  82 pp. 
 
Bean, L.J. &H.W. Lawton 1993.   Some explanations 
for the rise of cultural Complexity in native 
California with comments on proto-agriculture and 
agriculture .  IN: T.C. Blackburn &K. Anderson 
(eds.)   Before the wilderness.  Environmental 
management by Native Californians .  pp. 27-54.  
Ballena Press. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, & T. Davies, Jr. 1990.  
Plant propagation principles and practices .  Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647  pp. 
 
Hickman, J. C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H.S. Zim, &A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York. 
500 pp. 
 
Mayer, K.E. &W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. (eds.) 1988.   A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish and 
Game, and PG&E.  
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society. 81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2.  Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  220 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J., J.R. Johnson, &D.D. Earle 1993.  
Vegetation burning by the Chumash .  IN: T.C. 
Blackburn and K. Anderson (eds .) Before the 
Wilderness. Environmental Management by Native 
Californians.  pp. 117-150.  Ballena Press.  
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center

Bart O’Brien 
Director of Horticulture, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic 
Garden, Claremont, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.