Plant Guide
MOUNTAIN 
TARWEED  
Madia glomerata  Hook. 
Plant Symbol = MAGL2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials  Center, 
Oregon  
Mountain tarweed in flower at the Corvalli s Plant Materials 
Center. Photo  by Tyler Ross, 2012.  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names: cluster tarweed, mountain 
tarplant, California dwarf -sunflower   
Alternate  Scientific Names: none  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: Mountain tarweed attracts many 
native pollinators and other beneficial insects.   It may 
be included  in roadside revegetation mixes and  
pollinator hedgerows along farm edges .  It is 
particularly useful as a late season pollen source for 
native bees . 
Wildlife:  The seeds (ach enes) are used as food by 
birds and small mammals.  
Restoration:  Mountain tarweed can be planted on 
restoration sites that contain upland areas such as  
meadows , oak savannas , or shrublands .  This species 
is  used for  NRCS  Conservation Reserve Program 
( CRP ) a nd  Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program 
( WHIP ) plantings.  
Status  
Throughout its native range in the West, mountain 
tarweed is considered a facultative upland plant 
(FACU), meaning it occasionally occurs in wetlands 
but is usually found in uplands.  Where it  has become 
naturalized in Alaska, it is considered an obligate  upland plant (UPL), meaning it almost always occurs 
in uplands.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (
e.g., threat ened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Weediness  
Mountain tarweed often becomes weedy in 
overgrazed pastures and on disturbed  sites such as 
roadsides and trails  (Lass, 2007) .  It may displace 
desirable veget ation if not properly managed.   Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANT S Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information.  
Description  
General : Mountain tarweed is a strongly scent ed 
annual herb that may be 6 to 40 inches tall.  The 
plants may be simple or with stiff as cending 
branches.  Leaves are 1 to 4 inches in length and are 
densely pubescent  (hairy)  on the underside and 
sparsely covered with glandular hairs on top.  
Infloresce nces are clusters of glandular flower heads 
comprised of 0– 3 yellow ray flowers and 1 –5 disk 
flowers.  The seed is a flat, black achene  (Hickman , 
1993 ).    
Distribution:  Mountain tarweed is the most widely 
distributed  of all of the Madia  species , with a  native 
range covering much of the  western and northern 
parts of North America from British Columbia  to the 
Southwestern United States, across southwestern  
Canada and into the  Rocky Mountains region.   It has 
become naturalized in Alaska and across eastern 
C anada and the north -central and northeastern U.S.   
For current d istribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
Habitat:  Mountain tarweed grows mostly on 
disturbed sites including  o penings in grasslands, 
meadows , swales, shrublands, woodlands, forests, 
edges of marshes, lakes, and roadsides at elevations 
of  0 –12,000 ft  ( Hickman, 1993).  
Ethnobotany  
First nation people harvested the seeds to use as a 
food source and used other parts of the plant for 
medications, cu res, and rituals ( Moerman , 2003).