YELLOW-FLOWERED 
ALFALFA 
Medicago sativa subsp. falcata (L.) 
Arcang. 
Plant Symbol = MESAF 
 
Yellow-flowered alfalfa seed production field at Bismarck North Dakota Plant Materials Center. 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  yellow alfalfa, falcata alfalfa, falcata 
Scientific Names:  syn. M. falcata L. 
Description 
General:  Yellow-flowered alfalfa is a non-native, 
perennial, forage legume.  It has trifoliate leaves, multiple 
stems, and a thick, somewhat woody crown.  Like purple-
flowered alfalfa, its roots host nitrogen-fixing bacteria.  
Unlike purple-flowered alfalfa, however, its roots are 
more branching and fibrous than the tap root of purple-
flowered alfalfa.   
Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Habitat:  Yellow-flowered alfalfa may be cultivated in 
monoculture or interseeded with shrubs or grasses and/or 
with purple-flowered alfalfa.  In parts of South Dakota it 
has become naturalized. 
Adaptation 
Yellow-flowered alfalfa is best adapted to medium 
textured soil with a pH between 6 and 8.  It does well in 
areas with low precipitation and cold winters. 
 
 
Uses 
Yellow-flowered alfalfa is used for dry hay, greenchop, 
silage, and grazing and has a potential as a summer 
stockpiled forage.  It is a source of nectar and pollen for 
insects and provides habitat for birds and mammals. 
Ethnobotany 
Native to Siberia, it was introduced to the Dakotas by a 
travelling scientist around 1915.  The travelling scientist 
had noted the plant’s success on the Siberian plains near 
the Arctic Circle. 
Status 
Yellow-flowered alfalfa is an obligate upland (UPL) 
species. 
This plant has not been observed to become weedy.  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
Preparations for yellow-flowered alfalfa include 
controlling perennial weeds and adjusting soil pH to near 
neutral.  It may be grown from shallow-planted seed in 
spring or late-summer. 
Management 
Since yellow-flowered alfalfa exhibits an indeterminate 
flowering habit, it may be managed for forage production 
with fewer cuttings per year or may be harvested later in 
the flowering cycle with less decline in quality than 
purple-flowered alfalfa.  
  Purple-flowered alfalfa (left) and yellow-flowered alfalfa (right) showing difference in potato leaf hopper resistance in E. Lansing, Michigan. 
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Pests and Potential Problems 
The observed effects of insects (e.g. alfalfa weevil and 
potato leaf hopper) and diseases (e.g. root rots) have not 
been as deleterious on yellow-flowered alfalfa as on 
purple-flowered alfalfa.  
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with yellow-flowered alfalfa. 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only for 
illustrative purposes.  USDA-NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Spatial isolation from purple-flowered alfalfa is required 
to maintain seed purity.  Leaf-cutter bees may be 
imported to increase pollination and seed set.  Dessicants 
and pod dehiscence reducing agents may be used as 
harvest aides. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension, or local 
USDA-NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area.  Three yellow-flowered 
alfalfa cultivars are known:  ‘Anik’ developed by 
Agriculture Canada Northern Research Group, ‘AC 
Yellowhead’ developed at the Semiarid Prairie 
Agriculture Research Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food 
Canada, and ‘Don’ developed by the USDA-ARS Forage 
and Range Research Laboratory in Logan, UT.  (The 
name Don was chosen to reflect its origin in Don 
Province of Southeast Russia.)  ‘Sholty’ was jointly 
released in 2015 by the South Dakota Agricultural 
Experiment Station, South Dakota State University, 
Brookings, SD; the Michigan Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Michigan State University, E. Lansing, MI; the 
USDA-NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, ND; and the USDA-NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center, E. Lansing, MI and should be adapted 
to the service areas which these institutions represent. 
 
  Sholty alfalfa behind deer exclusion fence at Rose Lake Plant Materials Center. 
 
References 
Bliss, R.M.  2003.  Interseeding alfalfa on the northern 
plains:  Flowering alfalfa breaks barriers.  
Agricultural Research.  USDA-ARS.  Oct. 2003:  
Pp. 8-10. 
Boe, A., R. Bortnem, K.F. Higgins, A. Kruse, K.D. 
Kephart, and S. Selman. 1998. Breeding yellow-
flowered alfalfa for combined wildlife habitat 
and forage purposes, pp. 12, In SDAES, (ed.). 
South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 
Bortnem, R., A. Boe, and A. Kruse. 1994. Forage quality 
of yellow-flowered and hay-type alfalfas In 34th 
North American Alfalfa Improvement 
Conference Proceedings, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON 
Dietz, T.S.  2011.  Evaluation of Medicago sativa spp. 
falcata for sustainable forage production in 
Michigan.  Ph.D. Thesis.  Michigan State Univ., 
E. Lansing, MI 
McLeod, J.G., R. Muri, P.G. Jefferson, S. Bittman, and D. 
McCarthey.  2009.  Yellowhead alfalfa.  Can. J. 
Plant Sci.  89:653-655. 
Pankiw, P. and B. Siemens.  1975.  Anik alfalfa.  Can. J. 
Plant Sci.  56:203-205. 
Peel, M.D., K.H. Asay, B.L. Waldron, K.B. Jensen, J.G. 
Robins, and I.W. Mott.  2009.  ‘Don’, a diploid 
falcata alfalfa for western U.S. Rangelands.  
Journal of Plant Registrations.  3:115-118.

Quiros, C.F., and G.R. Bauchan. 1988. The genus 
Medicago and the origin of the Medicago sativa 
complex, In A. A. Hanson, et al., eds. Alfalfa 
and Alfalfa Improvement, Vol. 29. ASA CSA 
SSSA, Madison, WI 
Prepared by 
Durling, J.C., USDA-NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center; T.S. Dietz, Monsanto and formerly Crop & Soil 
Sciences Department, Michigan State University; W.L. 
Duckwitz and N.K. Jensen, USDA-NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center; and K.A. Cassida, Department of Plant, 
Soil, & Microbial Sciences, Michigan State University 
 
Citation 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Program.  2015. Plant 
guide for yellow-flowered alfalfa [Medicago sativa subsp. 
falcata (L.) Arcang.]. 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER