HOARY TANSYASTER 
Machaeranthera canescens 
(Pursh) A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = MACA2  
 Hoary tansyaster flowers. Photo by Derek Tilley  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  Purple aster  
Scientific Names:  Dieteria canescens  
 
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Hoary 
tansyaster is a short -lived perennial forb with pale to dark 
purple flowers. Plants  are 15 to 75 cm (6 to 30 in) tall 
with diffuse branching. Leaves are about 5 cm (2 in) long 
and 6 mm (0.25 in) wide, oblong or lance shaped with 
entire to sharply toothed margin. Flower heads have many 
subtending bracts that reflex away from the flower at  the 
tip (Welsh et al., 2003). Flower heads and vegetation are 
very sticky and heavily scented. Bracts are white and 
membranous at the bottom and green at the tip. The 
pappus of the achene is dirty white and hair -like. There 
are approximately 1.3 million s eeds/lb based on seed 
counts conducted by Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
(Tilley and St. John, 2010).  
 
Distribution : Hoary tansyaster occurs throughout western 
North America from British Columbia to Saskatoon, 
south to California, Arizona and Colorado. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Hoary tansyaster is common in plant 
communities from shadscale desert and Wyoming big 
sage sagebrush shrub communities on the valley floors to 
mountain big sagebrush, aspen and limber pine  communities moving up
-slope to higher elevations. Plants 
can be readily found flowering in late summer in 
numerous habitats, but primarily in valley bottoms and 
other dry areas. Hoary tansyaster is very comm on in low 
seral degraded and disturbed sites and has been 
considered by some as a weedy species in meadows and 
rangelands (Whitson et al., 1996).  
 
Adaptation  
Hoary tansyaster is adapted to medium to coarse textured, 
well drained soils with a pH of 6.0 to 8.4 (Borden and 
Black, 2005; Tilley and St. John, 2010). Hoary tansyaster 
requires full exposure to sunlight, and a minimum 10 inch 
rooting depth. The species is commonly found in areas 
receiving 20 to 150 cm (8 to 60 in.) of annual 
precipitation.   
 
Uses  
Re storation/reclamation : 
Hoary tansyaster is an early colonizer of rangelands and 
disturbed sites. It is commonly found on roadsides and 
gravel pits competing with invasive plants such as 
cheatgrass ( Bromus tectorum ) and knapweed species 
( Centaurea  spp). It can be planted to enhance species 
diversity in rangeland seedings throughout the western 
United States.  
 
Ethnobotanical  
Plants were used by Navajo Indians to treat nose and 
throat troubles (Moerman, 1998).  
 
Wildlife : 
Hoary tansyaster can be used as part of  a native forb 
component in rangeland and wildland seedings to increase 
biodiversity, improve wildlife habitat, and provide food 
for numerous birds and mammals. Hoary tansyaster is 
readily visited by pollinators and other insect species. It is 
considered an important species for sage grouse during 
brood rearing because of its insect associations. Insect 
surveys on hoary tansyaster plots at the Aberdeen Idaho 
Plant Materials Center showed visitation by sweat bees 
( Halictus  spp.), green sweat bees ( Agapostemon spp.), 
European honey bees ( Apis mellifera), bee flies 
( Bombilidae ) and cabbage white butterflies ( Pieris spp.).  
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide

A green sweat bee (Agapostemon sp.) visiting hoary tansyaster. 
Photo by Derek Tilley  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Planting Guidelines 
Parkinson and DeBolt (2005) observed 77% germination 
of seed that had been pre- chilled in dampened blotter 
paper at 4° C for 35 days.  Seed field establishment at the 
Aberdeen PMC indicates that pre- chilling may not be 
necessary for g ermination. 
 
A common garden study comparing 9 populations of 
hoary tansyaster from Idaho and Utah had establishment 
percentages ranging from 41 to 87% (Tilley and St. John, 
2010) from seed that was field -planted in November and 
allowed to undergo natural stratification.  
 
Seed should be drilled or broadcast seeded in late fall into 
a firm, weed -free seed bed at a depth of 0 to 6 mm (0 to 
0.25 in). For a pure stand, target delivery of 20 to 30 pure 
live seeds (PLS) per square foot, seed at a rate of 2 lbs 
(0 .9 kg) PLS per acre. If seeding as part of a mix, adjust 
seeding rate to the desired percentage of the mixture. 
Broadcast seedings should be followed with a cultipacker 
to ensure good seed to soil contact.   
 
Seed should be mixed with a dilutent such as ric e hulls to 
assist seed flow through seeding equipment. When 
calculating rice hull amounts based on seed bushel 
weights, it is important to determine the condition of the 
seed. Hoary tansyaster seed which has not had the pappus  removed has a bushel weight o
f approximately 3 
lb/bushel.  Seed that has been processed to remove the 
pappus weighs approximately 20 to 24 lb/bushel.  
 
Management  
When planted in a native reclamation  seed mix, it will be 
a minor component of the establishing plant community; 
therefore  management should be based on other key 
species in the mixture.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Moth caterpillars from the genus  Cucillia were observed 
on observational plots at Aberdeen, Idaho. These were 
seen eating flower heads, but did not appear to do 
extensive damage to the plots or decrease seed production 
significantly (Tilley and St. John, 2010).  
 
 
A Cucillia  moth caterpillar feed ing on hoary tansyaster flower 
heads. Photo by Derek Tilley 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with hoary tansyaster.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed production fields of hoary tansyaster can be hand -
planted into weed barrier fabric at 9 to 18 inch plant 
spacing or mechanically seeded into larger field plantings 
at 30 to 36 inch row spacing at 0.35 lb PLS/ac.  
 
Planting timing is important with hoa ry tansyaster. We 
have found that late summer (August) seedings result in 
reduced annual weed competition. Fields planted in spring 
or early summer did not produce a crop during the first 
year but did produce the following year and died that 
winter. Fields  planted in the fall produced crops the 
following 2 years.   
 
Plants grown in weed barrier fabric at Aberdeen, Idaho 
(an 8 - 12 inch mean annual rainfall zone) required no 
supplemental irrigation.  Drill seeded fields received 10 
cm (4 in) supplemental irrig ation in late April and again 
in mid -May.  Flowering begins in late summer and 
continues for several weeks into the autumn.   
 
Seed can be harvested by hand, flail -vac, direct combined, 
or by using a vacuum harvester (Bair and Tilley 2010).

Vacuum harvesters allow multiple, non -destructive 
harvests as seed matures.  
 
Harvested material is spread out on a clean concrete floor 
to air dry. Multiple box fans are aimed at the seed to 
increase air -flow over the seed. The material is sifted and 
turned with hay forks  twice daily to facilitate drying and 
to remove larger pieces of residue from the harvest.   
 
Once dried, seed is first sent through a laboratory brush 
machine with a number 7 mantle and brush rotation speed 
of 3 to break up flower heads and remove the pappus. The 
gate is closed to allow the brushed seed to fall through to 
the catch pan below. The brushed material is then cleaned 
using a multi -deck air screen cleaner with 6x30 and 6x32 
screens. The air is set at a low setting (1 to 2) to remove 
dust, pappus and unfilled seed. Flail Vac and combine 
harvested material contains a large amount of inert matter 
and needs to be run through the air screen process 6 to 10 
times for adequate cleaning. Following air screening, we 
use an indent cleaner with 1.8 mm indent s to remove 
small weed seeds such as witchgrass ( Panicum capillare 
L.) and redroot pigweed ( Amaranthus retroflexus L.). 
This process results in seed that can partially flow through 
seed drills.  Rice hulls as a carrier can be mixed with the 
seed to improve seed flow through seeding equipment.  
 
This method yields approximately 60 to 90% purity and 
60 to 90% viability. Hand harvested and vacuum 
harvested seed is much easier to process, and higher 
purities (80 to 90%) are easily obtained due to the reduced 
amount of inert matter collected. Sowthistle ( Sonchus sp.) 
and prickly lettuce ( Lactuca serriola  L.) seed are similar  
in shape and weight to hoary tansyaster. These are very 
difficult to remove during seed cleaning and are best 
handled in the field with hand rogueing or spot herbicide 
treatments.  
 
Hand harvest of experimental plots yielded approximately 
100 lbs of clean seed per acre (assuming 50% PLS). 
Mechanical harvest yields range between 2 and 7 lbs pure 
live seed (PLS)/ac.  Increasing the number of harvests 
beyond 2 in a single year may slightly increase the total 
yield.   As more experience with harvest and seed 
pr ocessing occurs, clean seed yields may be increased 
incrementally.  
 
Weed control efforts should begin prior to planting. 
Planting into a weed -free seed bed, or using weed barrier 
fabric greatly reduces management inputs. Weeds can be 
controlled using pre -e mergent herbicides and by hand 
rouging. Weedy grasses can be controlled with selective 
herbicides.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
Amethyst Germplasm hoary tansyaster was released in 
2014 by the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center for wildlife 
habitat and pollinator plantings in the Intermountain  West. The original source population of Amethyst 
Germplasm hoary tansyaster is located near the St. 
Anthony Sand Dunes in Fremont County, Idaho at 1,524 
m (5,000 ft) elevation. It is
 anticipated that Amethyst 
Germplasm hoary tansyaster is suited for conservation 
plantings in MLRA B11, Snake River Plains and B13 
Eastern Idaho Plateaus (USDA 2006). It is also likely 
adapted for use in arid locations throughout the 
Intermountain West, but has not been tested to that extent.  
 
Wildland collected seed may also be available 
commercially.  
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local e xtension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area . 
 
Literature Cited  
Bair, C. and D. Tilley. 2010.  The Jet Harvester: A New 
Tool for Harvesting Native Forb and ShrubSeed. 
USDA -NRCS. Technical Note 55.  Boise, ID.  
Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of  Machaeranthera canescens  (Pursh) A. Gray Seeds; 
USDA FS -R6 Bend Seed Extractory, Bend, OR. In: 
Native Plant Network. URL: http://www.nativeplant 
network.org (accessed 26 July 2010). Moscow  (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery.  
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany.  Timber Press. 927 p.  
Parkinson, H., and A. DeBolt. 2005. Propagation protocol 
for production of container Machaerantehra 
canescens  (Pursh) A. Gray plants; USDA Forest 
Service, RMRS, Boise, ID. In: Native Plant Network. 
URL:  http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org  (accessed  9 
Feb 2007). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery.  
Tilley, D.  and L. St. John. 2010. Hoary tansyaster initial 
evaluation planting: progress report 2010. USDA -
NRCS. Aberdeen, ID.  
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2014. Plant guide for 
hoary tansyaster ( Machaeranthera canescens ). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210.  
November, 2010  
 
Edited:
  05Sep2014 djt  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation

District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER