Plant Guide
SMOOTHSTEM 
BLAZINGSTAR  
Mentzelia laevicaulis  (Hook.) 
Torr. & A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = MELA2  
 
Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
 Mentzelia laevicaulis .  Sheri Hagwood, USDA NRCS 
PLANTS Database  
Alternate Names 
Blazing star, giant blazingstar, blazing -star mentzelia, 
beautiful blazingstar, stickleaf, Bartonia laevicaulis  
Douglas,  Nuttallia laevicaulis  (Douglas) Greene 
Uses  
Pollinator Habitat:  Smoothstem blazingstar is a 
source of nectar and pollen for native bees, butterflies 
and moths (Mee et al 2003).  
 
Rangeland:  This plant can be used for revegetation 
and diversification of rang eland, particularly on 
harsh, rocky sites.  
 
Forage:  Smoothstem blazingstar is undesirable as 
forage to both livestock and wildlife.  
 
Ethnobotanical:  The Cheyenne used the roots of this 
plant to treat rheumatism, arthritis, earaches, fevers,  mumps, measles and smallpox, as well as other 
complicated diseases.  They also used the roots for 
thirst prevention.  The Gosiute applied an infusion of 
the roots to bruised swellings.  The Montana and 
Mendicino made a decoction of the leaves and 
applied i
t as a wash for skin diseases, and drank it for 
stomachaches.  The Paiute used it as a source of food; 
they cooked the seeds in water and used it for a gravy 
(Native American Ethnobotany Database 2010).  
 
Ornamental:  Hitchcock and Cronquist (1973) state 
th is and a related species, M.  decapetala are 
“beautiful -flowered and desirable garden subjects for 
dry areas, especially the eastern Cascades”.  
According to Mee et al (2003) the plant is well -suited 
for a rock garden, steppe garden, or rocky slopes and 
is  self seeding.  However, it is difficult to transplant 
due to its taproot and barbed  leaves. 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
st ate noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant has a weedy appearance and is often found 
growing in association with weeds, however it is not 
weedy; it does not aggressivelydominate an area.  
 
Bumble bee visiting a Mentzelia  laevicaulis flower.  
Pamela Pavek  
Description 
General : Loasa family (Loasaceae).  Mentzelia 
laevicaulis  is a native biennial or short -lived 
perennial that has a deep taproot and a single,