Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC 
WAXMYRTLE  
Morella californica  (Cham. & 
Schlecht.) Wilbur 
Plant Symbol = MOCA6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
California bayberry, California wax myrtle, bayberry, 
pacific bayberry,  western bayberry,  Myrica 
californica  (MYCA13) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Wax from the pulp of the fruit was 
used to make aromatic candles.  The wax was also 
used in making soups.  A gray-brown and a maroon-
purple dye was obtained from the fresh or dried 
berries (Grae 1974).  This species was easily grown 
and valued especially on the Pacific Coast for its 
berries and evergreen  leaves (Wyman 1965). 
 
Agroforestry: Myrica californica  is used in tree strips 
for windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of 
winter storms and reduce home heating costs during 
the winter months.  They also provide shade and 
wind protection during the summer, which aids in the 
reduction of cooling bills. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pacific waxmyrtle ( Myrica californica) is a 
large evergreen shrub or small tree, ten to thirty-five 
feet high.  The leaves are a lternate, simple, five to ten 
centimeters long with resin dots, and are slightly 
sticky and fragrant when crushed.  The fruit are 
purplish, single seeded berr ies, coated with a white 
wax, ripening in the early autumn and usually falling 
during the winter.  The bark is smooth, compact, dark 
gray or light brown on  the surface and dark red-
brown internally (Sargent 1961). 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © St. Mary’s College @ Calflora
 
Distribution : Pacific waxmyrtle occurs in canyons 
and hill slopes of the coastal region from the Santa 
Monica Mountains of Los Angeles County northward 
to Del Norte County, and north to Washington 
(McMinn 1939).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Myrica californica  thrives in wet soil conditions and 
is drought tolerant.  It grows best in full sun in an 
open position and can tolerate light shaded areas.  
This species prefers a p eaty soil or lime free loamy 
soil. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seeds are best sown as soon 
as ripe in the autumn in a cold frame.  Stored seeds 
will germinate faster if they go through a three-month 
period of cold stratification and then are sown in a 
cold frame.  As soon as the seeds are ripe, place them 
in seed trays or containers .  When seedlings are large 
enough to handle, place them  in individual pots and 
grow them in a cold frame fo r the first winter.  Plants 
should be planted into their permanent positions in 
the late spring or early summer. 
 
Management 
In exposed situations, the wax myrtle forms a little 
more than a bushy arborescent shrub but in protected 
areas it becomes a medium sized tree, much branched 
and densely leafy, with a gray warty unfissured bark 
(Howell 1949).  Plants injured by fire sprout from the 
heavy root crown (Ibid.).

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available through native plant nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York  
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Grae, I. 1974.  Nature’s colors-dyes from plants .  
MacMillan Publishing Company, New York, New 
York. 
 
Howell, J.T. 1949.   Marin Flora: manual of the 
flowering plants and ferns of Marin County, 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley 
& Los Angeles, California. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
London, England. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Thomas, J.H. 1961.   Flora of the Santa Cruz 
Mountains of California .  Stanford University Press, 
Stanford, California. 
 
Wyman, D. 1965.   Trees for American gardens .  The 
MacMillan Company, New York, New York. 
 
Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., University  of California, Davis, 
California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.