Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEVADA STICKLEAF
Mentzelia dispersa S. Wats. 
Plant Symbol = MEDI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Nevada sandseed, Nevada blazingstar 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The seeds of Nevada stickleaf are 
relished by the Washoe, Utah Southern Paiute, 
Western Shoshone, and the Kawaiisu--tribes of 
California and the Great Basi n.  Its rich flavor is 
reputed to taste like peanut butter.  It is gathered 
when the seed is ripe and the plants have begun to die 
back in June, July, or early August depending upon 
elevation.  If the plants ar e still green, it is too early 
to harvest.  Traditionally, the plant was beaten with a 
seedbeater and the seed s dropped into a seed-
gathering basket.  Today the plant is tapped with a 
flat stick and the seeds drop into a pan or on a cloth 
that is laid under the plant.  The plant can also be 
uprooted and shaken and beaten onto a canvas tarp.  
The seeds are winnowed to remove the chaff.  A 
gentle breeze makes a good  seed cleaning wind. 
 
Today the seeds are placed into a frying pan and 
lightly roasted on the stove, emitting an aroma not 
unlike peanut butter.  In former times, the seeds were 
parched with live coals skillfully shaken in a flat 
basket tray.  Next the seeds are ground on a portable 
metate into a very fine powder.  The flour can then be  rolled into balls and eaten.  Among the Washoe, the 
flour is mixed with a little wheat flour and water is 
added, then the mixture is cooked and made into a 
rich soup similar in consistency to gravy.  It is then 
eaten with cooked meat.  In
 former times, dahal soup 
was often shared among the Washoe during 
storytelling events. The seed of some  Mentzelia 
species are eaten by the Gambel quail ( Lophortyx 
gambelii) in the Southwest U.S. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Loasa Family (Loasaceae).  This annual 
plant reaches 4 dm. in he ight and it grows up to 
2,500-m. elevation.  The small yellow flowers have a 
basal orange spot and the petals are 2-4 mm. long.  
The capsules produce grain-lik e, greyish-black seeds.  
The leaves are sticky and vary from having entire 
edges to small teeth.  When looking across a 
landscape, the white stems are easy to spot in the 
sunlight. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It ranges from California, north to Washington, 
and east to the Rocky Mountains and south into New 
Mexico. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Acre upon acre of this plant germinates 
in sagebrush scrub after fire.  It is an early 
successional species, one of the first to colonize burn 
sites, and then it disappears after several years.  The 
plant grows in many plant community types. 
 
General : Nevada stickleaf may be grown from seed 
planted into an area with full sunlight in November, 
in a well-drained gravely to sandy soil and prior to 
the rainy season.  A screen should be placed over the 
planted area, to keep the birds out.  If the 
precipitation is late, water the area.  In between rains, 
keep the area watered during the growing period. 
 
Management 
With urban development the plant disappears.  
Prescribed burns could be conducted on various open

sites to heighten production of this plant and facilitate 
the continuance of this remarkable tradition.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Field gathering is the usual source, since commercial 
sources are unknown.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Darlington, J. 1934.  A monograph of the genus 
Mentzelia .  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 21:103-225. 
 
Ebeling, W. 1986.   Handbook of Indian foods and 
fibers of arid America .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Fowler, Catherine S. 1986.   Subsistence.  IN: 
Handbook of North American Indians Volume 11 
Great Basin .  Edited by W.L. D'Azevedo, pp. 64-97.  
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Prigge, B. 1993.   Mentzelia.  Pages 741-744, IN:  The 
Jepson manual: Higher plants of California .  J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 990405. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.