Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COAST TARWEED 
Madia sativa Molina 
Plant Symbol = MASA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Coast tarweed seeds were one 
component in pinole, which was a staple food of the 
Indians of the Pacific coast.  There are several  Madia 
species, called “tarweed” because of the intense 
stickiness of the plant.  The tarweeds produce 
abundant seed and  are agreeably aromatic and oily.  
The Miwok, Hupa, Cahuilla, Digueño, Chumash, 
Costanoan, Kawaiisu, and Maidu tribes in California 
made pinole from  Madia species. 
 
Women harvested coast tarweed seeds in late summer 
during a period of a fortni ght.  A seed beater and a 
basket were used to gather the seeds.  Then, the seeds 
were winnowed and ground very fine in a bedrock 
mortar with a stone pestle.  Both winnowing and 
sifting were done in a flat circular basket plaque.  The 
sifting was done by jiggling the plaque so that large 
fragments separated from the fine meal.  The large 
fragments were pulverized into meal, which was  eaten dry.  The seeds were kept in storage in every 
household, and eaten all year.  Coast tarweed roots 
were also eaten. 
 
When the seeds had matured but the plants were still 
green, the Hupa burn
ed the areas where Madia grew.  
Seeds gathered from the scorched plants needed no 
further parching before being crushed into flour.  The 
Yokuts added  Madia sativa seeds to manzanita cider 
for flavoring. 
Jeanne Russell Janish Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
Wildlife : The dark seeds (achenes) of tarweeds are 
used as food by many birds and small mammals, 
including mourning doves, quail, blackbirds, finches, 
Oregon juncos, California horned larks, western 
meadowlarks, American pi pits, sparrows, towhees, 
chipmunks, ground squirrels, and mice.  Cottontail 
rabbits, ground squirrels, and chipmunks eat the 
plants. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).   Madia 
sativa  is an annual herb, 2-24 dm tall, and strongly 
scented.  The stems are stiff and very leafy, with 
glandular hairs throughout the plant producing a very 
sticky substance that covers the stems and leaves.  
The small (7-15 mm involucre), greenish-yellow, 
sunflower-like heads are sessile in dense cymes or 
panicle-like clusters.  The fruits are small (2.5-5 mm) 
black or dark brown achenes.  
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Madia sativa  grows in coastal grasslands at 
elevations below 950 m.  The distribution is quite 
widespread along the pacific coast, from Alaska to 
northern Baja California and southwestern South 
America.  
 
Establishment 
Madia sativa  seeds ripen in late summer, usually in 
August in California.  Afte r gathering, seeds can be 
stored in a cool, dry place for at least a year and still 
maintain viability.  Coast tarweed requires well-
drained, fairly dry soils with full sun.  These annual

species produce prolific seeds, and can be planted 
directly in the soil or in seed flats.  Plant seeds at the 
soil surface or plant 1/8" to ¼" in a well-drained soil.  
As the soil dries, water seedlings stimulate growth.  It 
is best to plant seeds in the fall.  Fertilization 
stimulates growth and seed production.  Seeds 
germinate rapidly.  Plant the seedlings into 2” or 4” 
pots after they grow 2-4 leaves beyond thee 
cotyledons.  Water as needed, but do not overwater. 
 
Management 
Traditional Resource Management: Resource 
management of coast tarweed includes the following: 
•  Seeds were distributed during the process of 
gathering seeds through seed beating.   
•  Burning occurred during September-October 
after seeds were harvested.  Grassland species 
were burned for plant improvement by the tribes 
throughout California. 
•  Seeds were planted from wild plants.  A 
Diegueño woman reported her people always 
cleared a small spot near their dwelling to plant 
seeds of plants with gr eens, seeds, and roots. 
•  Ownership of seed-gathering grounds promoted 
long term care and sustainable harvest practices.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is somewhat available from native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Anderson, K. 1993.   Native Californians as ancient 
and contemporary cultivators .  IN: T.C. Blackburn 
and K. Anderson (eds.)   Before the wilderness.  
Environmental management by native Californians .  
151-174 pp.  Ballena Press. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture Indian Life of the Yosemite region .  Yosemite 
Association, Yosemite National Park, California.  
388 pp. 
 
Barrows, D.P. 1977.   Ethno-botany of the Coahuilla 
Indians .  Malki Museum Press. Morongo Indian 
Reservation, Banning, California.  82 pp. 
 
Bean, L.J. & H.W. Lawton 1993.   Some explanations 
for the rise of cultural complexity in native California 
with comments on proto-agriculture and agriculture .  
IN: T.C. Blackburn and K. Anderson (eds.)  Before 
the wilderness. Environmental management by native 
Californians.  27-54 pp.  Ballena Press. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990 .  Plant propagation principles and Practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hickman, J. C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York.  
500 pp. 
 
Mayer, K.E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. (eds.) 1988.  A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish and 
Game, and PG&E.  
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2.  Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  220 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J., J.R. Johnson, & D.D. Earle 1993.  
Vegetation burning by the Chumash .  IN: T.C. 
Blackburn and K. Anderson (eds .)  Before the 
wilderness.  Environmental management by native 
Californians .  117-150 pp.  Ballena Press.  
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Bart O’Brien 
Director of Horticulture, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic 
Garden, Claremont, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.