Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE MULBERRY 
Morus alba L. 
Plant Symbol = MOAL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Chinese white mulberry, common mulberry, Russian 
mulberry, silkworm mulberry, chi sang, chin sang, 
moral blanco 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The fruits may be eaten cooked or raw 
and are made into jellies, jams, pies and is added to 
bread, cookies, or puddings.  The fruit is also an 
ingredient in mulberry wine and is used as a raisin 
substitute.  The inner bark was roasted and grounded 
into a meal and then used as a thickener in soups or 
mixed with cereals when making bread.  The young 
shoots were used as a tea substitute 
 
Economic : White mulberry was introduced along the 
Atlantic seaboard during colonial times when an 
attempt was made to establish the silkworm industry 
in this country (Harrar & Harrar 1962).  A fiber was 
obtained from the bark and used in weaving.  A 
brown dye can be obtained from the trunk. 
 
The wood is valued for sporting goods due to its 
durability, flexibility, and elasticity.  It is used mainly 
for tennis and badminton rackets, hockey sticks, 
furniture, agricultural implements, and house and 
boat building materials.  The stem is fibrous and is 
used in Europe and China for making paper. 
 
Medicinal : The leaves are taken internally in the 
treatment of sore throats,  colds, eye infections, and 
nose bleeds.  The stems are  used in the treatment of 
spasms, rheumatic pains, and high blood pressure.  
The fruit is used in the treatment of urinary 
incontinence, dizziness, diabetes, pre-maturing gray 
hair, and constipation in the elderly. 
 
Wildlife : White mulberry leaves are eaten as a 
vegetable and are useful as a cattle fodder.  Wild 
birds, hogs, and poultry eat the mulberry fruit. 
 Department of Botany University of Wisconsin, Madison 
 
Agroforestry : Morus alba  is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of 
winter storms and reduce home heating costs during 
the winter months. 
 
Status 
Introduced into the U.S. and it is considered invasive 
by several sources.  Please consult the Plants Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current stat us, such as, state noxious 
status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, st ate natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants .usda.gov.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description 
General : Mulberry family (Moreaceae).  White 
mulberry is an introduced, small to medium sized 
shrub or tree.  The leaves are alternate, simple, 
serrate or dentate, ovate to  broad ovate, and two to 
seven inches long (Dirr 1990).  The flowers are 
small, greenish, crowded in clusters, and hanging in 
catkins.  The fruit is blackberry like, typically white 
but sometimes pinkish violet, insipid and so plentiful 
it litters lawns and pavements (Taylor 1965).  The 
bark is light brown to gray and smooth, becoming 
divided into narrow scaly ridges.

Distribution: Morus alba  is a Chinese tree, cultivated 
throughout the world wherever silkworms are raised.  
It is occasionally cultivated in Japan, Europe, North 
America, and Africa.  In Mi chigan, white mulberry is 
frequent in urban environments in the southern half 
of the Lower Peninsula, occasionally in the northern 
half of the Lower Peninsula and the Upper Peninsula 
(Barnes & Wagner 1981).  This species is naturalized 
in the urban environment and rare in disturbed forest 
communities (Ibid.).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
White mulberry grows well on a wide variety of 
soils.  It prefers a warm, moist, well-drained loamy 
soil in a sunny position.  It withstands drought once 
well established.   Morus alba is quite salt tolerant.  
This species is also fairly wind-resistant. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Sow the seeds as soon as 
they are ripe in a cold fra me.  Germination of fresh 
seed may vary because some seed will contain 
dormant embryos and impermeable seed coats (Dirr 
& Heuser 1987).  Germination is improved by cold 
stratification at 33 to 41ºF for one to three months 
(Ibid.).  After germination, the seeds require half 
shade for a few weeks. 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Cutting are taken from 
bushes at pruning time.  The branches are cut twenty-
two to thirty centimeters long with three buds and 
planted immediately.  June and July are optimum 
months for rooting (Dirr & Heuser).  The cuttings are 
buried in soil about six to nine centimeters deep and 
watered frequently.  After about a month when the 
buds have shoots, they are taken out and planted.  
Mid July cuttings with bases are dipped in 8000 ppm 
IBA-talc and sand, that roots in three weeks with 
heavy root systems (Ibid).  
 
Management 
Mulberries have brittle roots and need to be handled 
with care when being planted.  Pruning should be 
done in the winter when the plant is fully dormant. 
Only badly placed branches  or dead wood should be 
removed during pruning.  Mulberries are bleeders 
and should not be cut when the sap is flowing. 
 
Different mulberry trees vary in fruit production.  
Sericulture is the most important commercial use for 
white mulberry.  Young, fully developed leaves are 
best for feeding silkworm larvae.  White mulberry 
can become weed trees as  fruits are distributed by 
birds and other wildlife (Dirr 1997). 
 
Control  
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Charparral’, ‘Pendula’, ‘Teas’, ‘Bellaire’, and 
‘Lingan’ are some of the cultivars of  Morus alba.  
‘Charparral’ is fruitless, with a weeping form, 
reaching a height of twelve feet.  ‘Pendula’ has a 
slender weeping form, reach ing a height and spread 
of twenty feet.  ‘Teas’ is grown for its edible fruit.  
‘Bellaire’ has a distinctive form and multiple trunk 
(Dirr 1990),  ‘Lingan’ is a type with leathery, lustrous 
foliage.  It is fruitless, fast growing, and drought 
resistant (Ibid.). 
 
Consult your local nurseries to choose the right 
cultivar for your specific landscape. 
 
References 
Brown, C.L. & L.K. Kirkman 1990.  Trees of 
Georgia and adjacent states.   Timber Press, Portalnd, 
Oregon. 
 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York. 
Bruggen, T.V.  1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Epple, A.O. 1995.   A field guide to the plants of 
Arizona .  Falcon Press, Helena, Montana.

Facciola, S. 1990.  Cornucopia-a source book of 
edible plants .  Kampong Publications.  
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
great plains .  University press of Kansas, Lawerence, 
Kansas. 
 
Harrar, E.S. & J.G. Harrar 1962.   Guide to southern 
trees .  2nd ed.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 
New York. 
 
Hunter, C.J. 1989.   Trees, shrubs, and vines of 
Arkansas .  The Ozark Society Foundation, Little 
Rock, Arkansas. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas.  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Strausbaugh, P.D. & E.L. Core 1971.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
Taylor, N. 1965.   The guide to garden shrubs and 
trees .  Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 
Massachusetts. 
 
University of Wisconsin 2002.  Morus alba .  
Department of Botany, Madison, Wisconsin.  
Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://www.wisc. edu/botit/img/bot/130/Plant%20M
orphology/130%20Required%20Terms/Leaf%20Stru
cture/Lobed/> 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 24feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.