Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOTTED 
HORSEMINT  
Monarda punctata  L. 
Plant Symbol = MOPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Spotted bee-balm 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Dotted horsemint was used by the 
Meskwaki to treat colds and catarrh in a mixture with 
the leaves of  Ranunculus delphinifolius  and the disk 
florets of  Helenium autumnale .  This plant, along 
with other plants were ground into a powder and 
snuffed up the nostrils to relieve a sick headache.  
Taken with the roots of  Asarum canadense, 
Euphorbia corollata, and  Brauneria angustifolia 
these plants relieved stomach cramps.  The Delaware 
washed patients' faces with an infusion of dotted 
horsemint to treat skin problems.  They also used an 
infusion of dotted horsemint to reduce fevers.  The 
Mohegan made an infusion of the plant to reduce 
fevers as well.  The Nanticoke used an infusion of the 
entire plant to treat colds.   The Navajo hung the plant 
in the hogan for its pleasing odor.   
 
Other Uses : Birds are attracted to  the nectar, such as 
hummingbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Mint Family (Lamiaceae).  This herbaceous 
perennial is 3 to 10 dm. high and thinly canescent.  
The leaves are lanceolate or narrowly oblong, 2-8 
cm. and more or less hairy.  The plant has square 
stems.  The flowers are both terminal and axillary 
and the stamens do not ex sert beyond the strongly 
arched upper corolla lip.  The flowers appear in 
small, compact, head-like cymes of 2-5 or solitary on 
depauperate plants.  The fl owers are tubular, and 13-
15 nerved.  The corolla is pale yellow, spotted with 
purple and strongly bilabiate.  The upper lip is 
narrow and entire, and is about as long as the throat 
and slender tube together.  The lower lip is broader.   
©  Hugh Wilson Vascular Plant Image Gallery 
@Texas A & M 
 
Distribution 
This plant is found in dry sandy soil from Vermont to 
southeastern Minnesota, south to Florida and Texas, 
but missing from most of the Ohio drainage.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
When the seeds are ripe, cut off the seed heads and 
spread them over a clean,  dry surface indoors to air-
dry for several days.  Then place some of the seed 
heads in a paper bag and shake.  Many of the seeds 
will fall into the bag.  Repeat the process with the 
remaining heads.  Next run the seeds and associated 
chaff through a sieve.  Stor e the seeds in a dry sealed 
and labeled container or Ziploc ™ bag with wet sand 
or peat moss in the refrigerat or that is kept under 40º 
F for three months.  
 
Propagation by seeds : Sow the seeds in a greenhouse 
in cells (1 and one quarter inches across and 2 and 
one quarter inches deep) in January no deeper than 
one-eighth of an inch.  Expect them to germinate in 
one to two weeks.  The soil mix can be one-third 
sand and two-thirds commercial plug mix.  Place 5 
seeds per cell.  Apply a starter fertilizer solution for 
the seedlings.  Water them when the surface is dry to 
the touch.  Note that dotted horsemint is sensitive to 
over-watering.  Keep the seedlings in the cells for 3 
to 4 months.  Water them when the surface is dry to 
the touch.  Pinch off the tops of the plants several

times to encourage a branching and bushier grow 
habit.  Apply a weekly application of an all-purpose 
fertilizer to the seedlings.  When the roots fill the 
container they are ready  for out-planting in the 
garden.  Plant the plants in a sunny, weed-free spot to 
light shade and in a light, well-drained soil, two feet 
apart.  Water, until rains come. 
 
Seeds can also be broadcast on a weed-free surface 
from January to mid-May in a sunny location.  
During the first summer of full growth mow the area 
3 to 5 times to keep the plants between 8 and 4 inches 
tall.  Mowing also reduces weeds. 
 
Propagation by cuttings : Take stem tip cuttings, 3-4 
inches long, any time from May to August.  Remove 
the lower leaves and all flower or seed heads and 
insert the stems into a sand and perlite-rooting 
medium.  Bury each cutting up to the first node.  
Place the cuttings in an enclosed area and mist them 
several times a day.  In 4 to 5 weeks the cuttings 
should be well rooted and can be transplanted to pots.  
Then out-plant the seedlings in the garden in early 
autumn. 
 
Management 
Once established, dotted horsemint still benefits from 
extra watering during dry summers.  Continue 
mowing the area, once a year, after the hardest killing 
frosts or the following spring.  This keeps woody 
plants from encroaching and removes plants that have 
died back.  Continue to add leaf mold and compost to 
your soil, as the plant's shallow root systems spread 
easily through light soil. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected dotted horsemint are 
available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Elmore, F.H. 1944.  Ethnobotany of the Navajo.   
School of American Research, Santa Fe, New 
Mexico. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and  adjacent Canada.
  Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928 .  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Tantaquidgeon, G. 1972.   Folk medicine of the 
Delaware and related Algonkian Indians . 
Pennsylvania Historical Commission 
Anthropological papers, Number 3, Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Prepared by and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 18sep00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.