Plant Guide

GREEN 

NEEDLEGRASS

Nassella viridula (Trin.) 

Barkworth 

Plant Symbol = NAVI4 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center 
Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the Northern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
Alternate Names  
Feather bunchgrass, Stipa viridula 
Uses 
Rangeland/hayland: Green needlegrass is well suited 
for use in mixtures for range seeding, critical area 
establishment, mineland revegetation, wildlife 
habitat, and other plantings where the establishment 
of native vegetation is the objective.  This species is 
nutritious, palatable, but decreases under grazing use. 
The awns are not as troublesome to livestock as with 
other needlegrasses.  Green needlegrass is frequently 
included in seedings of mixed midgrasses, but due 
partly to its hard seed coat, it may be slow to 
germinate and become established. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Green needlegrass is a cool-season (C3) 
native perennial bunchgrass.  It grows to a height of 
18 to 36 inches.  The seed head is a compacted 
panicle, varying from 4 to 10 inches in length.  
Flowering occurs in early June with seed usually 
maturing in late June or early July.  The awns are 
curved, sharply bent in the middle, and about one 
inch long.  The leaves are often rolled, thread-like, 4 
to 12 inches long, smooth, with prominent veins 
above. Auricles are absent.  The ligule is a ring of 
hairs, and the sheath is hairy at the margins.  This 
species has rather deep, fibrous roots which in 
favorable situations may extend to a depth of 10 feet 
or more.  Green needlegrass is very resistant to 
disease.  It occurs only sparingly in most associations 
of native vegetation. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: This grass is an important native of the 
Northern Great Plains, and is found as far south as 
Arizona.  Green needlegrass grows on medium to 
fine-textured soils in both the True Prairie and Mixed 
Prairie.  On medium-textured soils, green needlegrass 
grows with western wheatgrass, needleandthread, and 
blue grama.  On fine-textured soils, needleandthread 
drops out, and on even finer soils, blue grama 
decreases leaving green needlegrass and western 
wheatgrass as dominants.  Green needlegrass 
naturally occurs on bottomlands, flat benches and 
overflow area along streams. 
Establishment 
This species is recommended for seeding mixes in 
the 12 to 18 inch precipitation zone.  High dormancy 
is a characteristic of the seed of this species.  
Germinability improves for several years after 
harvest. Seedlings are slow in developing. Once 
established, they have good vigor.  Green needlegrass 
has approximately 181,000 seeds per pound. The 
recommended seeding rate for western North and 
South Dakota is 6 PLS pounds per acre (25 pure live 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

seeds per square foot). A full seeding rate for eastern 
North and South Dakota is 7.5 PLS pounds per acre 
(30 pure live seeds per square foot). 
This species is often planted as part of a mix with 
other native grasses.  If used as a component of a 
mix, it is necessary to adjust the seeding rate to the 
percent of mix desired. On most sites in the Dakotas 
where this species is adapted, it is seldom more than 
30 percent of the mix.  This species should be planted 
with equipment which provides for proper seed 
depth, a uniform seeding rate, and good seed to soil 
contact.  If the seed has been processed to remove the 
awns, it can be seeded with other grasses in the small 
grain or wheatgrass box of a grass drill. The seedbed 
needs to be firm enough to allow seed to be planted 
only ½ to ¾ inch deep. 
Management 
Hayland: Due to its early spring green-up, green 
needlegrass is an important component of natural 
plant communities. This species is harvested for hay 
in native grass mixtures.  In some areas, it makes up 
an appreciable portion of the yields of native hay 
from upland areas or from flats, on loamy to heavy 
clay soils.  The hay is of good quality and is readily 
eaten by livestock. The time of peak forage 
production for green needlegrass is from mid to late 
August.  In studies carried out in North and South 
Dakota, the five-year average for forage production 
varied from 700 lb/ac on a fine sandy loam to 1,100 
lb/ac on a clay loam.  Crude protein is good during 
the early growing season.  A study at Hettinger, 
North Dakota, indicated a range from 19 percent on 
April 26, to 5 percent on August 24. 
Pasture: Green needlegrass is not recommended for a 
solid seeding for grazing use.  It is best used in 
pasture mixes.  Growth begins in early spring, and 
cattle will seek it out.  Growth continues in the fall 
when moisture conditions are favorable.  It makes 
excellent recovery after grazing.  It seems to stand up 
fairly well for winter grazing.  This species will 
decrease under grazing use. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed production: Seed yields from green needlegrass 
fields vary from about 125 lb/ac on dry land to more 
than 250 lb/ac for irrigated fields.  Older references 
indicate that this species can be grown in either rows 
or in a solid seeding. Studies have shown that seed 
dormancy in this species is inversely related to 
maturity.  This can be critical since seed in the lower 
panicle is still immature when that in the upper 
branches has ripened and started to shatter. The 
difference of a few days in harvest date can make a 
difference in amount of seed dormancy.  Harvest 
should begin when the majority of the seed heads are 
black, or at the first sign of shattering.  Seed harvest 
must be timed carefully to avoid excesses in both 
shattering and immaturity.  Seed ripens from late 
June to mid-July.  If seed is harvested with a seed 
stripper, more than one pass can be made through the 
field.  Once harvested, the seed should be processed 
to remove awns.  This will make the seed much more 
flowable through a drill. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
(and area of origin) 
Many older references mention a variety of green 
needlegrass named ‘Green Stipa.’  This variety is no 
longer available, and was replaced by ‘Lodorm,’ 
which was released by the Montana, North Dakota 
and South Dakota Experiment Stations, along with 
the Plant Science Research Division of the 
Agricultural Research Service, Mandan, North 
Dakota.  Lodorm originates from a bulk collection 
made in a native stand north of Bismarck, North 
Dakota, in 1935.  It is a heterogeneous population of 
highly self-pollinated individuals.  It was selected for 
low seed dormancy after harvest.  Seed is 
commercially available, and the USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Bismarck, North Dakota, maintains 
Foundation seed.  
‘ACTM  Mallard’ was developed as a northern hardy 
ecovar of green needlegrass for use in western 
Canada.  Seed is available from Proven 
Seed/Agricore United. 
‘Cucharas Germplasm’ was released in 2003 for 
use in the central Great Plains.  It shows an 
improvement in germinability over Lodorm.  Seed is 
available from the Utah Crop Improvement 
Association. 
References 
Alderson, J. and W.C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties in 
the United States. Agricultural Handbook No. 170. 
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
Bergman, H.F. 1912. Flora of North Dakota. North 
Dakota Soil and Geological Survey, Bismarck. 
Clarke, S.E., J.A. Campbell and W. Shevkenek. 
1950. The identification of certain native and 
naturalized grasses by their vegetative characters. 
Publication No. 762. Department of Agriculture, 
Canada.

Johnson, J.R. and G.E. Larson. 1999. Grassland 
plants of North Dakota and the Northern Great 
Plains. Bulletin 566 (rev.). South Dakota State 
University, Brookings. 
Larson, K.L. and J.F. Carter. 1970. Lodorm green 
needlegrass – A new variety for revegetating 
rangeland. North Dakota Farm Research 27: 6-8. 
Fargo. 
Sedivec, K.K. and W.T. Barker. n.d. Selected North 
Dakota and Minnesota range plants. EB-69. North 
Dakota State University Extension Service, Fargo. 
Smith, S.R. and S. Smith, editors. n.d. Native grass 
seed production manual. USDA, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Ducks Unlimited Canada, 
Manitoba Forage Seed Association, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg. 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Michael Knudson 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota 
Edited:27Jun2005 MJK; 28Jun2005 RLN; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.