Plant Guide       
 
NODDING 
NEEDLEGRASS 
Nasella cernua  (Stebbins & 
R.M. Love) Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = NACE 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Alternate Names 
Stipa cernua, nodding stipa 
 
Uses 
Nodding needlegrass is used for restoration, critical 
area planting, cover crop, and wildlife habitat.  It is 
probably one of the best grasses available for use in 
harsh conditions, such as subsoils, low fertility soils, 
hot ant dry meadows, roadcuts, and roadsides.  It also 
provides good early fora ge for grazing animals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poacae).  Nodding needlegrass is a 
native, long-lived, cool season tufted perennial 
bunchgrass.  It is very similar to  Nassella pulchra 
(purple needlegrass), but is generally smaller, with 
finer leaf blades, and the te rminal segment of the awn 
flexuous.  It also produces more flower spikes.  The 
basal leaf blades are numerous, narrow, and glaucus. 
 
Distribution 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
Nodding needlegrass is found is the southwestern 
United States in lower elevations with a coastal 
influence.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
In California, this grass is especially adapted to 
sandy, well-drained, loamy soils, but will tolerate 
rocky soil.  It is native to chaparral and dry slopes in 
lower elevations.  It thrives in full sun, and also 
grows in partial shade.  It will tolerate heat and wind. 
 
Establishment 
Nodding needlegrass does well in disturbed sites and 
is valuable for erosion control, because of its strong 
root system.  However, it does not tolerate 
disturbance after planting.  It will go dormant after 
flowering without additional water (facultatively 
dormant), and does best with no summer water after 
the first year in the ground.  Small amounts of routine 
watering may keep it green all year, but may also kill 
it.  It is very drought tolerant, and intolerant of 
flooding.  In dense stands, it can completely inhibit 
certain weeds, such as yellow starthistle.  Abundant 
seed production is usually what helps maintain 
natural stands in non-grazed  or lightly grazed areas.  
Plants need some protection from grazing during 
flowering to ensure seed formation and food storage 
in the crown.  Once established, it is generally fire 
tolerant, but not fire resistant.  The season of a burn is 
the most important factor in determining the severity 
of the effects on the plants.  It will re-sprout after 
spring or fall burns, but summer burns can be 
damaging.  Smaller plants are often less damaged by 
fire than larger plants because they burn less 
intensely and don’t smolder for long periods of time. 
 
Management  
Nodding needlegrass will withstand mowing, 
especially after seed set and some traffic.  It also

requires some protection from grazing during the 
flowering period (late May-April).  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Abundant seed matures in mid to late spring, with 
collection possible for 2 - 3 weeks.  There are 
between 118,000 and 250,000 seeds/lb., and if 
planted at a rate of 1 lb./acre, there will be 
approximately 4.3 seeds/square feet.  Sharp points on 
the seeds are augured into the soil by the twisting 
action of the awns.  Also, seed can be harvested using 
a flow-vac or combine.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘LK415f’ Germplasm: Collected from San Luis 
Obispo County, California; Trusedale and Shells 
Roads. Township 27S and Range 15E Section 10.  
Elevation is approximately 1200 feet.  Mean annual 
precipitation is 12-20 inches.  Mean annual 
temperature is 60 degrees F.  
 
References 
Clunet.edu. 2005.  Wildflowers of California: A 
photographic gallery . Accessed: 12 Sep 2005. 
http://ww1.clunet.edu/wf/chap/common/bjc-
1404.htm.  
 
USDA NRCS. Notice of release of foothill 
needlegrass for major land resource area 15f 
selected class of natural germplasm LK415f 
germplasm . Lockeford, CA. 
 
Wrysinski, Jeanette. 2000.  Know Your Natives: A 
Pictorial Guide to California Native Grasses . Yolo 
County Resource Conservation District, Woodland, 
California. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California. 
 Edited: 12Sep2005 ro; 23sep05 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status.  (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg
e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.