Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW POND-LILY
Nuphar lutea (L.) Sm. 
Plant Symbol = NULU 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plants Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Brandy-bottle, bullhead lily,  Nuphar variegatum, 
spatterdock, yellow cowlily.  
 
Nuphar lutea is divided into many subspecies. 
Comparisons of morphological features and 
interpretations of molecular analysis indicate the 
name 
Nuphar lutea should not be used for any North 
American 
Nuphar members. The genus Nuphar is 
now represented by 
eight distinct species in North 
America. A key to this new classification is provided 
in 
Flora of North America, volume 3, by Kartesz 
(1997) and 
Aquatic and Wetland Plants of 
Northeastern North America
, volume 1, by Crow and 
Hellquist (2000). 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans consumed the 
starchy rootstocks as boiled or roasted vegetables and 
harvested the seed for grindi ng into flour.  There are 
some accounts of the root being powdered and used 
as a poultice.   
 
Wildlife:  Yellow pond-lily provides food and shelter 
for many fish and underwater insects. 
 
Ornamental:  Yellow pond-lily flowers and leaves are 
showy and fragrant.  For this  reason, it is used as an 
ornamental planting in water gardens and ponds.   
 
Legal Status 
Yellow pond-lily is a noxious aquatic weed in Puerto 
Rico.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
  D. Bayne @ AquaPlant Database. 2000. 
Texas Cooperative Extension. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General: Water Lily Family (Nymphaeaceae).   
Yellow pond-lily is an aquatic perennial that grows to 
be 15 to 60 cm in height and spreads 1 to 2 m on the 
water surface.  Spongy rh izomes anchor into the 
muddy bottom of a water body and give rise to long, 
stout stems. Submerged leaves are thin and attached 
to the rhizomes.  Floating leaves are thick, somewhat 
heart-shaped, wavy along the margins, have up to a 
40 cm spread, and are attached to the stems.  Flowers 
emerge on separate stem stalks.  They are cup-
shaped, yellow-green, with small scale-like petals 
and numberous stamens and stigmas hidden within 
the thick showy sepals.  Flowers bloom from May to 
October, partially opening in the morning and closing 
at night.  Spent flowers give way to seed heads that 
burst upon ripening, broadcasting their seeds over the 
water surface.  Flowers and leaf stems die back to the 
rhizome in autumn. 
 
Yellow pond-lily may be confused with water lily, 
Nymphaea species, which have rounder leaves and 
showier pink to white flowers.   
 
Distribution : Yellow pond-lily is native to the 
Eastern United States, Africa, Temperate Asia, the 
West Indies, and Europe.  It  is naturalized in most

temperate regions of North America.  It occurs in all 
50 states except Hawaii.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
Habitat: Yellow pond-lily occurs in slow-moving 
streams, still ponds, and lakes. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for yellow pond-lily are 
4 to 10.  It grows in wet, poor sandy soils and 
performs best in 1 to 3 feet of water in full sun to part 
shade.  It is more tolerant of shade and deep water 
than Nymphaea  species. 
 
It is more often used in large water gardens and 
ponds where it can produc e underwater stems that 
grow up to 2 m long and can slowly spread to form 
sizeable colonies. 
 
Establishment 
Yellow pond-lily should be grown in containers if 
they are used for water gardens.  For natural ponds, 
plant rhizomes directly in the muddy bottom if 
naturalization is desired. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are produced and deposited on the water 
surface, where they are carried  to a germination spot.  
Yellow pond-lily reproduces more readily by 
spreading rhizomes.   
 
Control 
Although this plant is not considered invasive, it is 
very difficult to eradicate when not grown in 
containers because any section of rhizome left behind 
may sprout new growth. 
 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  The USDA NRCS does not guarantee 
or warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 30 
July 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Bayne, D. 2000.  Aquaplant database 
(http://aquaplant.tamu.edu/default.htm, 30 July 
2004). Texas Cooperative Extension, Texas A&M 
University, College Station. 
Connecticut Botanical  Society. 2004. Yellow pond-
lily  (http://www.ct-botanicalsociety.org/galleries/ 
nupharlute.html, 30 July 2004). New Haven. 
 
Kemper Center for Home Gardening. 2004.  Kemper 
web, PlantFinder 
(http://ridgwaydb.mobot.org/k emperweb/plantfinder/
Alpha.asp, 30 July 2004). Missouri Botanical 
Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Ramey, V. and A. Murray. 2002.  Aquatic Plant 
Information Retrieval System (APIRS)  
(http://aquat1.ifas.ufl.edu/welcome.html, 30 July 
2004). Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants, 
University of Florida, Gainesville. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 3Aug2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.