Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEARGRASS 
Nolina microcarpa  S. Wats 
Plant Symbol = NOMI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, UC Davis Arboretum, & Tucson NRCS Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Sacahuista 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Beargrass formed the stuffing or warp 
of Papago coiled baskets.  The blades were cut off 
near the ground and the  saw-like edges are scraped 
away with a knife, split in two or more sections, and 
bundled and stored until used.  Beargrass leaves were 
sometimes used in Jemez Pueblo ring baskets and 
they were the preferred materials for other southerly 
Rio Grande Pueblos earlier in this century. The Pima 
used beargrass in their ba skets. They sun-dried the 
leaves and then split them into four, five or six  strands before using them. These materials are still 
being gathered today and woven into baskets.  The 
Isleta Pueblo in New Mexico ground beargrass seeds 
into flour for food.  They 
also drank a tea of boiled 
beargrass roots as a cure for pneumonia and 
rheumatism. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This native, 
acaulescent perennial has long, narrow leaves with 
small teeth along their margins.  The leaves are 
narrow--6-12 mm. wide and 6-12 dm. long.  
Beargrass has a dense cluster of white flowers on a 
long stalk, up to 2 m tall.  The flowers are minute and 
cream-tan, and the round fruits are deeply notched at 
the apex.  The seeds are lig ht yellow-brown to nearly 
black and finely wrinkled. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : The plant is found on exposed 
mountainsides throughout much of Arizona, and 
similar elevations eastward through New Mexico into 
western Texas and adjacent Chihuahua and 
northeastern Sonora. 
 
General : Establish the plant by seed.  Plant the seeds 
in a flat in a nursery at a depth that is the width of the 
seeds.  The seeds should be planted in the spring in 
well-drained soil with a coar se layer of sand on top 
and gently watered.  Protect  the flat from animals.  
Let the surface of the soil dry out between watering.  
If the flats are watered too often, this can cause the 
plants to rot.  A good indicator of over-watering is 
that the plants wilt.  Once the seedlings have leaves 
and are at least two inches tall with sturdiness to 
them, transplant them into individual pots with good 
drainage holes.  After transplanting, put the 
containers in a shady area that is protected from wind 
and animals such as a lath  house or a shady grove of 
trees.

After one and one-half years, plant the plants 
outdoors in lower elevations in mid-to-late fall or 
early winter.  In higher elevations where the ground 
freezes, it is best to plant  the plants when the ground 
thaws.  After planting, water the plants and let them 
dry out on the surface between watering.  During the 
rainy season, supplement with hand watering if the 
rains are insufficient.  Plant the plants in a well-
drained, well-aerated soil.  Plant in partial shade, 
using a shade cloth or other means until well-
established and then remove the shade cloth to 
expose the plant to full sun.  Water the plant through 
the summer.  It will be n ecessary to water the plant 
for several years until well established.  In areas 
without summer rainfall, continue to water the plant 
in summer throughout the life of the plant. 
 
Management 
If the plant begins to have an unkempt, matted 
appearance, prune it back in late winter or early 
spring after the danger of frost is past. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo Province: Exploring ancient and 
enduring uses .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa 
Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Rea, A.M. 1997.   At the desert's green edge: An 
ethnobotany of the Gila River Pima .  University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Robinson, B. 1954.   The basket weavers of Arizona .  
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico. 
 
Shreve, F. & I.L. Wiggins 1964.   Vegetation and 
flora of the Sonoran Desert.  Vol.  I.  Stanford 
University Press, Standford, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Whiteford, A.H. 1988.   Southwestern Indian baskets  their history and their makers
.  School of American 
Research Press, Sante Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Dept. of Plant Sciences, Un iversity of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Warren Roberts 
UC Davis Arboretum 
 
Bruce Munda 
USDA, NRCS, Tucson Plant Materials Center, 
Tucson, Arizona 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 21may03 ahv 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.