Plant Guide

BLACKGUM

Nyssa sylvatica Marsh. 

Plant Symbol = NYSY 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the Northern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
Black tupelo, blackgum, sour gum, pepperidge, 
tupelo, and tupelo-gum 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Reestablishes well in erosion prone 
areas like burned over forest, abandoned fields, 
rolling hills and cold mountain swamps.   
Wildlife: Black bears, foxes, wood ducks, wild 
turkeys, robins, woodpeckers, mockingbirds, brown 
thrashers, thrushes, flickers, and starlings frequently 
eat the fruit, while white-tailed deer and beavers 
browse the twigs, foliage, and young sprouts.  
Additionally, provides cavity and nesting sites for a 
variety of birds and mammals and a good honey tree.   
Timber: Its wood is used for light, non-splitting 
woodwork such as in docks and wharves; veneer, 
containers, crossties, and pallets.   
Recreation and Beautification: Excellent ornamental 
plant for its straight bole, shapely crown and 
attractive autumn foliage. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description 
Nyssa sylvatica is a medium to large-sized native 
tree, frequently 60 to 80 ft tall and 3 to 4 ft in 
diameter.  It typically has dense foliage with a 
conical crown on straight trunk.  The simple, 
alternate leaves are leathery, and densely clustered at 
the branchlets.  The small greenish white flowers are 
borne singly or in clusters.  The bark is reddish 
brown and broken into deep irregular ridges and 
diamond-shaped plates.   
Distribution: Blackgum grows from Maine west to 
New York, extreme southern Ontario, central 
Michigan, Illinois, central Missouri, and south to 
central Florida.   
Adaptation 
A wide variety of sites have adapted to the 
Blackgum.  They range from the creek bottoms of the 
southern Coastal Plain to altitudes of 3,000 feet in 
North Carolina.  It grows best on well-drained, light-
textured soils on the low ridges of second bottoms 
and on the high flats of silt alluvium.  Blackgum will 
tolerate brief spring flooding on alluvial sites and is 
common on the relatively dry upper and middle 
slopes in the Appalachian Mountains.  On the drier 
uplands, it grows best on loam and clay loam.  It is 
well adapted to fire.  Older trees have thick bark and 
relatively high moisture content.  Although 
aboveground portions of young trees are top-killed by 
fire, it typically survives by sprouting from the root 
crown or caudex.  
Establishment 
Blackgum is usually found in a mix of other species 
including black cherry (Prunus serotina), dogwood 
(Cornus florida), hickory (Carya spp.), oak (Quercus 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

spp.), eastern hophornbeam (Ostrya virginiana), and 
yaupon (Ilex vomitoria), it is shade tolerant and 
seldom grows as the dominant tree but it usually 
grows in the intermediate crown class on most sites. 
It responds favorably to releases from overtopping 
vegetation.  Seedlings grow slowly under a fully 
stocked stand. At the time of disturbance, large 
numbers of new seedlings can become established.  
Smaller blackgum stumps sprout readily and larger 
stumps sprout and develop root suckers.  Layering 
can be used to produce stocks.   
Propagation from Seed: Seed production is highly 
variable, disseminated primarily by gravity and birds, 
others generally fall to the ground and remain 
dormant in the litter or are carried by water. Seeds 
overwinter on cool, damp soil and germinate the 
following spring.  Blackgum requires nearly full 
sunlight for optimum early growth.  Pre-chilled seeds 
must be sown in spring.  Seeds are drilled at the rate 
of 15 ft per row and covered with ½ - 1 inch of soil.  
A mulch of sawdust is often used.  Beds must be kept 
moist.   
Propagation from Stumps: Blackgum sprouts from 
the stump following disturbance.  Smaller sour gum 
stumps sprout readily while larger stumps sprout 
occasionally. Sprouts arise from suppressed buds 
and are concentrated near the top of the stump.  
Stump sprouts can produce seeds at 2 years of age. 
Management 
Seedling establishment is best accomplished by the 
shelterwood method.  Regeneration can also be 
accomplished by clear-cutting if prior to a good seed 
fall or if advanced regeneration already exist.  Due to 
the high palatability of seedlings and sprouts, 
controlling deer populations can protect Black tupelo.  
It often competes with loblolly and short-leaf pine for 
water and light, reducing its growth and 
development.  Basal tree injections with herbicide is 
an effective control method for crown kill.  
Intermediate trees respond favorably to release from 
overhead vegetation; seedlings respond to reduction 
in canopy cover with relatively rapid height growth. 
Pests 
Tupelo leaf minors (Antispila nyssaefolia) and forest 
tent caterpillar (Malacosoma disstria) attacks Black 
tupelo causing growth loss and occasional mortality.   
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Materials are readily available from nurseries 
throughout its range.    Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information. 
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 18apr02 jsp; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.