Plant Guide       
 
PURPLE 
NEEDLEGRASS 
Nasella pulchra  (A.S. Hitch.) 
Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = NAPU4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Alternate Names 
Purple stipa, purple tussockgrass 
 
Uses 
This is a great plant for dry land restoration and range 
improvement, because it is very long-lived and 
tolerates poor soils.  It is valuable for erosion control 
because of its strong root system and it will establish 
well on disturbed areas and thin soils.  It seems to 
grow well on previously disturbed soils, because it is 
often seen sprouting on roadsides and on gopher 
mounds.  It greens up early in the season and 
provides good quality early forage for grazing 
animals.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Purple needlegrass is a 
densely tufted, long-lived, upright perennial 
bunchgrass with conspicuous awns.  It has numerous 
basal leaves and a distinct  nodding habit.  The leaf 
blades are smooth to finely hairy.  Basal blades are 
long, flat and 2.4 - 6 mm (.9 - .24 inch).  It becomes  dormant after seed production, but begins growth 
again with the first fall rains.  
Nassella pulchra is 
California’s state grass. 
 
Distribution 
Purple needlegrass occurs on the west side of the 
Coast Ranges from northern Baja California north to 
the Oregon border.  The sp ecies also occurs in the 
Central Valley and foothills of the Cascade Range 
and Sierra Nevada, and on the Channel Islands.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
 Gary A. Monroe @ plants.usda.gov 
Adaptation 
Purple needlegrass grows in oak woodland, 
chaparral, and grassland in areas receiving between 
20 - 76 cm (8 and 30 inches) of rainfall.  It is usually 
not found in dense stands, though it can be, even 
though it is widespread.  It is well adapted to 
droughty soils and clay soils and grows well in full 
sun as well as partial shade.  It is tolerant of extreme 
summer heat and drought conditions as well as 
serpentine soils.  
 
Establishment 
Purple needlegrass does not like disturbance once it 
is established.  It does not compete well with annual 
grassy or broadleaf weeds during its establishment 
phase because of its slow  growth during the first 
year.  It needs bare ground to re-seed, but re-seeds 
readily and increases its range once it is established. 
Stands are usually maintained by abundant seed 
production in non-grazed or  slightly grazed areas. 
 
Management 
Purple needlegrass needs some protection from 
grazing during flowering to ensure formation of the 
seed and to allow food st orage in the crown.  The 
awns can cause livestock injury.  After seeds are 
dropped, the sharp points are drilled into the soil by 
the twisting and untwisting of the long awns.  It has a 
good tolerance for mowing, especially after seed 
maturity, but it can be mowed earlier.  Purple 
needlegrass is generally fire tolerant and it may 
benefit from a burn.  In fact, it has been noted that 
seeds are produced more abundantly the year after a 
fire.  The season during which the fire occurs may 
determine the effects on the grass.  It typically will 
re-sprout after spring or fall burns, but not as well 
after summer burns.  Larger plants often do not 
recover as well, due to hi gher crown temperatures.  
Some ecotypes have partial flood tolerance.

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed matures mid- to late spring, and can be 
collected for 2 - 4 weeks.  It shatters very quickly 
during hot, dry weather.   There are between 51,500 
and 100,000 seeds/lb., and if planted at a rate of 1 
lb./acre, there will be approximately 1.7 seeds/square 
feet. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘LK 315d Germplasm’: Found in Alameda County, 
California; Mines Rd.; Boy Scout Camp (Rancho Los 
Mochos).  Township 4S Range 4E Section 13. 
Elevation is approximately 2056 feet.  Mean annual 
precipitation is 14-35 inches.  Mean annual 
temperature is 58-63 degrees F.  
 
‘LK 215e Germplasm’: Found in Colusa County, 
California; Walnut Valley Ranch; near Lodoga CA. 
Township 17N Range 6W Section 25.  Elevation is 
approximately 1280 feet.   Mean annual precipitation 
is 19.8 inches.  Mean annual temperature 58.4 
degrees F.  
 
‘LK 115d Germplasm’: Found in Tehama County, 
California; along Highway 36 approximately 0.3 
miles west of the intersection of Highway 36 and 
Bowman Road.  Township 28N Range 6W Section 
13.  Elevation is approxim ately 2300 feet.  Annual 
precipitation is approximately 25 inches. 
 
References 
USDA Forest Service. 2002.  Distribution and 
occurrence- species: Nassella pulchra . Accessed: 
01Sep2005.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/databas e/feis/plants/graminoid/n
aspul/distribution_and_occurrence.html. 
 
USDA NRCS. Notice of release of purple 
needlegrass for major land resource area 15d 
selected class of natural germplasm LK 115d 
germplasm. Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
California. 
 
USDA NRCS.  Notice of release of purple 
needlegrass for major land resource area 15e 
selected class of natural germplasm LK 215e 
germplasm. Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
California. 
 
USDA NRCS.  Notice of release of purple 
needlegrass for major land resource area 15d 
selected class of natural germplasm LK 315d 
germplasm. Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
California.  
 
Wrysinski, Jeanette. 2000.  Know your natives: A 
pictorial guide to California native grasses, creeping 
wildrye.  Yolo County Resource Conservation 
District, Woodland, California. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California. 
 Edited: 24Aug2005 ro; 23sep05 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.