Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAINFOIN 
Onobrychis viciifolia  Scop. 
Plant Symbol = ONVI  
 
Contributed by: Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
  Figure 1. Mature sainfoin in flower. 
 
Alternate Names 
Onobrychis sativa Lam., Onobrychis viciaefolia  
Scop., Hedysarum onobrychis  L., holy clover 
 
Uses 
Hay/pasture : Sainfoin is an introduced non-bloat 
causing legume which can be used as hay, or grazed 
in pastures alone or in a grass-legume mix. It is often 
grown as a mix with Russian wildrye or crested 
wheatgrass or Siberian wheatgrass. It is also 
commonly included in a mixed blend of sainfoin, 
meadow brome and birdsfoot trefoil and/or 
orchardgrass.  
 
Sainfoin is highly palatable to sheep and cattle and is 
preferred over alfalfa. Long-term sainfoin dry matter 
yields range from around 20 to 30% less than those  of alfalfa. First cut hay yi
elds are often greater than 
those for alfalfa but later cuttings commonly yield 
less than alfalfa (Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990). 
Sainfoin is well suited to haying due to its upright 
growth habit. Regrowth is poor however and it is 
recommended to be cut once/season at the half- to 
full-bloom stage.  Protein quality for sainfoin is 
around 68 compared to 71 for alfalfa out of a possible 
score of 100 for an “ideal pr otein” (Kaldy et al 1979). 
Sainfoin is also not susceptible to alfalfa weevil. 
 
Rangeland :  Sainfoin is preferred over alfalfa by 
mule deer and other wildlife. It matures earlier in the 
spring than alfalfa and stay s green during the summer 
(Stevens and Monsen 2004). Its large, deep tap root 
also makes this species fairly drought tolerant. High 
protein, high palatability and its non-bloat 
characteristic make it a good choice for range 
improvement for livestock or wildlife. The foliage is 
readily eaten by elk, deer  and sage grouse, and the 
seed is eaten by many other birds and rodents. 
 
Pollinators : Sainfoin blossoms produce copious 
amounts of nectar and are highly attractive to 
pollinating insects, particularly honey bees (Pellett 
1947) in May through July (Ogle et al 2007). Pollen 
is also produced in abundance. Honey made from 
sainfoin is reported to be of the finest quality (Dubbs 
1967). 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Fabaceae (Legume family). Sainfoin is a 
deep-rooted perennial legume arising from a 
branching root crown. Flowers are showy and pink, 
white or purple and tightly arranged in a compact 
raceme with 20 to 50 flow ers per head (figure 1). 
Leaves are odd-pinnately compound with 11 to 21 
leaflets. Sainfoin typically grows taller than alfalfa 
reaching 8 to 36 inches ta ll. The seeding unit is a 
single-seeded pod (figure  2). Seeds are large with 
only 18,500 (pre-husked) seeds per pound (USDA 
2008). 2n=28 (Welsh et al 2003). 
 
Distribution : Sainfoin has been used as a forage 
legume for hundreds of years in Europe and Asia and 
was introduced to North America around 1900. It has

since been widely used in the Intermountain and 
Rocky Mountain regions in hay plantings and 
reclamation plantings (Welsh et al 2003). 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
 
Figure 2. Sainfoin fruit (pod) each contains a single seed. Picture courtesy of 
Tracey Slotta @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database (USDA 2008). 
 
Habitat: Sainfoin can be found in western rangeland 
sites in 14 inch and greater  precipitation areas. It is 
often associated with big sagebrush and mountain 
shrub communities in well-drained calcareous soils. 
 
Adaptation : Early varieties from Western Europe did 
not perform well in the western United States. The 
plants were poorly adapted and had low forage 
yields. Newer varieties from Russia and Turkey 
however are better suited to western climates and 
perform similarly to alfalfa. (Baldridge and Lohmiller 
1990). 
 
Sainfoin is best adapted to soils at least 18 inches 
deep with a pH of 6.6 to 8.0 (USDA 2008). It is best 
adapted to sites receiving  at least 14 inches mean 
annual precipitation (MAP). Rangeland plantings 
have been successful in sagebrush, pinyon-juniper 
and mountain shrub areas in deep, calcium based 
soils (Stevens and Monsen 2004). Sainfoin has low 
salt tolerance
. 
 
Sainfoin does not do well in sites with high water 
tables or wet soils. 
 
Establishment 
Sainfoin can be planted in the spring or fall. Seeding 
depth should be between 0.25 and 0.75 inches. All 
seed should be inoculated with the appropriate 
rhizobium prior to planting. Full seeding rate for 
pasture plantings is 34 lb/ac. Seed 2 to 5 lb/ac when  used as a component of a rangeland mix. Sainfoin 
should not be mixed with aggressive grass species; 
consider alternate row pl
anting (Ogle et al 2008). 
 
Management  
Do not graze for two season s after planting. Stands 
should be allowed to naturally reseed every 2 to 3 
years for reestablishment. Stands will persist 3 to 6 
years under irrigation but will last longer if root and 
crown rot diseases are cont rolled. Some plantings in 
Montana have survived for over 60 years and are still 
used for pasture (Dubbs 1967). Sainfoin should not 
be planted next to shelterbelts because trees and 
shrubs will suffer from browsing by deer and elk 
(Stannard 2002). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Although sainfoin is resistant to many alfalfa related 
pests, long-term stand survival is limited in irrigated 
or wet conditions due to root and crown rot diseases 
(Morrill et al 1998). These root pathogens enter the 
plant through scars created  by root-feeding insects, 
especially weevils. Control of these insects decreases 
tap root disease occurrence and increases the 
longevity of the stand. 
 
Use of sainfoin has been limited largely due to high 
establishment costs. The larg e seed, high seeding rate 
and high seed prices often reduce interest in using 
this species. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Sainfoin has been widely used in reclamation and 
range enhancement seedings throughout the Great 
Plains, Rocky Mountains and Intermountain West 
and has become naturalized in some locations. It is 
not considered weedy or invasive, but may spread 
under ideal conditions via seed. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The first seed crop can be harvested the second year 
after establishment. Seed yields can be as high as 
1000 lb/acre under irrigated conditions. Under 
dryland conditions, seed yields are rarely more than 
200 pounds per acre.  
 
Seed should be harvested when seed moisture is 
<40% or when seed is beginning to shatter. Seed 
shatter can be a problem with this species and seed 
can be harvested by swathing followed by combining 
after 2 to 5 days of drying. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
New types of sainfoin have been developed in the

U.S. and in Canada. Sainfoin breeding programs have 
selected for increased disease resistance, improved 
nodulation and nitrogen fixation, and increased 
dryland (single-cut) and irrigated (multi-cut) yields. 
 
‘Eski’  was released by Montana State University in 
1964 and is the most common sainfoin used in 
western rangelands. It has performed well in pinyon-
juniper, mountain big sagebrush, and mountain brush 
areas. Eski was selected from seed from Eskisehire, 
Turkey that survived severe winters at Sidney, 
Montana. The seed increased from these hardy plants 
was designated as breeder seed.  Eski is 
recommended for dryland pasture hay in areas 
receiving at least 14 inch es of precipitation or on 
irrigated land. Eski yields only one to two cuttings 
per season.   
 
‘Melrose’  was released in Canada in 1971 by the 
Canada Department of Agriculture in Lethbridge. 
Melrose showed higher forage yields, seed yields and 
greater winter hardiness than  Eski (Cooke et al 1971). 
Melrose is recommended for dryland hay or pasture 
and irrigated hay production in the Prairie Province 
region. Breeder seed is maintained by the Canada 
Department of Agriculture  Research Stations at 
Melfort and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan and 
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada. 
 
‘Nova’  was released at Leth bridge by Agriculture 
Canada in 1980 from a Russian seed source. Nova is 
more vigorous and taller than Melrose, Eski and 
Remont. Regrowth is comparable to Melrose and 
Eski but slower than Remont (Hanna 1981). Nova 
has greater forage yields and winter hardiness than 
other varieties. Certified seed is maintained by SeCan 
Association, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
 
‘ Remont’  was  released by the Montana Agricultural 
Experiment Station in 1971, and was developed from 
plants from Iran exhibiting  rapid regrowth. Remont is 
recommended for two-or-three-cutting areas for hay 
and pasture. Remont and Eski produce similar annual 
yields, but Remont has higher yield potential under 
irrigation and in areas with a longer growing season. 
Remont begins growth earlier in the spring than Eski 
and regrows more rapidly after cutting than other 
varieties. 
 
‘Renumex’  is a New Mexico State University release 
made in 1979 from plants selected from Remont. The 
variety was developed by the New Mexico 
Agricultural Experiment Station in 1979 for rapid 
regrowth under the hot, dry conditions of the 
Southwest.  
  ‘Shoshone’
 was developed and released for a high 
tolerance to northern root-knot nematode when 
compared to ‘Remont’. Shoshone was jointly 
released in 2006 by th e College of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Experiment Stations at the University of 
Wyoming, Montana State Un iversity and the USDA-
NRCS. Foundation seed is maintained by the 
University of Wyoming, Seed Certification Service in 
Powell, Wyoming.  
 
‘ Delaney’ or UWRD is soon to be jointly released by 
the Montana Agricultural Experiment Station and 
Wyoming Agricultural Experiment Station. Delaney 
was developed from surviving plants of a 25 year old 
planting near Laramie, Wyoming. The original plants 
in that field included plants of Eski, Remont and 
multiple experimental accessions (precise 
percentages of each line ar e unknown). Delaney was 
developed to be a multiple-cut sainfoin with 
significantly higher yields than Shoshone, Remont 
and Eski. Third cut yields were also higher than those 
of Remont, Eski and Shoshone. Foundation seed will 
be maintained by the Foundation Seed Programs of 
Montana and Wyoming. 
 
References 
Baldridge, D.E. and R.G. Lohmiller., ed. 1990. 
Montana Interagency Plant Materials Handbook. 
Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana. 337p. 
 
Cash, D., Ditterline, R. and D. Johnson. 2006. 
Sainfoin making a comeback. Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana. 4p. 
 
Cooke, D.A., Hanna, M.R. and B.P. Goplen. 1971. 
Registration of Melrose sainfoin. Crop Science 11: 
603. 
 
Dubbs, A.L. 1967. Sainfoin: a new honey crop for 
Montana. American Bee Journal. 107:18-19. 
 
Hanna, R.R. 1981. Registration of Nova sainfoin. 
Crop Science 21: 987. 
 
Kaldy, M.S., Hanna, M.R. and  S. Smoliak. 1979. 
Amino acid composition of sainfoin forage.  
Grass and Forage Science 34 (2) 145–148.  
 
Morrill, W. L., R. L. Ditter line, et al. 1998. Insect 
pests and associated root pathogens of sainfoin in 
western USA. Field Crops Research 59(2): 129-134.  
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth. 
2008. Grass, Grass-Like, Forb, Legume and Woody 
Species for the Intermountain West. Natural

Resources Conservation Service. Boise, Idaho. Idaho 
Technical Note No. 24. 43p. 
 
Ogle, D., Cane, J., Fink, F., St. John, L., Stannard, 
M., and T. Dring. 2007. Plants for pollinators in the 
Intermountain West.  Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Boise,  Idaho. Idaho Technical 
Note No. 2. 21p. 
 
Pellett, F. C. 1947. American honey plants, 4th ed.  
Orange Judd Publ. Co., Inc., New York. 
 
Stannard, M. 2002. Sain foin. USDA-NRCS Plant 
Fact Sheet. Pullman, Washington. 2p. 
 
Stevens, R. and S.B.  Monsen. 2004. Forbs for 
seeding range and wildlife habitats. In: S.B. Monsen, 
R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw [compilers]. Restoring 
western ranges and wildland s. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. General 
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2., Fort 
Collins, Colorado. p. 425-466. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2008. The PLANTS Database 
( http://plants.usda.gov
, 22 February 2008). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press, Provo, Utah. 912 p. 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 030508djt; 030408 lsj; 030508 dgo; 080313 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.