Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUCKHORN CHOLLA
Opuntia acanthocarpa Engelm. 
& Bigelow  
Plant Symbol = OPAC  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: In the Southwest the Hualapai and 
Pima harvested the unopened flower buds of 
buckhorn cholla with two long sticks.  The sticks 
were used to grab the mature buds and twist them off 
into a large flat basket or  bucket.  The spines are then 
removed prior to cooking.  Traditionally the buds 
were baked in an earthen pit, lined with stones, and 
heated with mesquite ( Prosopis velutina) firewood.  
Then the buds were eaten  right away or dried and 
stored for future use.  Pima individuals who had 
stomach troubles were put on a special diet of these 
buds made into gruel.  Some individuals still gather 
buckhorn cholla today. 
 
Wildlife : Many kinds of  Opuntia species have fruits, 
seeds, and stems that are  eaten by wildlife.  Small 
mammals that feed on seeds and fruits include 
Western chipmunks, pocket gophers, brown gophers, 
Harris ground squirrels, prairie dogs, kangaroo rats, 
skunks, and cottontail and jackrabbits.  Hoofed 
browsers feed on the vegetable parts and fruits such 
as antelope, white tailed deer, and mountain sheep.  
Upland game birds such as gambel quail and white-
winged doves feed on the s eeds and fruits as well as  numerous songbirds such as the wren-tit and the 
cactus wren.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description
 
General : Cactus Family (Cactaceae).  The buckhorn 
cholla is an open and spreading woody cactus, up to 1 
m tall.  The gray-green stems, also called "joints", are 
cylindrical, 5-30 cm long and 17-20 mm in diameter 
with tubercles or nodules.  Each tubercle has a cluster 
of stiff spines, which are covered with loose papery 
sheaths.  The flowers are up to 5 cm long and range 
from yellow to purple-red  with shades in between.  
The fruits are obovoid, dry, shriveled and spiny and 
drop off later in the season.  The seeds are light 
yellowish to gray-brown, 3.5 to 4 mm. long. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This cactus is found on desert mesas and slopes 
in such plant communities as the creosote bush scrub 
and Joshua tree woodland.  It is in Pima and Pinal 
Counties of Arizona. 
 
Establishment 
Seeds: To establish  Opuntia spp.  by seed is a slow 
process.  It takes up to five years, compared to six 
months by a stem, and is therefore not recommended. 
 
Cuttings : Break off or cut the stem of the cactus in 
the spring.  Choose a smaller cylindrical stem with 
one joint and take the newest growth, when possible, 
a complete branch should be taken as the cutting.  
Ideally, the cut should be made at the neck where the 
branch joins the stem.  Place the cutting in an area 
with good air circulation, in partial shade for several 
days or until the cu t surface has formed a callus.  The 
cutting is then planted with its cut surface 3 mm 
below the surface in compost that contains little 
nutrients and placed in partia l shade.  Keep the plant 
slightly moist until roots are established.  Once roots 
are formed the plant can be potted in a well-drained, 
sandy soil.  Plant the cactus in a permanent place 
with full sun outdoors in the fall.  Make sure the soil 
has excellent drainage.  This cactus is intolerant of 
frequent summer water and should not be planted

near lawns or other plants that require summer 
watering.   
 
Management 
To keep the plants in bounds, cut off outermost 
joints.  Prune in late spring or summer.  Use tongs or 
rolled newspapers to grasp the stems while cutting 
with pruning shears. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This plant is available through some native plant 
nurseries within its range   Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Curtin, L.S.M. 1984.   By the prophet of the earth:  
Ethnobotany of the Pima .  University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Dobyns, H.F. 1956.   Pre-conquest Hualapai plant 
food gathering .  An unpublished report to Marks and 
Marks, Phoenix, Arizona and Strasser, Spielberg, 
Fried and Frank, Washington, D.C. 
 
Keen, B. 1990.   Cacti and succulents .  Crowood 
Press, Ramsbury, Marlborought, Wilshire, England. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Mielke, J. 1993.   Native plants for southwestern 
landscapes .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Shreve, F. & I.L. Wiggins 1964.   Opuntia.  Pages 
960-985 IN: Vegetation and Flora of the Sonoran 
Desert Vol. II.  Stanford University Press, Standford, 
California. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.