Plant Guide
HOP HORNBEAM 
Ostrya virginiana (Mill.) K. Koch  
Plant Symbol = OSVI 
 
Contributed by:   USDA NRCS Appalachian Plant 
Materials Center, Alderson, West Virginia  
 
 
 
 
Herman, D.E., et al. 1996.  North Dakota tree handbook . USDA 
NRCS ND State Soil Conservation Committee; NDSU Extension 
and Western Area Power Administration, Bismarck, ND. Courtesy 
of 
ND State Soil Conservation Committee. Provided by 
USDA NRCS ND Stat e Office. United States, ND.   
Alternate Names 
Eastern hop hornbeam, American Hop -hornbeam,  Hop 
hornbeam, Ironwood, Leverwood, Ironwood Hornbeam 
Tree  
 
Uses  
The wood of hop hornbeam is hard and durable.  It is used 
for fence posts, fuel, and tool handles.  The bark and inner 
wood was used to treat toothache, sore muscles, coughs, 
and many other ailments by American Indians.   
 
Ornamental Landscaping:   This tr ee is used in 
landscaping, particularly along boulevards.  Its appeal is 
that it retains its coppery -tan leaves well into or through 
winter.  
 
Wildlife :  The hop -like papery sack encases a nutlet that is 
the fruit of this tree and is a winter food for ring -necked 
pheasants, rabbits, grouse, turkeys, deer, squirrels, an 
several songbirds.  These fruits occur in clusters that 
resemble true hops that are used in the production of beer.   
  Conservation Practices
:  Hop hornbeam, because of its 
growth habit and va riety of distribution, potentially has 
application when established with these conservation 
practices; however, conservation practice standards vary 
by state.  Consult the local USDA NRCS Field Office for 
localized information.  NRCS conservation practices  
include 612 –  Tree and Shrub Establishment and 391 –  
Riparian Forest Buffer.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious  status, and wetland indicator values).   
USDA Native Status:  L48 (N), CAN (N).  
 
Description  
General :  Birch Family (Betulaceae).  It is a native, 
perennial, deciduous tree that is of 20 ft. to 50 ft. in height 
and 15 ft. to 30 ft. in width with very hard  wood and 
brownish scaly bark.  The buds have about 6 scales; 
leaves are oblong -ovate, sharply doubly -serrate, and 
downy beneath, 2 to 4 inches in length and 1 to 2 inches 
in width.  The tree is monoecious (bearing flowers of both 
sexes on the same tree).   The bloom time range is from 
mid spring to late spring and the tree has dark green 
foliage throughout the season that turns lemon yellow, 
yellowish brown, or red in the fall.  Hop hornbeam has 
been labeled a “weed tree” of no commercial value and is 
consi dered a competitor to more profitable species by 
commercial forest managers.      
 
Distribution :  Hop hornbeam is a small understory tree 
found in a variety of forested environments and openings 
located in the eastern United States and southern Canada.   
It  can also be found in the mountains of Mexico, south to 
northern South America.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation   
It has a slow growth rate and is found in USDA hardiness 
zones 5 to 9. The tree is adapted to a variety of soils from 
fine through course textures but prefers moist soils and 
pH ranges of 4.2 through 7.6.  It grows in partial shade 
and full sun conditions.   
 
Establishment  
Hop  hornbeam prefers moist, well -draine d, slightly acidic 
soils of rich or average composition.  It adapts readily to 
wet, dry, poor, or alkaline soils with a slightly reduced 
growth rate.

The fruits complete development during the summer and 
are ripe by the end of August in the north and as late as 
October in the south.  Trees begin to be fruitful at age 25.  
The hoplike strobile begins to break up immediately after 
ripening and the seeds are dispersed throughout the fall 
and into early winter.  The seeds exhibit a double 
dormancy that requi res lengthy stratification in a moist 
medium in order to germinate.  Seeds usually germinate 
in the spring the year after they are shed.  
 
Reproduction of this tree is aggressive when released by 
overstory cutting.  Stump sprouting is common on cut, 
burned,  or injured trees.  
  
 
One method of reproduction from seed  referred to as the 
“Minnesota System” involves the use of bottomless 
containers arranged in trays of standing water.  This 
prunes the strong taproot and produces a more fibrous, 
compact root system that is better able to support the 
newly planted tree
.  
 
When used as an ornamental, hop  hornbeam should be 
transplanted as a balled and burla pped  plant. Balling and 
burlapping  improves the tree’s  chances for establishment 
and  helps  preserve the  mycorrhizal  relationships (the 
symbiotic association between a fungus and the roots of a 
vascular plant) the tree relies upon.   
 
 
Management  
Harvesting the larger, dominant commercial species in 
stands that contain well developed sub -canopies of hop 
hornbeam w ill allow the tree to dominate and inhibit the 
reproduction of the original overstory species.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
This tree is considered to be relatively free of insect and 
other disease problems.  It is browsed by white -tailed deer 
only incide ntally.  It is sensitive to pollutants such as 
oxides of sulfur or nitrogen, and to chlorine or fluorine.  
There are no known pests or problems associated with 
hop hornbeam.    
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
wit h hop hornbeam.  
 
Control  
Hop  hornbeam is not considered to be “weedy” but is 
considered  a nondesirable tree in a commercially 
managed forest.  Methods of eradicating the species 
include girdling and the use of herbicides applied by mist 
blowing, tree injec tion, or spraying cut stumps.   
 
If control is desired contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each contro l method.  Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warrant the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective.
 
 
Seeds and Plant Product ion 
Seeds should be collected when the strobiles are a pale 
greenish brown and before they dry enough to shatter.  
Seeds are light -about 30,000 cleaned seeds per pound.  
The nuts are 0.3 inches long and are enclosed in an 
inflated sac about 0.8 of an inch long that provides 
buoyancy and improves dispersal by the wind.  Birds 
provide a secondary means of seed dispersal.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)    
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly So il Conservation Service) office for 
more information. Look in the phone book under United 
States Government. The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service  should be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  
 
References  
Fehrenbach , Jr., William E., 1984. The Eastern Hop 
Hornbeam: Its Natural History and Landscape 
Potential. Available at 
http://arnoldia.arboretum.harvard.edu/pdf/articles/198
4 -44- 2-the -eastern -hop -hornbeam -its -natural  -
history -anlandscape -potential.pdf  (verified Feb 2012) 
Arnoldia 44(2):23- 27. 
  Illinois State Museum. Hop hornbeam. Forests of Illinois 
Tree Guide.2000. Available at 
http://www.museum.state.il.us/muslink/forest/htmls/t
rees/O -virginiana.html (verified Feb2012). Illinois 
State Museum, Springfield, IL.  
Metzg er, F. T. 1990.Eastern hophormbeam. In  Silvics of 
North America. Vol. 2. Hardwoods. Compiled by R. 
M. Burns and B. H. Honkala. Available at 
http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/pubs/silvics_manual/vol
ume_2/ostrya/virginiana.html  (verified Feb 2012). 
U.S. Departmen t of Agriculture Handbook 654.  
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of 
Forestry. American Hophornbeam. Available at 
http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/home/trees/hophorn_am/t
abid/5377/default.aspx  (verified Feb 2012). Ohio 
Department of Natural Resources , Division of 
Forestry, Columbus, OH  
Strasbaugh, P. D.and E. L. Core. 1952. Flora of West 
Virginia. West Virginia University Bulletin, series 
65, No. 3- 1, p. 293-293. Morgantown, West 
Virginia,100p.  
U SDA, NRCS.  2012. The PLANTS 
Database( http://plants.usda. gov, 21 February 2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27402 -
4901 USA.  
 
Prepared By

Stephen E. Ritz, USDA, NRCS, Romney, West Virginia  
 
Citation  
Ritz, S. E. 2012. Plant guide for hop hornbeam  (Ostrya 
virginiana) . USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Serivce, Appalach ian Plant Materials Center. Alderson, 
WV  
 
Published February 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
  For more information about this and other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District  
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site  
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://Plant- Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER