Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON EVENING-PRIMROSE 
Oenothera biennis  L. 
Plant Symbol = OEBI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Weedy evening-primrose, German rampion, hog 
weed, King’s cure-all, fever-plant 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Cherokee, Iro quois, Ojibwas, and 
Potawatomi were among several Native American 
tribes that used common evening-primrose for both 
food and for medicinal purposes.  The roots were 
boiled and eaten like potatoes.  The young leaves 
were cooked and served as greens.  The shoots were 
eaten raw.  A tea was made from the plant and used 
as a dietary aid or stimulant to treat laziness and  “overfatness.”  A hot poultice made from the 
pounded roots was applied externally to treat piles 
and boils.  A poultice made 
from the entire plant was 
used to treat bruises.  The roots were chewed and 
rubbed onto the muscles to improve strength.  The 
plant was used to treat  pain associated with 
menstruation as well as bowel pain.  Handfuls of 
people still use the plant today, medicinally and for 
food.   
  
Other:  Common evening-primrose is commercially 
cultivated in over 15 countries for its oil which 
contains the essential fatty acids, linoleic acid and 
gamma linolenic acid (Kemper 1999).  When the 
seedpods ripen, the tall stalks can be cut and used as 
interesting additions to dried arrangements. 
 ©William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife : Hummingbirds visit the flowers to obtain 
nectar and insects to eat.  The seed capsules provide 
food for many other birds during the winter months.  
It is thought that the plants are pollinated by night-
visiting hawk moths, which feed on their nectar.  
Japanese Beetles prefer the leaves of common 
evening-primrose to those of other garden plants. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agricultural department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS. 
 
Description 
General : Evening Primrose Family (Onagraceae).  
Oenothera biennis  is a biennial, herbaceous forb.  
The family is so-named  because the flowers are 
partially to fully closed during the day and open in 
the evening.  The bright yellow to gold corolla is 2-5 
cm wide, with four petals.  The fragrant flowers 
usually last only one to two days. The erect stem, 
which sometimes branches near the top, can be 
covered with hairs.  The plant grows from 3-25 dm 
tall.  Basal leaves, which form a rosette, are from 10-

30 cm long.  The stem has alternate, lanceolate-
shaped leaves, 2.5-15 cm long, that are shallowly 
toothed and wavey at the edges.  The leaves are 
usually hairy.  The plant flowers can from June 
through October.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Common evening-primrose grows in dry open fields, 
along roadsides, railroad embankments, waste areas 
and in open woods. 
 
Establishment 
These plants do best in well-drained soils in full sun.  
They can be easily grown from seed.  The seeds are 
ripe when the seed capsule begins to split open, 
usually in October.  To insure even planting, mix the 
seeds with a small amount of sand prior to sowing.  
The seeds usually germinate within four weeks.   
Thereafter, the plants will generally self-sow.  Please 
use care when cultivating this plant as it has become 
invasive in many parts of the world.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)   
These plants are readily available from commercial 
sources.   Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians . Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Borchers, A.T., C.L. Keen, J.S. Stern & M.E. 
Gershwin  2000.   Inflammation and Native American 
Medicine: the role of botanicals.   American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition 72: 339-347. 
 
Coffey, T. 1993.   The history & folklore of North 
American wildflowers.   Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 
Massachusetts.  356 pp.   
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers in the United States and Canada .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, New York.  
322 pp.  
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote 1975.  Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.  University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Kemper, K.J., MD, MPH 1999.   The Longwood 
Herbal Taskforce and the Center for Holistic 
Pediatric Education and Research.  Evening 
primrose ( Oenethera biennis ).   
http://www.mcp.edu/herbal/epo/epo.pdf 
(13 June 2001).   
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publications, New York, New York.  
500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998  N ative American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Phillips, H.R. 1985.   Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.   University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina.  331 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Steffek, E.F. 1983.   The new wild flowers and how to 
grow them.  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  186 pp.

Taylor, K.S. and S.F. Hamblin 1963.  Handbook of 
wild flower cultivation .  The Macmillan Company, 
New York, New York.  307 pp.   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 21June2001 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.