Plant Guide
CLASPINGLEAF 
PONDWEED  
Potamogeton perfoliatus L.  
Plant Symbol = POPE7 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Norman A. B erg  
National Plant Materials Center  
 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 
1913. An illustrated flora of the northern United States, Canada 
and the British Possessions. 3 vols. Charles Scribner's Sons, New 
York. Vol. 1: 80.  
Alternate Names  
redhead grass  
clasping -leaved pondweed  
Uses  
Claspingleaf pondweed  beds stabilize sediments, 
reduce shoreline erosion, and provide valuable 
habitat and food source for a variety of fish, 
macroinvertebrates, crustaceans and waterfowl 
(Thayer et al 1975, Lubbers 1990). They provide 
protection  from predators, as well as attract ing 
epiphytes and zooplankton upon which other species 
graze,  providing  an important link in the food web. 
D uring the breeding season up to 80 percent of 
w aterfowl ’s diet is  plant material, much of it aquatic 
(Kenow and Rusch 1996) . Migratory waterfowl dive 
and scavenge for rhizomes buried in sediments of 
claspingleaf pondweed  beds .  Another potentially  important feature of claspingleaf pondweed
 is its 
antibacterial properties. Bushman and Ailstock 
(2006),  found claspingleaf pondwee d exhibited 
antibacterial  activity against a  number of different 
strains of bacteria. This could be critical for the 
health of the organisms  dwell ing in the grass beds 
such as the blue crab , the waterfowl that consume it, 
as well as any plant community dyn amics affected by 
this trait.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : 
Claspingleaf pondweed  is a submerged, rooted, 
flowering aquatic plant that grows in alkaline, 
brackish, and freshwater lakes, streams and estuaries. 
Substrate conditions are often low in organic content 
form ing a firm muddy  bottom  or  a sand -based  
sediment in reasonably slow moving waters. Th e 
plant has  a  well -developed rhizomatous network 
(horizontally branching roots). At the end of the 
vegetative season rhizomes overwinter in the form of 
resting buds . These buds  develop  at the tips of  
rhizomes a nd are the source of the next year’s shoots 
(Hutch inson 1975). Resting bud depth  is variable 
from just below the sediment surface to depths of 
more than 8 inches into the sediment . Plants tend to 
be darker green colored in shallow waters and are a 
paler gr een in deeper water (Bergstrom et al. 2006).  
 
Stems are light beige to reddish brown or green -
yellow in color typically  consisting of one straight 
main stem at the base of the plant . S ometimes two or 
three (rarely more) stems may  branching from the 
main  stem. The parallel -veined leaves are almost 
perfoliate  (stem through the leaves) , cordate (heart 
shaped)  clasping the stem by curving around it . 
 
  Leaves measure 0.4 -2.75 inches long and are from 
0.4 to 1 inch wide. They typically start no more than 
about  2 inches from the base of the plant and extend 
regularly along the stem in an alternate or slightly 
opposite pattern .  Leaves extend  to either the top  of 
the stem  or  to the flowering end (terminal 
inflorescence) of the pl ant. Stem densities in the wild 
are  highly variable .  Due to its rhizomatous nature, it 
is quite rare to find just a single plant.