Plant Guide
TIMOTHY 
Phleum pratense  L. 
Plant Symbol = PHPR3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
and Aberdeen, Idaho, Plant Materials Center  
Timothy (Phleum pretense ). James R. Johnson @ USDA -NRCS 
PLANTS Database / USDA NRCS. 1992.  Western wetland 
flora: Field office guide to plant species . West Region, 
Sacramento.  
 
Alternate Names  
Herd grass, herd’s grass,  meadow cat's-tail,  Phleum  
nodosum  
Uses  
Livestock: Timothy is preferred by cattle and horses, 
and timothy hay is a premium feed for horses. Sheep 
utilize timothy during the summer in mountainous 
areas.  Timothy is used for pasture and silage, but 
mostly for hay.  It is palatable and nutritious.  It 
makes  a first rate companion grass with alfalfa,  birdsfoot 
trefoil, or clover species as it is one of the 
grasses least competitive with legumes.  
 
Erosion control : Timothy can be used with legumes 
and/or other grasses in seed mixtures for cover, filter 
strips,  herbaceous buffers,  waterways, and other 
critical area applications. It can also be used for 
erosion control on cut - or burned- over forest land.  
Keep in mind that timothy is shallow -rooted and thus 
should not be considered the primary species for 
erosion co ntrol plantings.  
 
Wildlife : Timothy is commonly found in wildlife seed 
m ixtures for nesting, brood rearing, and escape cover.  
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened  or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Timothy is a relatively short -lived,  introduced 
perennial grass that grows in stools or clumps. It 
spreads via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions. It is known to 
coexist with native plants.  On favorable sites where 
it is  best adapted, it can  exist as a monoculture. There 
is no documentation that it crosses with native 
species. It is considered a weed in seed lots in the 
eastern states of Delaware, Maryland, New 
Hampshire , New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia and 
West Virginia.  
 
C onsult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative  Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.g ov/.  
C onsult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information.  
Description  
General : Grass family (Poaceae).  Timothy is a 
relatively short -lived, cool -season, introduced 
perennial grass that grows in stools or clumps. It has 
a shallow, compact, and fibrous root system.  It 
grows in erect culms 50 to 100 cm ( 20 to 40 in) tall. 
Leaves vary in length from a few inches to more than 
a foot and are about 0.6 cm (0.25 in)  wide, narrowing 
gently toward the tip.

per acre when seeded alone and 1 to 3 pounds per 
acre when seeded in mixtures. The  average number 
of  seeds per square foot at 1 lb. seeding  rate is 28 
seeds . Seeding rates should be doubled if seed is 
broadcast planted.  
Management  
Timothy is a short -lived, shallow -rooted, introduced, 
perennial bunchgrass.  In spring, the crowns form 
swollen, bulblike internodes that store energy. Close 
grazing and trampling during moist conditions can 
damage these interno des and severely reduce stands.  
 
Timothy  should be grazed before the jointing stage 
and hayed before seed heads have emerged from boot  
to early bloom stage . Begin grazing during the 
vegetative stage, after grass has reached at least 15 
cm ( 6 in) in height. A  10 cm (4 in) stubble height 
should remain following grazing. It regrows slowly 
following grazing or haying. A 28 to 35 day recovery 
period between grazing or haying cycles is 
recommended.  
 
Tim othy is highly responsive to fertilizers,  which 
should be applied frequently based in accordance 
with soil tests.  Fertilizer, especially nitrogen, is 
important when legumes such as clover species have 
almost disappeared from the hay or pasture mixture.  
 
Timothy stands become weak under close and  
continuous grazing.  A fundamental reason for the 
decline of timothy under poor grazing practices is 
injury to the bulblets (haplacorm).  These bulblets 
form in the spring at the same time the stem 
elongates.  Food reserves are stored in the bulblets, 
and  they may be destroyed through trampling by 
grazing animals in the spring.  
 
Timothy can be initially grazed before jointing and 
again between early head to full head.  Second and 
successive grazing periods should occur before 
jointing and when basal sprout s appear at the soil 
surface.  After the second grazing period, plants 
usually do not joint; therefore, sprouts are the 
primary grazing guide.  Timothy should be cut for 
hay  or silage from boot stage to early head or 
flowering stage.  Make successive harve sts for hay 
and silage when basal sprouts appear at the soil 
surface.  Sterile seed -heads may be 38 to 50 cm ( 15 
to 20 in ) up the stems when sprouts appear at the time 
of second cutting.  Growing points stay below ground 
level after the second cutting.  Gr aze or cut to heights 
of  10 cm ( 4 in) or more.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Stem rust is a disease that can cause loss of vigor and 
forage quality to timothy.  Rust -resistant varieties 
have been developed to control this disease. Purple 
eyespot ( Cladospori um phlei) and leaf streak 
( Drechslera phlei ) are diseases commonly found  across western Canada. Timothy is also damaged by 
brown leaf blight and grasshoppers.  New fields are 
also susceptible to wireworm or cutworms.  European 
skipper larvae (a bright oran
ge butterfly) are a pest of 
timothy in eastern Canada.  
Seed  Production  
Seed production fields should be soil tested before 
planting to determine soil nutrient levels and fertilizer 
needs.  Seed should be drilled or broadcast  into a 
weed free, firm seedbed.   The optimum seeding depth 
is  0.3 to 1.3 cm (0.125  to 0.5  in ).  The drill seeding 
rate of 1 to  2 pounds PLS per acre in 45 to 60 cm ( 18 
to 24 in ) rows provides a good stand.  Wider row 
spacing may be beneficial to seed production in dry 
climates.  
 
Under i rrigated conditions, seed yields average 450 
to  670 kg/ha ( 400 to 500 lb/ac). Seed production 
under dryland conditions is not recommended in the 
western United States. In the eastern United States, 
seed production yields of 336 to 450 kg/ha ( 300 to 
400  lb/ac)  can be expected.  
 
Timothy shatters readily but should not be swathed 
too soon.  It is usually ready to swath when 5 to 10 
percent of the seed have shattered (late July to early 
August).  The seedheads will have a tan color and the 
stems and leaves will  be a golden color.  Swathing 
early in the morning will hel p reduce seed shatter.  
Allow 5 to 14 days of drying before combining.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Most of the timothy grown in the U.S.  is common 
timothy.  Improved cultivars and places of 
development are: ‘Essex’ and ‘Cornell 1777’ (New 
York); ‘Lorain’ and ‘Marietta’ (Ohio); ‘Itasca’ 
(Minnesota); ‘Clair’ (Kentucky), and ‘Verdant’ 
(Wisconsin).  Canadian releases are ‘Bounty’, 
‘Climax’, ‘D rummond’, ‘Medon’, ‘Milton’, ‘Paton’, 
and ‘Swallow’.  Common timothy and most cultivars 
can be readily obtained from commercial sources.  
There are many proprietary timothy varieties grown 
under contract for seed companies.  
References  
Agriculture and Agri -Food Canada. 2004.  Timothy 
Seed Production in Western Canada.  Online at: 
http://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$Department/deptd
ocs.nsf/all/agdex8696.  [accessed Aug. 27, 2009].  
Alderson, J. and WC Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 
170.  USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C.  
Barkworth, Mary, et. al. 2007.  Manual of grasses for 
North America.  Intermountain Herbarium and 
Utah State University Press, Logan, Utah.  
Cronquist, A., A H Holmgren, NH. Holmgren, JL. 
Reveal, & P K. Holmgren 19 77.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.

Columbia University Press, New York, New 
York. 
Hitchcock, AS. 1950.  Manual of the grasses of the  United States .  USDA, Washington, DC.  
Holzworth, LK. and LE. Wiesner. 1985. Grass and  Legu me Seed Production in Montana and 
Wyoming.   USDA-SCS Bridger Plant Materials 
Center. 31 p.  
Majerus, M. 2009. Forage and Reclamation Grasse  of the Northern Great Plains and Rocky 
Mountains  Valley Printers, Bridger, Montana.  
McElroy , AR and H.T. Kunelius. 19 95. Timonthy. 
Pp. 305- 311 in R.F. Barnes, D.A. Miller and C.J. 
Nelson (eds.) Forages  volume I: A n introduction 
to grassland agriculture . Iowa State University 
Press, Ames.  
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000413.  
<htt p://www.fs.fed.us/  database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana.
 
Zamo ra, Ben , Oregon State University,  Range Plant 
Leaflet No. 47 . Corvallis, Oregon  
 
 
  Prepared By
:   
Daniel G. Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist USDA 
NRCS, Boise, ID  
 
Loren St. John, Team Leader, USDA NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Derek J. Tilley,  Agronomist, USDA NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Edited: 07Oct2009jfh; 10Oct2009mws; 18Mar2011dgo; 18Mar2011lsj; 
18Mar2011djt;   
Citation 
Ogle, DG, St. John, L  and DJ Tilley. 2011. Plant 
guide for  timothy (Phleum pratense ). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho State Office. 
Boise, ID.  
Published  March, 2011  
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.
  USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER