Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EATON’S 
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon eatonii  Gray ssp. 
eatonii  
Plant Symbol = PEEAE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
National Plant Data Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Eaton’s beardtongue, firecracker penstemon 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland: 'Cedar' Palmer’s penstemon 
(Penstemon palmeri) and 'Bandera' Rocky Mountain 
penstemon ( Penstemon strictus ) are the only released 
penstemons noted to have any forage value.  'Cedar' 
leaves stay green throughout the growing season  providing some forage value.  All other varieties are 
considered fair to poor pa
latability and considered to 
be only incidental forage value.  All species provide 
diversity to the seeded plant community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : All species are 
mentioned for their value in mixes for erosion control 
and beautification values. 
 
Wildlife : Penstemons are considered desirable forages 
for deer, antelope, and birds either as herbage or 
seed.  They may also provide some cover for selected 
small bird species.  They provide diversity to the 
plant community. 
William S. Moye Cronquist (1984) ©  The New York Botanic Garden 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Figwort Family (Scrophulariaceae).  
Penstemon or beardtongue species are perennial forbs 
or sub-shrubs to shrubs with attractive flowers.  They 
are short to long-lived.  Ea ton’s penstemon is a short-
lived perennial herbaceous forb with red flowers.  It 
is recognized as having three varieties:  P. eatonii ssp. 
eatonii , P. eatonii  ssp. exsertus, and P. eatonii  ssp. 
undosus .  Cronquist et al. (1984) provides a key 
separating  eatonii from undosus  and notes the key 
characteristics for  exsertus. 
 
Penstemons have opposite, entire, or toothed leaves.  
They have several stalked flowers or flower clusters 
that are borne in the axils  of the upper leaves or 
leaflike bracts.  The tubular corolla is strongly to 
distinctly two-lipped at the mouth with a two-lobed 
upper lip and a three-lobed lower lip.  There are 4 
anther-bearing (fertile) stamens and a single sterile 
stamen or staminodia that is often hairy at the tip.  
The fruit is a many-seeded capsule.  Eaton’s 
penstemon is 4-10 dm tall with erect stems. 
 
Distribution : Eaton’s penstemon is found in the 
southwestern U.S. from Colorado to California.  
Penstemons are common to the western United 
States.  Except for one minor species, the genus 
Penstemon  does not occur naturally outside of North 
America.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.

Establishment 
Adaptation: Penstemons do best on well-drained 
soils.  Most ecotypes do well on infertile, disturbed 
soils.  They have excellent cold winter and drought 
tolerance.  They will tolera te weakly saline to weakly 
acidic sites.  They are usually found in open areas, 
but will tolerate semi-shaded conditions.  They are 
not tolerant of fire, but are  fire resistant due to leaves 
staying green with relatively high moisture content 
during the fire season.  Eaton’s penstemon is found 
on dry slopes and flats in sagebrus, pinyon-juniper, 
mountain mahogany, and ponderosa pine 
communities (Cronquist et al. 1984). 
 
Planting : These species should be seeded with a drill 
or broadcast at a depth of 1/4 inch or less into a firm 
seedbed.  Ideal seeding depth is 1/8 inch.  
Penstemons are not recommended for single species 
seeding.  The full seeding rate (not recommended) for 
these forbs-shrubs is 1.5 to 3 pounds Pure Live Seed 
(PLS) per acre or 20 to 26 PLS per square foot 
(varies somewhat by species).  When used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  
For mined lands and other harsh critical areas, 
doubling the seeding rate component of penstemon is 
not required.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring (because of grass component of 
mix) on heavy to medium textured soils and in late 
fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seeding is not 
recommended.  Dormant fall seedings (preferred 
seeding period for penstemons) will pre-chill seed 
and reduce seed dormancy which is very strong in 
some species.  Mulching, irrigation, and weed control 
all benefit stand establishment.  Seedling vigor is 
good, but not as good as most grasses.  Germination 
may not occur until the second growing season.  
Flowering should not be expected until at least the 
second growing season. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because penstemons are broadleaf, 
use of 2,4-D is not recommended.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage.  Grasshoppers and other 
insects may also damage new stands and pesticides 
may be needed. 
 
Management 
Growth of penstemons begins in early spring and 
flowers appear in May through July depending on 
species.  Weed control and removal of very 
competitive species may improve chance of 
establishment.  Damage from wildlife and rodents  may occur and they may need to be controlled.  
Disease problems are minimal except under 
irrigation.  Under irrigation, fusarium wilt can be a 
problem. 
 
Environmental Concerns
: Penstemon species 
establish and spread slowly via seed distribution.  
They are not considered "weedy" or invasive species, 
but can spread into adjoining vegetative communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  
They coexist with other native species and add 
biodiversity to those plant communities. 
 
Seed Production 
Penstemons should be seeded in at least 36-inch rows 
at the rate of 2.5 pounds PLS per acre to allow 
mechanical weed control.  The use of weed barrier 
material may be an alternative to allow closer 
spacing.  They should be seeded in late fall or early 
winter unless seed is stratified under cool moist 
conditions.  "The Clearwater Selection" of alpine 
penstemon does not require stratification.  
Transplants by dividing the base of older plants or 
from greenhouse starts can also be successfully used 
to establish seed fields. 
 
Seed is generally harvested by hand stripping or by 
combine.  Seed is mature when capsules are dry and 
seed is hard and dark in color.  Flowering is 
indeterminate with mature capsules and flowers 
present at harvest period.  Multiple harvest periods 
(by hand) may be necessary to maximize seed 
collection.  Some seed will shatter once capsules 
open, but the capsule is upright and tends to hold 
seed very well.  Seed can be separated from the 
capsule by use of a hammer mill or barley debearder 
followed by air screening.  Cleaned seed should be 
allowed to dry and then stored in a cool dry area.  An 
after-ripening period of 3 to 4 months is required.  
Seed retains viability for several years under these 
conditions. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available for each 
variety through the appropriate state Crop 
Improvement Association or commercial sources to 
grow certified seed. 
 
Firecracker penstemon is a selected release from seed 
originally collected near Richfield, Utah.  'The 
Richfield Selection' of firecracker penstemon was 
selected by Aberdeen Plant Materials Center and was 
released in 1994.  It is an erect, native, perennial, 
cool-season sub-shrub to shrub with a fibrous root 
system and decumbent to reclining stems.  The leaves

are large and slightly pubescent.  The flowers are in 
racemes on 24 to 36 inch tall, upright stems.  It has 
bright red tubular flowers, blooming from early to 
late summer.  It is adapted to full sunlight, well to 
moderately well drained soils, 10 to 16 inch rainfall 
areas, at 3,300 to 8,000 feet elevation.  It does not do 
well in poorly drained soils.  Its intended uses are for 
erosion control, diversity, and beautification.  
Certified seed is not readily available at this date and 
Aberdeen PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
A number of other penstemons are seeded primarily 
for soil stabilization on depleted, disturbed, and 
erosive areas for erosion control and as ornamentals.  
These include low penstemon (Penstemon humilis ), 
Rydberg penstemon  (Penstemon rydbergii ), and 
thickleaf penstemon ( Penstemon pachyphyllus ).  No 
cultivar releases are known to have been made.  
Please check the PLANTS database for the names of 
native penstemons in your state, then check with your 
area native plant nurseries for their availability. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Reveal, & P.K. Holmgren 1984 .  Intermountain flora.  
Volume Four.  Subclass Asteridae (except 
Asteraceae) .  The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York. 
 
Crosswhite, F.S. 1967.   Revision of Penstemon 
section Habroanthus (Scrophulariaceae).  I: 
Conspectus, II: series Speciosi, and III: series 
Virgati .  American Midland Naturalist 77:1.41. 
 
Holmgren, N.H. 1971.   A new species of Penstemon 
from Nye Co., Nevada .  Aliso 7:351-356. 
 
________, 1978a.  An overlooked new species of 
Penstemon (Scropulariaceae from the Great Basin.  
Brittonia 30:334-339. 
 
________, 1978b.   Three new species of Penstemon 
(Scrophulariaceae from the Intermountain region.  
Brittonia 30:416-425. 
 
________, 1979a.   Nomenclatural changes in some 
Intermountain penstemons (Scrophulariaceae) .  
Brittonia 31:104-107. 
 
________, 1979b.   New penstemons 
(Scrophulariaceae) from the Intermountain region .  
Brittonia 31:217-242. 
 
Keck, D.D. 1932.  Studies in Penstemon.  A 
systematic treatment of the section Saccanthera .  
Univ. Calif. Publication in Botany 16:367-426. 
 
________, 1937a.   Studies in Penstemon IV.  The 
section Ericopsis .  Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical 
Club 64:357-381. 
 
________, 1937b.   Studies in Penstemon V.  The 
section Peltanthera .  American Midland Naturalist 
18:790-829. 
 
________, 1938.   Studies in Penstemon VI.  The 
section Autator .  Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical 
Club 65:233-255. 
 
________, 1940.   Studies in Penstemon VII.  The 
subsections Gairdneriani, Deusti, and Arenarii of the 
Graciles, and miscellaneous new species .  American 
Midland Naturalist 23:594-616. 
 
________, 1945.   Studies in Penstemon-VIII.  A cyto-
taxonomic account of the section Spermunculus .  
American Midland Naturalist 33:128-206. 
 
Pennell, F.W. 1920.   Penstemon.  IN: 
Scrophulariaceae of the  central Rocky Mountain 
states.  Contributions U.S. Natl. Herbarium 20:325-
381. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database.  
Version: 000502.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State  Office, Boise, Idaho 
J. Scott Peterson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited 19sep00 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.