Plant Guide
FLORIDA PASPALUM 
Paspalum floridanum Michx . 
Plant Symbol = PAFL4  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center  
 
USDA  NRCS  Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials Center  
Alternate Names 
Paspalum difforme  Le Conte  
Paspalum floridanum  Michx. var.  glabratum 
Engelm. ex Vasey  
Paspalum giganteum  Baldw. ex Vasey  
Paspalum glabratum (Engelm. ex Vasey) C. Mohr  
Uses  
Forage:  “ Florida paspalum is  palatable and is 
readily grazed by cattle during its growing season.  
Because this grass is succulent, it deteriorates rapidly 
after maturity, making it unimportant as dry winter 
forage ” (Leithead, Yarlett and Shiflet, 1971).   Young 
leaves are  palatable and nutritious, becoming less so 
as  the  plant matures.  In a native warm - season grass 
forage trial in Maryland, Florida paspalum exhibited 
good seedling vigor and stand establishment, 
excellent tolerance to drought, and good initial yields 
(Ugi ansky, R.J., L. Vough, and E. Dengler, 2008).    
 
Erosion Control :  Florida paspalum is a versatile 
grass that readily grows on disturbed areas such as 
road ditches as well as on sandy or poorly drained 
sites.  Being well adapted to wet soils, it is suitable  for use along vegetated swales or waterways.  The 
bluish color of some foliage gives this species some 
ornamental character.
 
 
Wildlife :  Florida paspalum produces an abundance of 
large grain -like seed which is eaten by birds 
including quail, dove, and turkey.  Wildlife, 
especially game birds , use Florida paspalum for both 
food and cover (Grelen and Hughs, 1984).  Seeds 
mature over an extended period of time, with an 
initial flush in late August and continuing until frost, 
providing wildlife with a dependa ble source of food 
from late summer into winter.   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator  values).  
Description  
General :  Florida paspalum is a native warm -season , 
perennial rhizomatous grass, typically ranging in 
height from 3 to 5 feet and up to 8 feet with higher 
fertility.  Plants are bunch -like but slowly spread 
from short, thick rhizomes  forming a sod over time, 
especially under grazing.  New growth begins in 
early spring.  Plants may be dark green or have a 
chalky cast that gives a bluish appearance.  Leaf 
sheaths and leaf blades may have short coarse hairs 
or may be hairless.  The leaf b lades are firm, flat or 
folded, approximately 3/8” to 3/4” wide and 14”  to 
20” long, with a dense tuft of long hairs immediately  
above the ligule.  Leaf sheaths are open, rounded, and 
frequently covered in hair (Leithead, Yarlett and 
Shiflet, 1971).    
 
The  seeds heads are similar in appearance to other 
paspalum species, although with generally larger seed 
than most.  Seeds are half -rounded and smooth and 
are crowded pairs along either side of the branches.  
The seed heads have 2 to 6 branches (racemes) that 
are each 3 ” to 4 ” long.   Florida paspalum produces an 
abundance of large seed that mature over an extended 
period of time from  late summer to late fall as new 
seed heads are continually produced from late July 
until frost.      
 
Habitat :  Florida paspalum  is commonly found 
growing in grassy areas and wood openings, with 
low, moist, sandy soil and along fresh or brackish 
marshes.