Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BITTER CHERRY 
Prunus emarginata (Dougl. ex 
Hook.) D. Dietr. 
Plant Symbol = PREM  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The edible fruits are bitter and best 
used in jams.  A green and dark gray dye was 
obtained from the fruits and leaves.  The bark was 
used for making baskets that were watertight and 
resist decay (Moerman 1998) .  The thin outer bark 
was used to make mats, ropes, arrows, and as an 
ornament on bows (Ibid.). 
 
Several native North American tribes used bitter 
cherry to treat a variety of  complaints.  An infusion 
of the bark was used in the treatment of tuberculosis 
(Moerman 1998).  A decoction of the root and inner 
bark was taken daily as a treatment for heart troubles 
(Ibid.).  An infusion of the bark, combined with crab 
apple (Malus  spp.), was used as a cure all tonics in 
treating colds and various other ailments (Ibid.).  An 
infusion of this species’ rotten wood was used as a 
contraceptive. 
 
Wildlife : Prunus emarginata  is a valuable species for 
elk, mule deer, and black bears.  The fruits are eaten 
by small mammals, rodents, and various birds.  This 
species is preferred by sheep and cattle. 
 
Agroforestry : Bitter cherry is used in forested riparian 
buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, protect 
aquatic environments, enha nce wildlife, and increase 
biodiversity. 
 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Saint Mary's College  @ CalPhotos
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Bitter cherry ( Prunus emarginata ) is a 
native, deciduous shrub, four to twelve feet high, or 
sometimes a small tree up to thirty feet high 
(McMinn 1939).  The leaves  are oblong to oval, fine 
toothed, and rounded at the tip.  The flowers are 
fragrant, blooming between April and May, in 
clusters of five to twelve.  The bark has a generally 
smooth dark brown surface marked by horizontal 
light gray interrupted hands and by rows of oblong 
orange colored lenticels (Sargent 1961). 
 
Distribution : Bitter cherry often forms extensive 
thickets on moist slopes and along stream banks in 
the transition and Canadian life zones in the coast 
ranges, the mountains of southern California and in 
the Sierra Nevada (McMinn 1939).  It extends 
northward to Idaho and British Columbia and 
eastward to Nevada and Ariz ona (Ibid.).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Prunus emarginata is frequently abundant in very 
dense; uniform stands, on steep, rocky slopes, and 
can be found along valley bottoms next to streams 
(Mozingo 1987).  It establishes easily in disturbed 
moist areas and prefers open  sandy or gravelly sites.  
This species succeeds in full sun or partial shade but 
grows best in a sunny position.  Bitter cherry does not 
tolerate much shade competition from other trees. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seed is best sown as soon as 
it is ripe, in the fall, in an open frame on a seedbed

(Heuser 1997).  It is important to protect the seeds 
from mice or any seed-eating creatures.  This species 
requires a period of two to three months cold 
stratification.  The seeds can be slow to germinate, 
sometimes taking up to eighteen months.  When the 
seedlings are large enough to handle, they can be 
placed into individual pots.  Grow seedlings in an 
open frame or greenhouse their first winter and plant 
into their permanent positions in late spring or early 
summer of the following year. 
 
Propagation from Softwood Cuttings: Cuttings 
should be done in the spring or early summer in the 
early morning.  Take cuttings about five to ten 
centimeters long, just above the node.  Put cuttings in 
plastic bags to prevent moisture loss (Heuser 1997).  
They must not be allowed to wilt. Trim the cuttings 
below the lowest node to  remove the lower leaves 
leaving three or four at the tip (Ibid.).  A rooting 
hormone maybe applied to improve rooting before 
planting.  Insert the cuttings in the rooting medium 
up to half their length so the leaves don’t touch each 
other.  The cuttings root in two to three weeks, after 
which they can be potted (Ibid.). 
 
Management 
This species is a member of the genus that produces a 
poison, hydrogen cyanide, which gives almonds a 
characteristic flavor.  This toxin is mainly found in 
the seeds and leaves and has a bitter taste.  Hydrogen 
cyanide can stimulate respirat ion and is beneficial in 
the treatment of cancer.  It is also known to cause 
respiratory failure and death in some instances. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available through native plant nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.   Trees and shrubs of New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Conneticut. 
 
Howell, J.T. 1949.   Marin flora: manual of the 
flowering plants and ferns of Marin County, 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley 
& Los Angeles, California. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1951.  An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley & Los Angeles, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Mozingo, H.N. 1987.   Shrubs of the Great Basin: a 
natural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Las Vegas, & London. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J. Jr. 1947.   Rocky Mountain trees.  2nd ed.  
Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C. & C. Sprague 1922.   Manual of the trees 
of North America . Vol. 2.  Dover Publication, Inc., 
New York, New York. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.