Plant Guide

REED 
CANARYGRASS 
Phalaris arundinacea L. 
Plant Symbol = PHAR3 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Material Center, Pullman, Washington 
Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the Northern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
gardener&#39;s-garters (Source: Hortus 3 ), reed Canary 
grass (Source: World Econ Pl ), ribbon grass (Source: 
Dict Gard ), variegated grass (Source: Webster&#39;s Dict 
), alpiste roseau (Source: Dict Rehm ) [French], 
Rohrglanzgras (Source: Dict Rehm ) [German], kusa­
yoshi (Source: F Japan Ohwi) [Japanese], caniço­
malhado (Source: Dict Rehm ) [Portuguese], hierba 
cinta (Source: Dict Rehm ) [Spanish], pasto cinto 
(Source: Dict Rehm ) [Spanish] (USDA, ARS 2002) 
Uses 
Use of reed canarygrass in the Pacific Northwest 
basically began at the turn of the century.  Farming 
commonly followed logging operations and reed 
canarygrass was frequently used as the “breaking in” 
crop (Wheeler 1950).  Stumps & logging debris and 
clearing operations left the land unsuitable for 
planting crops such as small grains.  Reed 
canarygrass was planted in these areas to allow time 
for the stumps and debris to degrade and be more 
easily removed at a later date. 
Reed canarygrass popularity in the Pacific Northwest 
was a composite of many factors. It is an extremely 
productive grass.  Reports of production far 
exceeding other grasses are common in the early 
literature.  It is very easy to establish and it persists 
very well.  Most plantings occurred during a period 
of history when farms were more self-reliant.  
Livestock were pastured on the farm, and hay was 
grown on the farm rather than purchased from hay 
brokers. It was a reliable, productive forage.  
A second wave of interest in reed canarygrass 
occurred when wastewater management became an 
important issue.  Reed canarygrass has the ability to 
respond exceedingly well to applied nutrients and one 
study showed a yield response to levels as high as 
920 pounds N/acre (Schmitt et al. 1999).  Zeiders 
(1976) reported, “reed canarygrass is the most 
popular species for irrigation with wastewater from 
municipal and industrial sources as a pollution 
control measure”.  
The most recent wave of interest in reed canarygrass 
is occurring in Europe.  Reed canarygrass is being 
cultivated in northern Europe as a biofuel and about 
10,000 acres are in production in Scandinavia 
(Kätterer et al (1998). 
It is a plant with many uses.  Unfortunately, reed 
canarygrass has proven to be too aggressive in the 
Pacific Northwest.  It moves out of pastureland and 
into stream bottoms, wetlands, and canal banks. It 
persists in areas where it is not desirable and is the 
bane of wetland restoration. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
Description 
Reed canarygrass is 2-9 feet tall non-native with flat, 
rough-textured, tapering leaves from 31/2-10 inches 
long.  The stem is hairless and stands erect.  One of 
the first grasses to sprout in the spring, reed canary 
grass produces a compact panicle 3-16 inches long 
that is erect or slightly spreading. The flowers are 
green to purple early in the season and change to 
beige over time.  The grass forms a thick rhizome 
system that quickly dominates the soil.  There is 
some debate as to the origin of the species.  Sources 
document native and non-native genotypes of reed 
canary grass.  The non-native strain is thought to be 
more invasive than native strain. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Adaptation 
Growth of reed canarygrass begins early in the 
spring, senescence occurs with summer drought, and 
limited vegetative growth resumes in the fall if 
moisture is available.  Sprouts will frequently be seen 
growing in ephemeral ponded water in the spring. 
Carbohydrate reserves stored in the rhizomes fuel the 
growth of these sprouts (Hovin et al. 1973). The 
roots are not contributing to the growth in this 
situation because the ponding causes an anaerobic 
condition.  If the water remains on the stand for a 
prolonged period the roots will eventually die 
because the reducing environment will not only 
deprive roots of oxygen but will also remove oxygen 
from the roots. 
The culms are very tall and individual leaves grow 
from nodes along the culm.  The leaves of the lower 
culm become light deprived as the plant grows and 
are replaced with new leaves higher up the culm.  If 
the stand is cut, new leaves will sprout from either 
rhizomes or from exposed nodes on the shortened 
culm.  
Biomass production is exceedingly high (as high as 9 
tons/acre) but it requires a tremendous amount of 
nutrients to sustain this growth.  Riparian soils tend 
to be very rich in nutrients, allowing reed canarygrass 
to thrive.  Limiting its growth by removing nutrients 
has not been practical on a field scale.  Indeed, there 
are stands that are hayed every year and a large 
amount of nutrients subsequently removed, and yet 
these stands continue to proliferate for decades.  
Reed canarygrass is very competitive once 
established and will frequently develop a solid 
monoculture. Tall growth enables reed canarygrass 
to compete with other herbaceous species by 
depriving them of light.  Native herbaceous species 
that initiate growth late in the spring are especially 
impacted by reed canarygrass. 
Establishment 
Rhizomes account for much of the localized spread 
of reed canarygrass.  Rhizomes grow outwardly from 
a mother plant until the terminal bud develops a shoot 
(Evans and Ely 1941).  This is unlike quackgrass, 
which develops shoots all along the rhizome axis.  
This allows reed canarygrass to rapidly expand its 
local territory and a single rhizome or stem can infest 
an entire drainage.  
Reed canarygrass culms are also capable of rooting 
and establishing stands (Hovin et al. 1973). Hovin 
and his coworkers reported that the nodes of reed 
canarygrass culms become meristematically active 
once the panicles are removed, and stage of 
development of the panicle affected the percent 
survival of the new plants.  Pre-anthesis culms rooted 
poorly while culms from post-anthesis plants rooted 
better.  Bank erosion and transport of culms allows 
for yet another means of establishing plants along a 
watercourse. 
Management 
Seeds require several days at cool temperatures for a 
high percentage of the seeds to germinate.  The rate 
and amount of germination is typical for most cool 
season pasture grasses, but pales in comparison to 
many annual weeds.  For comparison, yellow 
starthistle and cheatgrass can achieve 75% 
germination within 2 days.  Seedling development of 
reed canarygrass is similar to other cool season 
pasture grasses.  The seedlings lack vigor and are 
very sensitive to competition. Morrison and 
Molofsky (1998, 1999) reported that reed canarygrass 
seedlings were more sensitive to interspecific 
competition then they were to decreased water 
availability.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Reed canarygrass is a classic weed in many 
environments but in environments subject to frequent 
& severe disturbances it has some value.  It persists 
very well in spite of grazing.  The grazing period 
lasts nine months west of the Cascades (Wheeler

1950).  Few if any grasses can tolerate grazing 
pressure this long.  It also withstands grazing periods 
as frequent as 2 weeks between rests with little 
detrimental effects.  It withstands annual burning and 
spring flooding very well.  It also tolerates heavy 
applications of wastes.  It is ecologically “stable 
state.” The up-side -- it is not very prone to give way 
to noxious weeds.  The down-side -- natural 
transition to a higher seral “more native” state is 
unlikely. 
Environmental Concerns 
It is a plant with many uses.  Unfortunately, reed 
canarygrass has proven to be too aggressive in the 
Pacific Northwest.  It moves out of pastureland and 
into stream bottoms, wetlands, and canal banks. It 
persists in areas where it is not desirable and is the 
bane of wetland restorationists. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Reed canarygrass seed is quite small, very dense, and 
resembles timothy seed because both are small, 
heavy, and naked. Fully sodded stands produce only 
30-50 pounds seed/acre  (Schoth 1938).  Old stands 
tend to have a higher proportion of vegetative culms 
than reproductive culms.  Seed heads are borne on 
long culms and seeds mature from the top of the head 
down.  Fully ripe seeds are highly viable and shatter 
readily.  Indeterminate maturation allows for a 
prolonged period of seed dispersal, which reduces 
seed predation.  It also increases the chances of some 
seed being dispersed by an episodic event such as an 
animal brushing against a plant and some seed 
catching in its coat. 
Rhizomes account for much of the localized spread 
of reed canarygrass.  Rhizomes grow outwardly from 
a mother plant until the terminal bud develops a shoot 
(Evans and Ely 1941).  This is unlike quackgrass, 
which develops shoots all along the rhizome axis.  
This allows reed canarygrass to rapidly expand its 
local territory and a single rhizome or stem can infest 
an entire drainage.  
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information. 
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Always, F. 1931.  Early trials and use of reed 
canarygrass as a forage plant. J. Am. Soc. Agron. 
23:64-66. 
Evans, M.W. & J.E Ely 1941.  Growth habits of reed 
canarygrass. J. Am. Soc. Agron. 33:1017-1027. 
Forman, D. 1998.  The effects of shade and 
defoliation on reed canarygrass (Phalaris 
arundinacea L.) biomass production: a greenhouse 
study. Washington State University, M.S. Thesis, 
Pullman, Washington. 
Hovin, A.W., B.E. Beck, & G.C. Marten 1973. 
Propagation of reed canarygrass (Phalaris 
arundinacea L.) from culm segments.” Crop Sci. 
13:747-749. 
Kätterer, T., O. Andrén, & R. Pettersson 1998.  
Growth and nitrogen dynamics of reed canarygrass 
(Phalaris arundinacea L.) subjected to daily 
fertilization and irrigation in the field.  Field Crops 
Res. 55:153-164. 
Kilbride, K.M. & Paveglio 1999.  Integrated pest 
management to control reed canarygrass in seasonal 
wetlands of southwestern Washington. Wildl. Soc. 
Bull. 27:292-297. 
Morrison, S.L. & J. Molofsky 1998.  Effects of 
genotypes, soil moisture, and competition on the 
growth of an invasive grass, Phalaris arundinacea 
(reed canarygrass). Can. J. Bot. 76:1939-1946. 
Morrison, S.L. & J. Molofsky 1999.  Environmental 
and genetic effects on the early survival and growth 
of the invasive grass Phalaris arundinacea. Can. J. 
Bot. 77:1447-1453. 
Schmitt, M.A., M.P. Russelle, G.W. Randall, C.C. 
Sheaffer, L.J. Greub, & P.D. Clayton 1999. Effect of 
rate, timing and placement of liquid dairy manure on 
reed canarygrass yield.  J. Prod. Agric. 12:239-242.

Schoth, H.A. 1938.  Reed canarygrass. USDA 
Farmers’ Bulletin 1602.  11pp. 
Sheaffer, C.C., D.W. Miller, & G.C. Marten 1990. 
Grass dominance and moisture yield and quality in 
perennial grass-alfalfa mixtures. J. Prod. Agric. 
3:480-485. 
Stannard, M. & W. Crowder 2001.  Biology, history, 
and suppression of reed canarygrass (Phalaris 
arundinacea. USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Technical Note 43, Pullman Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington. 8pp. 
Stout, D. Curator, USDA ARS West Region Plant 
Introduction Station, Pullman, Washington. 
Tsvelev, N. N. 1983.  Grasses of the Soviet Union, 
Part 1. Publ.; Oxonian Press Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
USDA, ARS 2002. Phalaris arundinacea. 
Germplasm Resources Information Network. 
Beltsville, Maryland 
USDA, CSREES 2000.  Pacific Northwest weed 
control handbook.  Cooperative Extension Services 
of Idaho, Oregon, and Washington. 
Wheeler, W.A. 1950. Forage and Pasture Crops: a 
handbook of information about the grasses and 
legumes grown for forage in the United States.  Publ.; 
D, Van Nostrand Co., NY 
Zeiders, K.E. 1976. A new disease of reed 
canarygrass caused by Helminasporium catenarium. 
Plant Disease Reporter 60:556-568. 
Photo Credits: 

“Purdue Forage Information”

http://www.agry.purdue.edu/ext/forages/publications/

grasses/reed-canry.h tm

“The Nature Conservancy” 
http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/photos/phaar04.jpg 
The use of product names in this document is for 
simplicity and information, and does not imply 
endorsement by the NRCS over other equivalent 
materials. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators: 
Mark Stannard and Wayne Crowder, USDA, NRCS, 
Pullman Plant Material Center, Pullman, Washington 
Edited: 11april02 jsp; 25feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.