Plant Guide
JAMES’ GALLETA 
Pleuraphis jamesii Torr.  
Plant Symbol = PLJA  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and New Mexico 
P lant  Materials  Centers  
 
James' galleta.  Photo by Los Lunas Plant Materials Center.  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: Galleta,  Curly grass, Jim ’s 
laughing grass  
Scientific Alternate Names: Hilaria jamesii (Torr.) Benth.  
Uses  
Galleta is a desirable forage plant for cattle, horses and 
sheep during active plant growth in late spring and early 
summer.   Palatability is rated as moderate during active 
growth and relatively unpalatable during dormant periods.  
Sheep typically feed up on central portions of galleta tufts, 
leaving the coarser growth around the outer edges.   It is 
used to some extent by deer and antelope.  Desert bighorn 
sheep of the Mojave Desert utilize galleta as forage.  It  provides poor cover for most wildlife specie
s (Simonin, 
2000) . 
 
Galleta can also be used for conservation  ground cover on 
areas that have heavy foot traffic (campgrounds, picnic 
areas , and  roadsides ) because it can handle  trampling.   It 
is an excellent plant for erosion control on semi -desert 
sites  (Pratt, et al., 2002) . 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General:   Grass Family (Poaceae).  Galleta is a perennial, 
warm season grass with strong rhizomes , but commonly 
is  found growing in bunches .  Stems are erect, 30-50 cm 
(11 -19 in) tall, leaves 2 -4 mm  (0.08-0.16 in)  wide, 2 -5 cm 
(0.79- 1.97 in) long;  leaf sides  are smooth  and  edges  are 
scabrous.  Collars are pubescent with pilose hairs at the 
margins  and  auricles  are absent.  Ligules are 
membranous, 1.8- 2.2mm (0.07-0.09 in) long, obtuse, 
ciliolate, and glabrous.  Inflorescence is a raceme  with a 
wavy rachis , 3-10 cm (1.18- 3.94 in) long  with spikelets in 
clusters of 3 per node.  The central spikelets (next to the 
axis) are fertile and 1 -flowered.  The 2 lateral spikelets 
are staminate, 6 -8 mm  (0.24-0.31 in) long and hairy at 
base.  Glumes are 4 -5 mm  (0.16-0.20 in) long, linear and 
unequally 2 -lobed at the apex.   Glumes of the central 
spikelet are sub equal , 4-5.5 mm  (0.16- 0.22 in) long,  
ciliate and apex is divided into 4 -8 awned lobes.  The 
awns are 1.5 -5mm  (0.06- 0.20 in)  long.  Lemmas are 6 -7 
mm  (0.24- 0.28 in) long, 3 -5 nerved, and blunt (Skinner, 
2010).  
 
Under favorable conditions, bunches merge forming a 
sod.  Rhizomes occur 1 -2 inches (2.5- 5.1 cm) below the 
soil surface.  Few roots extend further than 18 inches (50 
cm) below the soil surface.  The tough, woody  rhizomes 
may reach 5 -6 feet (1.5 -1.8 m) in length (Simonin, 2000).  
Ethnobotany  
The Hopi tribe used galleta  for basketry, coiled trays, and 
as floor and hair brushes.  The Navajo tribe used it as a 
dietary/pediatric aid to make babies “want to eat a lot” 
a nd for horse and sheep feed because it withstands 
trampling and close grazing (Native American 
Ethnobotany, Online).  
Distribution :  Galleta is widespread throughout southern 
California to the desert mountains  of Nevada, Arizona, 
New Mexico, Utah, Colorado,  southern Wyoming,  and

western Texas.  It is also found in the panhandle of 
Oklahoma and in extreme southwest Kansas.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Galleta is found in th e pinyon-juniper (Pinus-
Juniperus ) and ponderosa  pine (P. ponderosa) habitat 
types and in the conifer woodland -grassland transition 
zones , and plains grasslands  in the southwest and also in 
northern desert -shrub plant communities of California, 
Nevada, Utah, Colorado , and southern Wyoming.  Galleta 
is also found in the  tallgrass plant communities along the 
Colorado- New Mexico border in association with little 
blu estem ( Schizachyrium scoparium ), western wheatgrass 
( Pascopyrum smithii ), needleandthread (Hesperostipa 
comat a), purple threeawn ( Aristida purpurea) , and sand 
dropseed ( Sporobolus cryptandrus ).  In Arizona, galleta is 
found in pinyon- juniper, shortgrass, and sagebrush plant 
communities and in Utah in salt desert shrub, creosote 
bush ( Larrea tridentat a), sageb rush ( Artemisia spp .), 
pinyon -juniper and blackbush ( Coleogyne ramosissima) 
plant  communities.  In the central portion of the Great 
Basin, galleta form s a habitat type with big sagebrush 
( Artemisia tridentata ).  Other common grasses found in 
association with galleta include black grama ( bouteloua 
eriopoda), blue grama ( Bouteloua gracilis), Indian 
ricegrass ( Achnatherum hymenoides ), desert needlegrass 
( St ipa speciosa) , bottlebrush squirreltail ( Elymus 
elymoides ), Sandberg bluegrass ( Poa secunda), Alkali 
sa caton ( Sporobolus airoides ), and Fendler threeawn 
( Aristida purpurea ssp . fendleriana), (Simonin, 2000.)  
Adaptation  
Galleta is adapted to a wide variety of soils but prefers 
neutral to moderately alkaline soils with low water 
holding capacity and coarse  loamy texture.  It is also 
adapted to fine textured soils, often found on clay soils 
where other grasses are rare.  Galleta is commonly found 
between 3,500 and 7,500 feet (1066- 2286 m) elevation in 
5- 16 inch (127- 406 mm) annual precipitation zones .  In 
California, it is found on dry, sandy to rocky slopes and 
flats within scrub and woodland areas.  In Arizona, it is 
most  common on sandy plateaus  and in Utah  on dry flats 
and  foothills .  In the Colorado Plateau region of Utah it 
thrives on well -drained, sandy soils and fractured 
rockland.  Preferred sites in Texas are dry rocky ledges, 
rolling slopes and valley flats  (Pratt,  et. al, 2002 and 
Simonin, 2000) . 
Establishment  
Seed should be planted into a clean, firm seedbed to a 
depth of ¼ -½ inch.   Drilling is preferred to ensure 
uniform seeding depth but broadcast seeding followed by 
harrowing and packing can be utilized where s oil 
moisture is not lacking.   The Los Lunas PMC provides 
seeding rate recommendations for galleta based on the 
caryopsis (the actual fruit, or “naked” seed) because of the 
extra, unnecessary bulk that is attached with the floret 
(caryopsis plus lemmas and paleas) and planting a  caryopsis is much easier.
  There are approximately 
151,850 florets per pound (PLANTS Database) and 
269,520 caryopsis seed per pound (LLPMC).    
The  single species  seeding rate based on caryopsis weight 
is  2-6  pounds  pure  live  seed  (PLS) per acre ( NMSU CES, 
1982  and LLPMC , NRCS 2008).   For erosion control 
plantings, double the seeding rate to  4-12  pounds 
(caryopsis),  PLS per acre ( LLPMC, NRCS 2008).   
Seeding rates based on floret weight are 6 -8 pounds PLS 
per acre and 12 -16 pounds P LS per acre for erosion 
control plantings.   If planted in a mixture, adjust the 
seeding rate to the percent of mix desired.   
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but applications of broadleaf herbicides 
should not be made until plants have reached the four to 
six leaf stage.  Mow above grass seedlings when weeds 
begin to bloom to reduce weed seed production.  Insects 
may damage new stands and the use of insecticides may 
be required.  Be sure to read and follow pesticide label 
directions.  
Management  
Galleta greens up in early summer if rains are adequate.  
Growth is dependent on precipitation and is tolerant of 
close grazing and trampling.  Management strategies 
should be based on key species in the plant community.  
Grazing should  be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Many of the  pests that can cause problems in galleta are 
the same pests  that can be  problematic  to  many  other 
native grass  species  such as ; grasshoppers, mites, gras s 
bugs, thrips, etc.  Thrips , if found in large enough 
populations , can  cause a sharp reduction in  seed 
production  of native grass species , and galleta is no 
exception  (USU Bulletin 487, 1972).    
Environmental Conc erns 
Galleta is a native species that spreads very slowly by 
rhizomes and is commonly found as scattered bunches.  It 
might spread into adjoining plant communities under 
ideal climatic and environmental conditions but does not 
pose any environmental concern to native plant 
communities.  
Seed and Plant Production  
When producing  grass seed of any species , the most 
important step is to obtain a clean, uniform stand of grass.  
The  seed  production field should  be kept  weed free, 
especially in the first year  of establishment.   If it is  kept 
weed free in th e first year and a uniform stand is 
produced, less work will be required to maintain an  
optimum seed production environment in subsequent 
years.   
 
Maintaining the  seed  production field using cultivation 
and  herbicide applications along with hand weeding will 
provide  for an even stand  of grass.  This methodology

will after the first year provide reduced labor costs in 
harvesting, cleaning and processing the seed crop 
( LLPMC,  NRCS 2008, USDA M7 -N-21281 July 1969) .   
 
Galleta s eed production  is rated as fair to poor.  At the  Los 
Lunas, New Mexico Plant Materials Center ( LLPMC) 
seed production  plantings  of source -identified collections 
have  consistently  yielded less than  the released cultivar 
‘Viva’.   Seed production depends on the percentage of 
flower s pollinated  and the formation of viable seed.  The 
pollination and subsequent seed  development was found 
to be poor for galleta and for several other species found 
in genus P leuraphis (USU Bulletin 487 , August 1972).   
Seed should be visually checked for maturity under a 
magnifying apparatus to allow for harvesting the greatest 
amount of viable seed.  In studies at the LLPMC , galleta 
grown in seed increase plantings ranged from 23 to 35 
pounds of caryopsi s pure live seed per acre  (NMSU 
USDA NRCS  ‘Viva ’ Galleta Release Notice,  March 
1979).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
 
‘Viva’  was selected and released at the Los Lunas, New 
Mexico Plant Materials Center in 1979 in cooperation 
with the New Mexico and Colorado State University  
Experiment Stations.  The original collection was from a 
native stand near Kirk, NM.  Source material was 
increased and selected in comparison rows and field 
studies for improved seedling vigor, forage , and seed 
yield.  Breeder and Foundation s eed is maintained by the 
Los Lunas Plant Materials Center and Certified Seed is 
available (USDA, 1994).  
 
There also may be  other  unnamed selections or ecotypes 
of this species available from commercial sources.  
References  
 
Native American Ethnobotany.  A Database of Foods, 
Drugs, Dyes and Fibers of Native American Peoples 
Derived from Plants.  University of Michigan, 
College of Arts, Sciences, and Letters  
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  (Accessed January 24, 
2012)  
New Mexico State University Cooperative Extension  Service Circular 503 ‘Viva’ Galleta, (1982).  
New Mexico NRCS Range Technical Note 81, Seeding  Rate Statistic for  Native and Introduced Species, 
1998.  
PLANTS Database. Pleuraphis jamesii . [Online].  
http://plants.usda.gov .  U.S. Department of 
Citation 
St. John, L., D. Tilley, and D. Goodson. 2012.  Plant 
guide for Galleta ( Pleuraphis jamesii ) USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Accessed January 23, 2012)  
Pratt, M ., Bowns, J., Banner, R., Rasmussen, A., 2002.  
Galleta.  In: Range Plants of Utah, [Online].  Utah 
State University, USU Extension 
http://extension.usu.edu/range/Grasses/galleta.htm  
(Accessed January 23, 2012)  
Simonin, K., 2000.  Pleuraphis jamesii .  In: Fire Effects 
Information System,  [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  (Accessed 
January 23, 2012 ) 
Skinner, Q., 2010.  A Field Guide to Wyomi ng Grasses.   
Education  Resources Publishing, Cumming, GA. 595 
p.  
USDA M7 -M-21281 Plant Materials in the Soil 
Conservation Service (July 1969) 40 p.  
USDA. 1994.  Grass Varieties in the United States.   Agriculture Handbook No. 170. United States 
Department  of Agriculture, Soil Conservation 
Service.  296p.  
USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials Center 2008:  Basic Guidelines for Seeding Native Grasses in Arid 
and Semi -Arid Ecosystems.  
Utah State University Bulletin 487 Galleta: Taxonomy,  Ecology and Management of  Hilaria jamesii on 
Western Rangelands (August 1972).  
 
Prepared By: 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Danny G. Goodson, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Los Lunas,  NM  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web si te at http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
Published  April, 2012  
Edited:  25Jan2012ls ; 10Feb2012dg;  13 Mar 2012ls;  
13Mar2012dt, 14Mar2012jab; 12Apr2012ls

For more information about this and other plants, please Materials Program Web site http://plant -
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation  materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER