Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHOKECHERRY 
Prunus virginiana L. 
Plant Symbol = PRVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman, Washington 
and Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials Centers and 
Kansas State University Forestry Division  
 
 
PARTS OF THIS PLANT CAN BE 
POISONOUS-See Environmental Concerns 
section of this document 
 
Alternate Names 
common chokecherry, choke cherry, black 
chokecherry, red chokecherry, California 
chokecherry, Virginia chokecherry, eastern 
chokecherry, western chokecherry, rum chokecherry, 
whiskey chokecherry, wild cherry, wild blackcherry, 
bird cherry, jamcherry, chokeberry, cabinet cherry, 
chuckleyplum, sloe tree, bitter-berry, caupulin. 
 
Uses 
Many people do not realize cherry and some other 
very important commercial  fruit trees (apple, peach, 
plum, apricot, nectarines, and almonds) are in the 
rose family.  Anthropologi sts indicate cherries have 
been harvested in Eurasia from 4,000 to 5,000 B.C.  
In 1629, chokecherry was imported to England where 
it has been cultivated as an  ornamental.  It was first 
cultivated in North America as an orchard crop in 
1724. 
  The seeds are toxic due to production of hydrocyanic 
acid in the leaves, stems and seeds.  The almond nuts 
are treated to deactivate 
the poisonous glycosides 
before they are put on the market.  Cases of illness 
and deaths have been traced back to eating the seeds 
of these trees.  
 
Conservation:   Chokecherry is used extensively in 
shelterbelts, windbreaks, wildlife
 habitat and mass 
plantings for erosion control.  Chokecherry does well 
in riparian area planting.  It provides thermal cover 
over the water and works well in stabilizing 
streambanks.  It has been used on disturbed sites such 
as mined land reclamation, highway right-of-ways 
and construction sites.  It is a good erosion control 
plant because it can form thickets and spread by 
rhizomes. 
 ©J.S Peterson @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife:   Chokecherry is important to many wildlife 
animals.  Birds, rabbits, hares, rodents and bears all 
seek out and eat its fruit.  It provides food, cover and 
nesting habitat for a variety of birds. Birds will also 
take advantage of its growth form for cover and 
nesting habitat.  It is used extensively by deer as a 
browse source in the winter.  The early spring 
flowers provide an importa nt source of nectar for 
butterflies, honeybees and ants.   
 
Food:    The common name, chokecherry, came from 
the bitter and astringent taste of the fruit. The fruit 
was a staple for numerous Indian tribes across the 
North American continent, especially to tribes who 
lived on the plains and prairies.  Chokecherries were 
routinely cooked before they were eaten or dried 
thoroughly.  Both methods served to break down any 
formation of prussi c acid contained in the stone pits.  
Drying chokecherries improves their taste by 
sweetening them, or at the very least, getting rid of 
the naturally occurring bitter taste.  Chokecherries 
were consumed in three ways  by Indians.  The fruit 
and/or juice were eaten.   Whole cherries, including 
pulp, skin and stone, were pulverized into a pulp, 
shaped into balls and dried in the sun.  Fruit balls 
could be stored for future use.  Either boiling or 
drying the fruit will neutralize the naturally occurring 
hydrocyanic acid.  The most important use was as 
part of the recipe for pemmican, or mince-meat.  
Pemmican was made by getting a slice of dried meat 
(bison was preferred over elk, deer or antelope) and 
pounding it with a stone until it had a fine texture.   
Bone marrow and animal lard were then heated and 
mixed with the meat.  Crushed chokecherries were

then added.  Pemmican would be cached as a winter 
food.  Some form of pemmican was a mainstay for all 
plains tribes.  Chokecherry butter was made by 
cooking the mature fruit, straining out the seed and 
skins, mixing this poultice with an equal quantity of 
wild plums or crabapples and adding sugar.  The bark 
was brewed for a tea drink.  Many tribes would add 
the fruits to soups and stews as flavoring and as a
 
thickening agent.  A green branch was speared 
through a meat slab while it was cooking to add spice 
to the taste. 
 
Likewise, pioneers and settlers came to realize its 
food value.  Mature fruits are still collected today and 
used to make jellies, jams, pie-fillings, syrups, sauces 
and wines. 
 
Like many plants and animals which were vital to 
their survival some tribes used parts of the 
chokecherry plant in their rituals.  A green dye was 
derived from the leaves, inner bark and immature 
fruit.  A purplish-red dye was derived from the ripe 
fruit. The Cheyenne used the limbs to make arrow 
shafts and bows.  The Crows used it for tipi stakes 
and pins.  Mountain men wa shed their steel traps in 
water boiled with the bark to remove the scent.  It is 
speculated many tribes planted seeds in places they 
frequented to ensure a supply of chokecherries was 
always available. 
 
Chokecherry is being promoted for planting as a 
minor crop in the prairie provinces of Canada for 
juice production.  Estimated fruit production potential 
is 15,000 pounds per acre from mature plants.  There 
is a significant research effort in Canada for 
developing fruit producing cultivars. 
 
Landscaping:   In some parts of the U.S., chokecherry 
is a popular ornamental.  Its quick growth, mature 
size, attractive white flowers in the spring and strong, 
sweet and almond-like aroma fragrance make it a 
good yard tree in urban neighborhoods.  Cultivars are 
planted for ornamentals rather than the native 
species.  All native chokecherry varieties have a great 
tendency to sucker, which can create problems in 
lawn care.  Most cultivated varieties do not have this 
suckering trait while producing more attractive 
flowers and/or larger fruit.   The fruit also attracts a 
diverse population of birds for a number of weeks.  
Chokecherries can be a component in a screen or 
noise barrier planting.  
 
Ethnobotany:  Chokecherry covered a large 
geographic range in North Am erica, so a majority of 
tribes used it to treat a variety of health problems.  It  was valued especially for its astringent properties and 
beneficial effect upon the respiratory system. 
 
The Arika women would drink the berry juice to stop 
post-partum hemorrhage. 
 
The Blackfeet drank berry ju
ice for diarrhea and sore 
throats.  An infusion of the cambium layer mixed 
with Saskatoon serviceberry (Amelanchier almifolia ) 
was taken as a general purge treatment and to 
lactating mothers so they  could pass on the medicinal 
qualities to the nursing baby.  They also used it in an 
enema solution for their children.  Willow ( Salix 
spp.) tea was used to counte ract the laxative effect of 
chokecherry. 
 
The Cherokees used chokecherry in the following 
ways:  mixed chokecherry with hazel alder ( Alnus 
serrulata ), downy
 rattlesnake plantain ( Goodyera 
pubescens ), Canadian wildginger (Asarum 
canadense ) and yellowroot ( Xanthorhiza 
simplicissima ) to make a blood tonic.  An infusion 
made from boiled bark was given for coughs, 
laryngitis, chills, ague, fevers and to loosen phlegm.  
Warm chokecherry tea was given to women when 
labor pains began.  The root bark is a good astringent 
and was mixed with water and used as a rinse for 
open sores and old skin ulcers.  The tree bark of 
spicebush (Lindera benzoin ) and flowering dogwood 
( Cornus florida ) was added to corn whiskey and used 
to treat for measles.  The fruit was boiled and eaten to 
treat for bloody bowels.  The branches and leaves 
were one of six ingredients burned in sweat lodges to 
treat for indigestion and jaundice. 
The Cheyenne would gather the immature fruit, dry it 
in the sun, pulverize it an d use it as a treatment for 
diarrhea.  
 
The Paiutes made a medicinal tea from the leaves and 
twigs to treat colds and rheumatism. 
 
The Sioux chewed the dried roots and then placed 
this poultice in open wounds to stop the bleeding.  
The Sioux, Crows, Gros Ventres and others made a 
bark tea to cure stomach aches, diarrhea and 
dysentery.  The Crows also used the bark to cleanse 
sores and burns.  
 
In the 19
th century medical doctors used many 
concoctions of chokecherry leaves and bark to treat a 
number of ailments.  Chokecherry bark was listed in 
the  U.S. Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1970.  It is still 
listed as a pharmaceutical  aid, a flavor agent for 
liquid medicines.  Among the health complaints 
treated were debility, hectic fever, irritative 
dyspepsia, irritability of the nervous system, fever,

pleurisy, whooping cough, tuberculosis, pneumonia, 
sore throats and gastrointestinal problems.  It was 
recommended as a rinse on burns, open sores, 
cankers and skin ulcers.  Pharmaceutical books at that 
time cautioned against boiling any mixture using 
chokecherry leaves or bark because it would drive off 
the medicinal properties.  The bark was used as a 
flavoring agent in many cough syrups.  In 1834, Dr. 
Proctor first identified the bark as containing prussic 
acid.   
 
In their journals, Lewis and  Clark recorded that while 
camped on the upper Missouri River Captain Lewis 
became will with abdominal cramps and fever.  He 
made a tea from chokecherry twigs and was well the 
next day. 
 
Modern medicinal research shows in small dosages 
hydrocyanic acid can stimulate respiration, improve 
digestion and gives a false sense of well-being.  
Some cancer research involving hydrocyanic acid is 
being conducted. 
 
Margaret Williams, Nevada Na tive Plant Society, @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace more desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site.   Description 
General
: Rose Family (Rosaceae).  
Chokecherry is a 
native, perennial, deciduous, woody, thicket-forming 
large erect shrub or small tree. It rarely reaches a 
height of over 30 feet.  The crown is irregular and 
from 10 to 20 feet wide when mature.  The stems are 
numerous and slender.  Reproduction can either be by 
seed or root rhizomes. 
 
Leaves are dark green and glossy above and paler 
beneath.  They are alternate, simple, glabrous, oval to 
broadly elliptic in shape, 1 to 4 inches long, and 3/4 
to 2 inches wide.  The margins are toothed with 
closely-spaced sharp teeth pointing outward forming 
a serrated edge.  They turn yellow in autumn. 
 
The bark of young trees may vary from gray to a 
reddish brown.  As it ages the bark turns darker, into 
brownish-black and becomes noticeably furrowed.  
The bark is distinctly marked by horizontal rows of 
raised air pores (lenticels).  With maturation the 
lenticels develop into shallow grooves.  
 
It has perfect flowers which are aromatic and 
arranged in cylindrical racem es 3 to 6 inches long.  
The racemes always grow on  the current year's leafy 
twig growth.  Individual flowers are perfect, 1/4 to 
3/8 inch in diameter with 5 white petals.  The flowers 
start appearing  before the leaves are fully developed.  
Flowers may appear from April to July and fruits 
form a couple of months later.    
 
The fruits are spherical dr upes (fleshy fruit with a 
stone in the center), globose, 1/4 to 3/8 inch in 
diameter.  Small ripe cherries range in color from 
dark red or purple to almo st black.  There are from 
3,000 to 5,000 seeds per pound.  
 
The roots are a network of rhizomes.  Deep root 
systems grow at irregular intervals along the length 
of the rhizomes.  Rhizomes can extend beyond the 
drip zone, up to 35 feet away from the base of the 
tree.  Rhizomes grow up to 3/4 inch in diameter. 
 
There are three recognized varieties of  Prunus 
virginiana .  The variety  demissa is commonly called 
western chokecherry.  It produces dark red fruit.  The 
variety melanocarpa  produces black fruit.  The 
variety virginiana  produces crimson to deep red fruit. 
This variety can be found in two forms, one with red 
and one with white fruit. 
 
Habitat: Chokecherry is found in a large geographic 
area and it grows abundantly in many habitat types 
and plant associations.  It may be found in thin 
stands, as dense thickets or individually in open

forest clearings.  It prefers direct sunlight and is not 
an understory species of boreal forests.
 
 
Chokecherry occurs naturally in a wide range of soil 
types and textures.  Soils supporting chokecherry 
vary considerably, from abandoned construction 
sites, with almost no soil depth or fertility, to deep 
virgin grasslands, with deep profiles and a high level 
of nutrients.  Soil textures range from silt to sandy 
loam, it does not do well on heavy clay soils.  Soil 
pH can vary from 5.2 (mildly acid) to 8.4 
(moderately alkaline) without any adverse effect 
upon growth.  Precipitation ranges from 13 to 65 
inches annually.  Sites range from low to mostly mid-
elevation, although it also occurs from 8,000 to 
10,000 feet in Idaho, Nevada and Utah.  It is widely 
adaptable to temperature extremes.  It is found in 
USDA hardiness zones 2 to 7 naturally.  If planted, 
chokecherry will grow into zone 10.  The four major 
limiting factors in its habitat are that it is intolerant of 
shade, poor drainage, frequent flooding and soils with 
a large amount of clay.   
 
Many wildlife animals eat the fruit and distribute it.  
Birds are by far the most common carrier of the 
seeds.  As a consequence it grows abundantly on 
places where birds rest, like  along roadsides, fences, 
hedgerows, riparian marg ins and forest clearings. 
Chokecherry is well adapted to fire disturbance.  It 
can be top-killed by fire, but re-sprouts readily from 
root crowns and rhizomes.  Seed germination is 
apparently improved with heat treatment, suggesting 
a further adaptation to fire. 
 
Known Distribution 
Distribution : Chokecherry is found in all but eight 
states or territories.  For  current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Nursery grown seedlings es tablish satisfactorily if 
planted free of competition in areas having 15 or 
more inches of annual precipitation.  If seeds are 
planted in the spring they should be pre-chilled for 3 
months, then placed about 1/ 2 inch deep.  Saplings 
are not tolerant of weedy competition for 2 to 3 years 
after planting.  Use of we ed barrier mat, a strict 
cultivation regime, or proper herbicide treatment is 
necessary if a successful planting is to occur.  Check 
with your local NRCS Field Office to determine if 
chokecherry is adapted to your area or soils before 
planting any trees. 
 
 
  Management 
Management of chokecherry will be dependent on 
whether it is looked upon as a desirable or 
undesirable plant.  On range and pastures it is often 
considered a potential hazard to livestock.  As a 
consequence either mechanical and/or herbicide 
treatments combined with good grassland 
management is needed to pr
event animal loss.  When 
it is used in windbreaks, as  an ornamental plant or as 
a wildlife resource it is beneficial.  Control of weedy 
vegetation, and treatment for potential diseases, is 
necessary if it is expected to grow for an extended 
period of years 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Chokecherry is susceptible to X-disease, black knot, 
stem decay, shothole, Valsa canker, and honey 
fungus  Plowrightia stansburiana .   Common insects
 
pests are the prairie tent caterpillar, eastern tent 
caterpillar and aphids.  In the northeastern United 
States, chokecherry is a pr imary host of the eastern 
tent caterpillar.  Browsing by deer on young 
immature trees causes consid erable damage in some 
areas.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
The leaves, bark, stem, and stone (seed pit) of 
chokecherry are all toxic.  It is potentially poisonous 
to all classes of livestock, but cattle and sheep are the 
ones commonly affected.  The meaty flesh of the fruit 
is not toxic. 
 
Hydrocyanic acid (HCN) is often called Prussic acid.  
HCN does not occur freely as  a plant compound.  It is 
formed only after disruption of the plant cell, either 
by mechanical injury or a  sudden freeze.  Only then 
do the degradative enzymes (hydroxynitrile lyases) 
and glycoside come into co ntact and mix together.  
HCN acid occurs in greatest amounts in the leaves.  
Generally, the amount of HCN in the leaves lessens 
as the growing season progresses.  By autumn 
chokecherry leaves have so little glycoside, a 
component of HCN, they are not normally considered 
hazardous.  Drought stress may cause the leaves to 
concentrate the glycoside in heavier amounts than 
usual.  Wilted leaves are more toxic per unit weight 
due to dehydration, which concentrates the 
components, which make up HCN.  HCN is so toxic 
at low levels because it inhibits blood cells from 
absorbing oxygen.  One symptom of HCN poisoning 
is the blood turns bright red when exposed to the air 
and it clots abnormally slow.  
 
Cyanogenic glycosides (prunasin, produced in the 
leaves and twigs, and am ygdalin, produced in the 
stone) are the building blocks for HCN.  Of the two,

prunasin is found in a much larger quantity. HCN is 
most commonly formed in the plant due to 
mechanical injury (such as browsing), a sudden 
change in temperature (an early and heavy frost) or in 
the animal during digestion.  The glycosides can 
either be hydrolyzed by enzymes in the plants or by 
rumen microorganisms. The glycosides occur in 
vacuoles in plant tissue while the enzymes are found 
in the cytosol. 
 
Ingestion of about 0.25 percent of an animal's body 
weight, or 50 milligrams/kilogram of body weight, is 
the Lethal Dose of fifty percent of animals (LD50).  
This means less than 4 ounces  of fresh leaves can be 
toxic to a 100 pound animal. 
 
Poisoning generally occurs  when animals graze this 
amount or more in an hour or less.  Formation of 
HCN must occur primarily within the short time 
between the mastication of the forage and its arrival 
in the stomach, for the acidic contents of the stomach 
slows down the reaction of the chemical process 
which creates the HCN.  The toxic elements become 
even more active if the animal drinks water 
immediately after browsing.  HCN works so quickly 
by the time poisoning symptoms are identified it is 
generally too late to treat.  Injection of a combination 
of sodium thiosulfate and sodium nitrite in the veins 
or peritoneum is the recommended antidote.  
Oxidizing substances such as potassium 
permanganate or hydrogen peroxide given as a 
drench may help some.  Any other medications 
promoting respiratory help and nerve stimulants may 
also contribute to recovery.  For any treatment to be 
effective it must be given immediately upon 
symptoms of poisoning.
 
 
Removing livestock from the HCN source is the only 
practical way to prevent mass poisoning and 
numerous losses once it ha s been detected. Good 
livestock management includes keeping hungry 
livestock away from areas where chokecherry is 
abundant.  Maintaining a good level of preferred 
forage in pastures will do a great deal in preventing 
HCN poisoning.  
 
When a person eats a single apple seed or cherry pit, 
though not recommended, it is unlikely to cause 
discomfort or serious illness.  However, there have 
been reported deaths, usually of children chewing on 
the stems and leaves, or swallowing the stones. 
Visible reactions to poisoni ng may include; anxiety; 
uneasiness; confusion; dizziness; vertigo;  headache; 
nausea; vomiting; the lips turn blue; bloating;  
dilation of the eyes; muscular weakness; abnormal 
breathing, either very labored or very rapid; paralysis  of the throat; irregular heart beat; convulsions; coma 
ensues and finally death.  Clinically, death results 
from the general anoxic state created by the 
inhibition of cytochrome oxidase. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Chokecherry can be propagated by seed, rhizome 
cuttings, suckers, crown division, semi-hardwood 
cuttings and grafting.  Generally, seed
 crops are 
regular and viable.  The flowers are more abundant 
and more fruit is produced on plants growing on open 
sites or in forest clearings.  Natural dispersal of the 
seed occurs when it passes through the digestive 
tracts of mammals and birds.  The seeds may be 
carried a long distance from  the parent plant in this 
manner.  If the rhizomatous roots are damaged due to 
a mechanical injury suckers will be produced.  This is 
often how thickets are formed.  A fire initially causes 
major damage to a stand of chokecherry.  However, 
regrowth is enhanced for several years following a 
burn.  It sprouts vigorously from surviving root 
crowns and suckers arise from the rhizomes. 
Chokecherry has seed dormancy. About half of the 
seed which is not stratified germinates within a 
couple of months.  Delayed germination may occur 
up to 4 months. An after-ripening period in the 
presence of oxygen and moisture is needed for a 
majority of seed to germinate.  Good
 germination can 
only be expected after a cool, moist stratification 
regime lasting 90 to 160 days at 36 to 41 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Sow 25 seeds per foot of drill row. One- 
year-old bareroot stock should be planted on deep, 
well-drained soils in sunny locations. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Planting materials can be obtained from most 
commercial hardwood nurseries and seed sources.  
Several cultivars have been released by government 
agencies and private nurser ies for use in landscaping 
and/or fruit production.  The two most commonly 
marketed cultivars are 'Schubert', and 'Canada Red'.  
A lot of literature states that these two cultivars are 
the same one with just different names.  This is not 
the entire truth.  'Schubert' is one of the oldest 
cultivars.  Its parent rootstock is  Prunus virginiana 
melanocarpa  selected from a native stand near Valley 
City, North Dakota.  It wa s released by the Oscar 
Will Nursery which was located in Bismarck.  
'Canada Red' was created by  grafting 'Schubert' on 
Mayday rootstock to get rid of the suckering trait.   
Releases from Canada include, 'Garrington', 'Goertz' 
and 'Robert'.

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Acuna, U.M., et. al. 2002.   Antioxidant Capacities of 
Ten Edible North American Plants .  Phytother 
Research.  Volume 16, Nu mber 1, Pp 63-65.  
Division of Pharmacognosy, University of Uppsala, 
Uppsala, Sweden. 
 
Anonymous. c.1864.   General Directions for 
Collecting and Drying Medicinal Substances of the 
Vegetable Kingdom.  List and Description of 
Indigenous Plants, etc. th eir Medicinal Properties; 
Forms of Administration, and Doses.  Prunus 
Virginianus.   Confederate States of America.  
Surgeon General's Office. 
 
Boger, C.M. 1887.   Extractum Pruni Virginianae 
Fluidum .  American Journal of Pharmacy.  Volume 
59, Number 5. 
 
Casserly, D.  1980.   An Apple A Day Keeps the 
Doctor Away (But the Seeds Can Kill You!) .  The 
American Legion.  Volume 108, Number 3.  Pp. 16-
17. 
 
CBIF.  Canadian Poiso nous Plants Information 
System.  2003.  URL:  ( http://www.cbif.gc.ca/
)  
(accessed 16 September 2003).  Canadian 
Biodiversity Information Facility.  Canada. 
 
Center for New Crops and Plants Products.  2003.  
Stone Fruits or Drupes .  URL:  
( http://hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/Default.html
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Purdue University.  Center 
for New Crops and Plants Products.  West Lafayette, 
Indiana USA. 
 
Coon, E.E.  1977.  Cyanogenesis, The Production of 
Hydrogen Cynide, By Plants.   In:  Keeler, R.F.; Van 
Kampen, K.R.; James, L.F.  1978.   Effects of 
Poisonous Plants On Livestock .  Academic Press.  
New York, New York USA.  Pp.  301-310. 
 
Coon, N.  1963.   An American Herbal.  Using Plants 
For Healing .  Rodale Press.  Emmaus, Pennsylvania 
USA.  Pp.  167.   
Crawford, H.S.; Kucera, C.L.; Ehrenreich, J.H.  1969.  
Ozark Range and Wildlife Plants
.  Agriculture 
Handbook Number 356.  United States Department 
of Agriculture.  Forest Service.  Washington, District 
of Columbia USA. Pp. 204. 
 
Densmore, F.  1928.   How Indians Use Wild Plants 
For Food, Medicine and Crafts .  Dover Publications, 
Inc.  New York, New York USA.  Pp.  291. 
 
DOI, USGS, NPWRC.  2003.   Midwestern Wetland 
Flora .  URL:  
( http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/othrdata/plntgu
id/species.htm#contents) (accessed 31 July 2003).  
Department of Interior.  United States Geologic 
Service.  Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center.  
Jamestown, North Dakota USA. 
 
Evers, R.A.; Link, R.P.  1972.   Poisonous Plants of 
the Midwest and Their Effects On Livestock .  Special 
Bulletin 24.  College of Agriculture.  University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  Champaign, Illinois 
USA.  Pp.  77. 
 
Felter, H.W.; Lloyd, J.U.  1898.   Prunus Virginiana 
(U.S.P.)-Wild Cherry .  King's American 
Dispensatory.  URL at:
  
( http://www.ibiblio.org/herbmed/eclectic/kings) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).   The Public's Library and 
Digital Archive.  Chapel Hill, North Carolina USA. 
 
Fernald, M.L.  1950.   Gray's Manual of Botany, 
Eigth (Centennial) Edition .  American Book 
Company, New York, New York USA.  Pp.  879.   
 
Folwer, M.; Craigmill,  A.L.; Norman, B.B.; 
Michelsen, P.  1982.   Livestock-Poisoning Plants of 
California .  Leaflet 21268.  Division of Agricultural 
Sciences.  University of California.  Davis, California 
USA.  Pp.  7-8. 
 
Gleason, H.A.  1952.   The New Britton and Brown 
Illustrated Flora of the Northeastern United States 
and Adjacent Canada .  New York Botanical Garden.  
Lancaster Press, Inc. Lancaster, Pennsylvania USA.  
Pp. 329. 
 
Gough, R.E.  2002.   Growing Minor Stone Fruit in 
Montana .  Montana State University Extension 
Service.  Montana State University-Bozeman.  
Bozeman, Montana USA. 
 
Hamel, P.B.; Chiltoskey, M.U.  1975.   Cherokee 
Plants .  Pp.  28-29.

Hardin, J.W.  1973.  Stock-Poisoning Plants of North 
Carolina .  Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 
Number 414 (revised).  North Carolina State 
University.  Raleigh, North Carolina USA.  Pp.  74. 
 
Herman, D.E.; Strange, C.M.; Quam, V.C.  1996.  
North Dakota Tree Handbook .  URL:  
( http://www.ag.ndsu.nodak.edu/aginfo/trees/handboo
k.htm) (accessed 16 September 2003).  United States 
Department of Agriculture.  Natural Resources 
Conservation Service.  North Dakota State University 
Extension Service.  Western Area Power 
Administration.  North Dakota State University.  
North Dakota Tree Information Center.  Fargo, North 
Dakota USA.  Pp. III-14. 
 
Hitchock, C.L.; Cronquist, A.  1964.   Vascular Plants 
of the Pacific Northwest.  Part 3:  Saxifragaceae to 
Ericaceae .  University of Wash ington Press, Seattle, 
Washington USA.  Pp. 614. 
 
HortiPlex Plant Database.  2003.   Prunus virginiana.  
URL:  ( http://hortiplex.gardenweb.com/plants
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Virtual Mirror.  Garden 
Web.  HortiPlex.  Florence, Maryland USA. 
 
Hutchens, A.R.  1991.   Indian Herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala Press.  Boston, Massachusetts 
USA.  Pp.  84-86. 
 
Iezzoni, A.; Schmidt, H.;  Blbertini, A.  1991.  
Cherries (Prunus) .  URL:  
( http://www.actahort.org/books/290/290_4.htm
) Acta 
Hort. (ISHS) 290:111-176. 
 
 
Iowa State University.  2003.   Prunus virginiana 
(Choke cherry) .  URL:  
( http://project.bio.Iastate .edu/trees/campustrees/ISU_
trees.html) (accessed 31 July 2003).  Iowa State 
University.  Ames, Iowa USA. 
 
Iverson, L.R.; Ketzner, D.; Karnes, J.  2003.   Illinois 
Plant Information Network Database .  URL:  
( http://fs.fed.us/ne/delaware/ilpin.html
) (accessed 31 
July 2003).  Illinois Natural History Survey and 
USDA Forest Service.  Delaware, Ohio USA. 
 
Johnson, F.L., Hoagland, B.W.  1999.   Catalog of the 
Woody Plants of Oklahoma .  URL:  
( http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/cover.htm
) 
(accessed 16 September 2003). Oklahoma Natural 
Heritage Inventory. Oklahoma Biological Survey.  
Norman, Oklahoma USA. 
   Johnson, K.A.  2000. 
Prunus virginiana.  URL: 
( http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/search.htm
) (accessed 
31 July 2003).  United States Department of 
Agriculture.  Forest Serv ice.  State and Private 
Forestry, Northeastern Area Office, Saint Paul Field 
Office, Saint Paul, Minnesota USA.   
 
Johnson, K.A.  2000.  Prunus virginiana.  In :  USDA, 
Forest Service Fire Effects Information System 
Database.  URL:  ( http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis
) 
(accessed 22 January 2003 ).  Rocky Mountatin 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
Missoula, Montana USA. 
 
Kindscher. K.  1992.   Medicinal Wild Plants of the 
Prairie.  An Ethnobotanical Guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  University of Kansas.  Lawrence, Kansas 
USA.  Pp.  169-174. 
 
Kindscher, K.  1987.   Edible Wild Plants of the 
Prairie.  An Ethnobotanical Guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  University of Kansas.  Lawrence, Kansas 
USA.  Pp.  4-5, and 30-31, and 176-182. 
 
Lambert, S.M.  January, 1989.   Streamside 
Revegetation .  Plant Materials Technical Note 12 
(Revised).  USDA, Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.  Spokane, Washington USA. 
 
Leininger, W.C.; Taylor, J.E.; Wambolt, C.L.  1977.  
Poisonous Range Plants in Montana .  Cooperative 
Extension Service Bulletin 348.  Montana State 
University.  Bozeman, Montana USA.  Pp.  44. 
 
Kingsbury, J.M.  1964.   Poisonous Plants of the 
United States and Canada .  Prentice-Hall, Inc.  
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey USA.  Pp 626. 
 
Knight, A.R.   Guide to Poisonous Plants .  URL:  
( http://www.colostate.edu/poisonous_plants/index.cf
m) (accessed 16 September 2003).  Colorado State 
University.  College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences.  Fort Collins, Colorado USA. 
 
Little, E.L. Jr.  1953.   Check List of Native and 
Naturalized Trees of the United States (Including 
Alaska) .  1953.  United States Department of 
Agriculture.  Forest Service.   Washington, District of 
Columbia USA.  Pp. 303-304. 
 
Manitoba Agriculture and Food.   Chokecherry 
Production in Manitoba, History and Uses .  URL:  
( http://www.gov.mb.ca/agriculture/crops/fruit/bla01s
00.html) (accessed 18 February 2003).

McGregor, R.L.; Barkley, T.M., et. al. 1977.  Atlas of 
the Flora of the Great Plains .  Iowa State University 
Press, Ames, Iowa USA.  Pp. 148.  
 
McGregor, R.L.; Barkley,  T.M.; Brooks, R.E.; 
Schofield, E.K., et. al.  1986.   Flora of the Great 
Plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas USA.  Pp.  395-396. 
 
Missouri Botanical Garden.  URL:  
( http://www.mobot.org/gardening/plantfinder
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Sa int Louis, Missouri USA. 
 
Nova Scotia Museum.  2003.   The Rose Family.  
URL at:  (http://museum.gov/ns.ca/poison/roses.htm
)  
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Nova Scotia Museum.  The 
Family of Provincial Museums.  Nova Scotia Canada. 
 
Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center.  
2003.   Ohio Perennial and Biennial Weed Guide .  
URL:  ( http://www.oardc.ohio- state.edu/weedguide
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Ohio Agricultural Research 
and Development Center.  Wooster, Ohio 44691 
USA. 
 
Plants For A Future.  2003.  URL:  
( http://www.ibiblio.org/
) (accessed 31 July 2003).  
Blagdon Cross, EX215DF, United Kingdom. 
 
Pruski, K.W.; Lewis, T.; Astatkie, T.; Jowak, J.  
2000.   Micropropagation of Chokecherry and 
Pincherry Cultivars .  Plant Cell Tissue and Organ 
Culture.  63(2) 93:100. 
 
Radford, A.E.; Ahles, H. E.; Bell, C.R.  1964.  
Manual of the Vascular Flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lian Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina USA.  Pp. 568-569. 
 
Rehder, A.  1940.  Manual of Cultivated Trees and 
Shrubs Hardy in North America .  Dioscorides Press.  
Portland, Oregon USA.  Pp. 275-281. 
 
Schmutz, E.M.; Freeman, B. N.; Reed, R.E.  1968.  
Livestock-Poisoning Plants of Arizona .  The 
University of Arizona Press.   University of Arizona.  
Tucson, Arizona USA.  Pp.  9-10. 
 
Sykes, C.  Undated. Chokecherry Fact Sheet .  URL:  
( http://www.usak.ca/agriculture/plantsci/range/index.
html) (accessed 31 July 2003).  University of 
Saskatchewa.  Department of Plant Sciences.  
Saskatoon, Saskatchewa Canada. 
  Stephens, H.A.  1980.  
Poisonous Plants of the 
Central United States .  University Press of Kansas.  
Lawrence, Kansas USA.  Pp.  43-45 and 151. 
 
Stephens, H.A.  1969.   Trees, Shrubs, and Woody 
Vines in Kansas .  University Press of Kansas.  
Lawrence, Kansas USA.  Pp. 138-139. 
 
University of Michig an-Dearborn. 2003. Native 
American Ethnobotany .  URL:  
( http://herb.umd.unich.edu/herb/search.pl
) (accessed 
28 July 2003).  In:  University of Michigan-
Dearborn.  Dearborn, Michigan USA. 
 
University of Minnesota.  2003.   The Right Tree 
Handbook.  Canada  Red Chokecherry.  URL:  
( http://www.mnpower.com/treebook)
 (accessed 22 
September 2003).   
 
University of Pennsylvania.  2003.   Poisonous 
Plants .  URL:  ( http://cal.nbc.upenn.edu/poison
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  University of Pennsylvania 
School of Veterinary Medicine.  Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania USA. 
 
USDA, ARS, NGRL.  2003.   Dr. Duke's 
Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases .  
URL:  ( http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/duke/ethnobot.pl) (accessed 16 September 2003).  
United States Department of Agriculture.  
Agriculture Research Serv ice.  National Genetic 
Research Laboratory.  Beltsville, Maryland USA. 
 
USDA, ARS, NGRP, GRIN.  2003.  URL:  
( http://www.ars-grin.gov/
)  (accessed 16 September 
2003).  United States Department of Agriculture.  
Agriculture Research Serv ice.  National Genetics 
Resources Program.  Germplasm Resources 
Information Network.  Database Management Unit.  
Plant Sciences Institute.  Beltsville, Maryland USA. 
 
USDA, ARS, PPRL.  2003.   Chokecherry.  URL:  
( http://www.pprl.usu.edu/Poisonous_Plants.htm
) 
(accessed 18 February and  16 September 2003).  
United States Department of Agriculture.  
Agriculture Research Serv ice.  Poisonous Plant 
Research Laboratory.  Logan, Utah USA. 
 
USDA, FS.  1985.   Handbook on Seeds of Browse-
Shrubs and Forbs.  Technical Publication R8-TP8.  
United States Department  of Agriculture.  Forest 
Service, Southern Region, Atlanta, Georgia USA.  
Pp. 163-164. 
 
USDA, ITIS.  2003.  URL:  ( http://itis.usda.gov/
) 
(accessed 16 September 2003).  United States

Department of Agriculture.  Integrated Taxonomic 
Information System.  Washington, District of 
Columbia USA. 
 
USDA, NRCS.  2004.  The PLANTS database, 
version 3.5.  URL:  ( http://plants.usda.gov
) (accessed 
14Jan04).  National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Utah State Univer sity.  2003.  Common Chokecherry .  
URL:  
( http://extension.usu.edu/forestry/utahforests/treeID
) 
(accessed 31 July 2003).  Utah State University.  
Forestry Extension.  Provo, Utah USA. 
 
Van Dersal, W.R.  1938.   Native Plants of the United 
States.  Their Erosion-Control and Wildlife Values .  
Miscellaneous Publication 303.  United States 
Department of Agriculture.  Soil Conservation 
Service.  Washington, District of Columbia USA.   
 
Virginia Tech Forestry Biology and Dendrology 
Educational Site.  2003.  URL:  
( http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/
) (accessed 30 July 
2003).  Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University.  Virginia Tech Forestry Biology and 
Dendrology.  Blacksburg, Virginia 24061 USA. 
 
Weed Science Society of  America.  2003.  Weeds 
that are Poisonous When Eaten .  URL:  
( http://www.wssa.net/subpages/weed/herbarium0.htm
l) (accessed 31 July 2003).  Lawrence, Kansas USA. 
 
Prepared By:   
Wayne Crowder 
USDA NRCS Pullman, Washington 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Dr. Wayne A. Geyer  
Forestry Division 
K-State Research and Extension 
Kansas State University 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Patrick J. Broyles  
Formerly USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Species Coordinator:   
Patrick J. Broyles  
Formerly USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Edited: 14jan04 jsp; 060808 jsp; 080716 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.