Plant Guide
SAN RAFAEL CACTUS 
Pediocactus despainii S.L. Welsh 
& Goodrich  
Plant Symbol = PEDE17  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 
Figure 1. San Rafael Cactus (Pediocactus despainii). Photo from 
Cactusfriends.com (2010).  
 
Alternate Names  
Despain’s footcactus  
 
Uses  
There are no known human uses associated with San 
Rafael cactus.  
 
Status  
San Rafael cactus was determined  endangered and under 
the protection of the Endangered Species Act by the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service in 1987 (USDI FWS 1987). 
Monitoring data show the species to be in decline based 
on a decrease in the number of vegetative individuals 
capable of reprodu cing. 
  Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).
 
 
Description  
General : Cactus family (Cactaceae).  San Rafael cactus 
arises from solitary, hemispheric stems. The plants are 4 
to 6 cm tall with spirally arranged tubercles. The spines 
are 2 to 6 mm (0.08 to 0.2 in) long and pale yellowish. 
Flowers are born at the top, are 15 to 25 mm (0.6 to 1.0 
in) acro ss with yellow to peach flowers (Welsh et al 
2003). The plants shrink underground for several months 
during dry or cold seasons, and are only noticeable in 
flower.  
 
Distribution :This rare species is limited in distribution to 
five populations in the San Ra fael Swell region of Emery 
County, Utah. Current surveys estimate the total number 
of individuals at about 20,000.  
 
Habitat : San Rafael cactus occurs on Juniper/pinyon and 
salt desert shrub communities on hills, benches and 
flatlands of the Colorado Plate au.  
 
Adaptation  
This species is adapted to limestone gravels, shales, clays 
and silty substrates of the Morrison, Carmel, and 
Moenkopi formations at 1850 to 2050 m (6070 to 6700 
ft).  
 
Management  
San Rafael cactus is highly sought by cactus enthusiasts.  
I t is also under threat from ORV use which is popular in 
its native habitat. Additionally, approximately half of the 
species range is covered by oil and gas leases and mining 
claims.   
 
Management goals are focused on the protection of 
habitat from disturban ce. These include the prevention of 
plant collection in natural populations, and implementing 
conservation measures to minimize and mitigate land use 
activities (USDI FWS 2007).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
The cactus borer beetle ( Moneilema semipunctatum ) is 
known to parasitize San Rafael cactus.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with this species.