Plant Guide
             Longleaf Pine  
                  Pinus palustris P. Mill.  
                  Plant Symbol = PIPA  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National  Plants Data 
Team , Davis , California  and the Mississippi Choctaw 
Field Office, Choctaw Mississippi 
 
 
 
  Figure 1. Old -growth longleaf pine forest,  St. Tammany Parish, 
Louisiana.  Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution, circa 1909.  
 
Alternate Names 
Hard, Longstraw, Pitch, Fat, Southern Yellow, Swamp, 
Yellow or Georgia Pine  
 
 
Uses  
Cultural:  Grooveless stone axes and adzes found in 
archaeological contexts in the southeastern United States 
reflect considerable Indian use of  wood resources in 
southeastern forests (Delcourt et al. 1993). One of the 
most important of these wood resources was the pines. 
Pines had many uses among southeastern tribes, but often 
the kind of pine used is not identified. Given that in the 
past, longle af pine dominated many landscapes in the 
Southeast, it is likely that it was utilized for many of the 
purposes described here. The Choctaw made darts that 
were used in blowguns  from splinters of pine, sharpened 
at one end (Bushnell 1909). Tribes of the Sou theast used 
pine wood for house frames, canoes, frames for skin boats 
or rafts, and bows (Swanton 1946). The Creek and 
Choctaw used pine bark to cover the roofs of their houses 
(Swanton 1931, 1946; Walker 2004). The Cherokee made   
canoes out of logs of lar ge pines and they were hollowed    
 
Figure 2 . Choctaw Village near the Tchefuncte River, an oil painting by 
François Bernard, Bonfouca, St. Tammany Parish. La., 1846. Notice the 
log cabin and summer arbor. Both are probably made of longleaf pine 
wood and ob serve the longleaf pine forest in the background. Courtesy 
of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard 
University: 41 -72 -10/27.  
 
out with fire and scraped and chipped with oyster shells 
and stone hatchets (Swanton 1946; Catesby 1731- 43). 
Lo ngleaf pine was used for torches for fishing and 
hunting at night, as fuelwood and tinder for heating and 
cooking, and village streets were paved with pine bark 
(Earley 2004). Pines are considered by the Cherokee to 
have eternal lives, and therefore a home  where a death 
occurred was purified with the smoke from pine branches, 
burned in a cooking vessel; pine branches were also 
thrown on the rekindled hearth fire (Mooney 1932). A 
Cherokee medicine man made a decoction of the tops of 
pines that was drunk by t he patient for removing the pain 
in the body caused by the intrusion of a foreign object 
(Mooney 1932).   
 
 
 
Figure 3 : Longleaf log cabin constructed and used by a member of the 
Choctaw -Apache Tribe of Ebarb. Photo used by permission by Chief John 
Procell.  Photo comes from their tribal collection.

The Choctaw -Apache Tribe of Ebarb located in Sabine 
Parish, Louisiana, utilized the longleaf pine wood for 
many purposes: as kindling for fires and for constructing 
log homes, cribs for livestock use, and slat houses 
(Rogers 2012). The slat homes were constructed of boards 
hewn from a longleaf pine log (see figures 2  - 4 ) (Rogers 
2012). The Adai Caddo also made log or slat homes 
(Rogers 2012).   
 
The Alabama Coushatta, Chitimacha, Adai Caddo, 
Louisiana Coushatta (Ko asati), Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of 
Louisiana, Clifton Choctaw, Four Winds Tribe Louisiana 
Cherokee Confederacy, Choctaw -Apache Tribe of Ebarb, 
Seminole, and Houma used and continue to use the 
distinct long needles of longleaf pine in the making of 
baskets  (figures 5 -8 )  (Gettys 1979; Kniffen et al. 1987; 
Rogers 2012; S. Turnbaugh and W. Turnbaugh 1986). 
The needles are gathered in the spring while still on the 
tree or fall from  the ground and dried in a cool place out 
of direct sunlight (Rogers 2012).   
 
 
 
Figure  4: Slat House construction from longleaf pine. House was the 
home to the great grandfather of the current Chief of the Choctaw -
Apache Tribe of Ebarb  - John Procell. The woman in the photo is Chief 
Procell’s mother. Picture used by permission of John  Procell . 
Once dry the sheaths of the needles are clipped or scraped 
off and discarded and the needles are stored in paper 
sacks or other breathable containers until needed (Rogers 
2012). Before using dried needles, they are soaked in 
water to regain their  flexibility and then used (Rogers 
2012). The long pine needles are coiled, and sewn in 
place with the inner bark of dogwood or slippery elm 
(Kniffen et al. 1987). The Louisiana Coushatta tribe was 
among the first practitioners of the coiled pine needle 
ba sket technique and they are  still known for their skill at 
making longleaf pine needle baskets and trays.  
   
Figure 5
: Becky Thomas, Clifton Choctaw shown weaving a basket; 
Seated around her on the floor are other baskets that she has created. 
She is one of the premier basket weavers of  the tribe. Photograph by E. 
John Rogers.  
 
 
 
Both the Louisiana and Texas Coushatta are known for 
their round and oval baskets, which may be decorated 
with flowers or pine cones  (figure 6 ). Pine needle trays 
have also been made since the 1930s. The Coushatta are 
also known for making pine needle effigy baskets in 
numerous animal shapes.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 6 : Longleaf pine  trees have been used for generations to c raft 
intricate handmade baskets  made by Tribal members and elders  of  the 
Alabama -Coushatta Tribe of Texas . Photograph by Beverly Moseley.

Figure 7 : Doris Battise, is a master  basket weaver and a member of the 
Alabama -Coushatta Tribe of Texas . Photograph  is by Beverly Moseley.   
 
During the 1960’s Coushatta women produced a wide 
array of animals: bear, crabs, crayfish, frogs, etc. The 
Louisiana Coushatta have also planted long leaf pine on 
their land near Elton in the southwestern part of the state, 
so they can continue to make bas kets in the future (Rogers 
2012). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 :  Materials needed to begin a longleaf needle basket; 
photograph taken at a longleaf pine needle basket workshop at the Four 
Winds Cherokee Tribal office. Permission granted by Four Winds Tribe 
to use and take  photograph. Photograph was taken by E. John Rogers . 
  It takes large quantities of pine needles to make a basket 
and today locating enough sources of needles is difficult 
in Louisiana (Rogers 2012) and many parts of the 
Southeast.
  
 
Non -Indian women in the  early to mid -part of the 
twentieth century made longleaf pine needle baskets for 
gathering fruits and berries, vegetables and flowers, and 
also eggs from the barnyard (Tappan 1930). They also 
made them for decoration and pine needle basketry was 
taught in  local schools (Hammel 1917). The favored time 
for gathering the needles was autumn (Lang 1926).  
 
Many early non -Indian settlers in the Southeastern United 
States considered longleaf pine the most valuable of all 
the kinds of pines (Porcher 1991). They found medicinal 
value in longleaf pine using turpentine as a stimulant and 
diuretic, and if taken in large doses, it served as a laxative 
(Porcher 1991). The turpentine was also used in the 
making of soap. The buds of the pine or the inner bark 
was steeped in  water and drunk as a cure for colds and 
coughs (Porcher 1991). As non -Indian settlers moved into 
the area, they grazed their sheep, hogs, and cattle in the 
open understories of these pine forests and hogs also 
consumed the pine nuts (Porcher 1991). By the  late 
1700’s Europeans and Americans had created an 
increased demand for naval stores where the wood was 
employed in the siding of ships, masts, yardarms and for 
floorboards in buildings (Porcher 1991). The tree took on 
great economic importance in Western  society for saw 
timber. The second -growth longleaf pine became 
important for lumber, pulpwood, crossties, boxes, crates, 
fuelwood, and in producing turpentine and rosin (Mattoon 
1922). Two distinct pine products, tar derived by slow -
burning pine wood in a  kiln, and pitch made from tar 
boiled in a kettle or cauldron were used to seal naval  
ships, making them watertight (Earley 2004). At one time, 
the bulk of the turpentine produced in the United States 
came from southeastern longleaf pine forests (Mattoon 
1 922). Forest examiner Wilbur Mattoon commented in 
1922 on the extensive destruction of young stands that 
were worked heavily for these products.  
   
Today young stands of longleaf pine can produce pine 
straw mulch, a very important regional product obtained  
from longleaf pine stands beginning at about age 8, 
peaking at age 18 and sometimes continuing for many 
more years (Wallace and Ward, 2011; Ward, 2011).  Care 
must be taken if pine straw is to be harvested sustainably 
and native understory plants conserve d (Ward, 2011).  
Mature longleaf forests produce high quality timber 
products including utility poles, lumber and pulpwood.  
   
Wildlife:  Many kinds of animals are associated with the 
groundcover in longleaf pine forests. In fact, the majority 
of the biological diversity in longleaf forests is in the 
understory, not the tree canopies (Simberloff 1993). Wild 
turkeys ( Meleagris gallapavo), fo x squirrels (Sciurus 
niger ), and gopher tortoises ( Gopherus polyphemus) all

use the longleaf pine understory. The gopher tortoise is 
crucial to longleaf pine communities because at least 332 
other animal species use its burrows such as Florida mice 
(Podomy s floridanus ), indigo snakes ( Drymarchon 
couperi ), and gopher frogs ( Rana capito) (Jackson and 
Milstrey 1989; Franz 1984). The gopher tortoise is a 
species of special concern —declining through loss of 
habitat and lack of fire in existing habitats (Barlow 2 004). 
In one study higher densities were found in open areas 
with herbaceous ground cover and bare soil and much 
lower in areas of higher shade and shrub cover (Barlow 
2004). The red- cockaded woodpecker ( Picoides borealis) 
and the Bachman’s sparrow ( Aimophila aestivalis) are 
two of many federally listed species that inhabit the 
endangered longleaf pine -wiregrass ecosystem of the 
southeastern coastal plain (Noss et al. 1995). With 
changed fire regimes, other birds that frequent longleaf 
pine are declining su ch as the brown-headed nuthatch 
( Sitta pusilla ), loggerhead shrike ( Lanius ludovicianus), 
and eastern bluebird ( Sialia sialis) (Cox 1987 cited in 
Barlow 2004). Longleaf stands are also highly valued for 
wildlife habitat necessary for  bobwhite quail ( Colinus 
virginianus) . 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
 
 
Description  
General:  The tree grows up to 120 feet tall (37 meters) 
tall, with a rounded crown. The orange -brown trunk is 
straight, up to 30 inches (76 cm) in diameter and it has 
coarse, rectangular, scaly plates (Harlow and Harrar, 
1969). The leaves are 25 -40 cm. long and are  in threes 
that are persistent for 2 years (Gleason and Cronquist 
1991; Radford et al. 1968). Longleaf pine has a deep 
taproot and a definite grass stage (Kral 1993). The seed 
cones are solitary or paired  15 cm. long.  A heavy crop of 
pine cones bearing seed occurs at intervals of about every 
seven years and the seeds require two years to mature 
(Mattoon 1922).   
 
Distribution:  The forest grows from 0 -700 m and once 
occupied a belt extending through the Coastal Plain from 
extreme southern Virginia to the Everglades in Florida 
and west into Texas, originally covering about 92 million 
acres prior to European settlement (Shantz and  Zon 1924; 
Frost 1993). Though confined mostly to the Coastal Plain, 
longleaf can also be encountered in parts of the Pied mont, 
as well as  the southern foothills of the Appalachian 
Mountains (Earley 2004). When the Spanish arrived in 
the early 1500s, longleaf pine was the dominant tree over 
60 million acres of the Southeast, and it grew in mixtures 
with other pines and hardwoods on an additi onal 30 
million acres (Earley 2004).  Presently longleaf occupies  only 3.4 million acres (America’s Longleaf 2009). 
Longleaf pine communities have been reduced to about 
three percent of their original area, due to logging, 
turpentining, open range grazing by hogs and other 
livestock, fire suppression, clearing for agriculture, and 
urban development (Frost 1993). The longleaf pine forests 
of Texas an d Louisiana have declined by eighty- five 
percent  since 1935 (Bridges and Orzell 1989 cited in Noss 
et. al 19 95). Ninety- eight percent of the presettlemen t 
longleaf pine forests in the Southeastern Coastal P lain are 
gone (Noss et al. 1995). Longleaf pine forests of Florida 
have dwindled by eighty- eight percent (Kautz 1993 cited 
in Noss et al. 1995). Lawrence S. Ear ley (2004) estimates 
that the majority of old -growth longleaf pine forest is 
gone —with a mere 12,000 acres remaining in scattered 
stands.  
 
Habitat:  Longleaf pine grows in pure stands over large 
areas and has the ability to grow on poor, dry, and poorly 
dra ined soils (Mattoon 1922). It is found in dry sandy 
uplands, sandhills, savannas, wet flatwoods of the coastal 
plain from Virginia to Texas, as well as montane sites 
including dry, rocky ridgetop areas in Alabama and 
Georgia (Estes 2006). The region experi ences from 40 to 
60 inches of rain a year.  
 
 
 
Adaptation  
Longleaf pine forests are adapted to the disturbances of 
fire and hurricanes and frequent low intensity burns are 
important in maintaining variable horizontal structure in 
this plant community (Lande rs et al 1995; Estes 2006). 
Longleaf pine is remarkably resistant to fire. It puts out an 
extensive root system following seed germination, 
enabling the seedling to sprout from its root collar if 
defoliated by fire (Carey 1992; Ware et al. 1993). The 
termi nal bud of the seedling is protected from the heat of 
grass fires by a rosette of long, green needles and older 
growth has a thick, fire -resistant bark (Watson 1940; 
Carey 1992). The large seeds germinate best on bare 
mineral soil—an effective way to creat e these conditions 
is through prescribed burning (Garren 1943 cited in 
Wagner 2003; Watson 1940).  
 
 
When the earliest explorers came into the southeastern 
United States, they commented on the wide spacing of 
longleaf pine trees. Early ecologists such as B. W. Wells 
marveled at the size of the old -growth trees, measuring a 
yard or more in basal diameter (Wells 1932 cited in 
Earley 2004). Euro -American accounts describe 
Southeastern Indian burning practices in the longleaf pine 
forests for many reasons such as  to facilitate hunting by 
opening the woods, encourage forage for wildlife, and 
control insects (Earley 2004; Lawson 1967).

Figur e 9:  Silvi cultural burning of longleaf in the grass stage.  
Photograph was taken by E. John Roger s. 
 
These fires were  frequent, every two to four years (Rogers 
2012). The time of year for most Indian- set fires was fall 
to winter (Ware et al. 1993). Together, lightning and 
Indian -set fires created the open forests that Europeans, 
such as William Bartram, observed in the So utheast. 
 
Many of the ecosystems where longleaf pine grows, such 
as the pine flatwood ecosystem, are fire dependent. Pine 
flatwoods have a fire frequency of every one to eight 
years (Behm 2003). Numerous studies demonstrate that 
prescribed burning can help  put cutover longleaf lands 
back into timber production without planting (Bruce and 
Bickford 1950). Longleaf pine grows best with low -
intensity fires spaced one to three  years apart (Kalisz et al. 
1986; Myers 1985 cited in Wagner 2003). Some research 
sugge sts that many longleaf pine sites have been replaced 
by hardwoods and other species of pines (Boyer 1990; 
Frost 1993; Myers and Peroni 1983). Many of these 
vegetation changes are in part a result of shifts in the fire 
regimes, likely due to a decrease in I ndian burning and 
lightning fire suppression.   
 
Establishment and Management  
Seeds of longleaf pine are the largest of the southern 
pines. They do not store well and are best planted in the 
fall after collection between October and November and 
test for se ed viability prior to planting.  Longleaf is 
mostly regenerated with bare  root or container seedlings.  
Best results are obtained with container seedlings, planted 
slightly  above ground level  when soil is moist between 
November and March. Planting rates va ry from 300 to 
900 per acre but the most commonly recommended rate is 
600- 700 per acre (Longleaf Pine Partnership Council  
2013).  Longleaf is very susceptible to competing 
vegetation.  Competing vegetation must be controlled 
either chemically or mechanical ly with seedlings planted 
in the center of a weed free area with a radius of at least 
15 inches (Longleaf Alliance  2009).  If there is a history 
of cultivation sub -soiling will be necessary to break up 
soi l compaction (Longleaf Alliance  2009).  Prescribed fire 
applied at an interval of 1 -3 years is necessary to exclude 
hardwood trees and shrubs and maintain a natural 
understory of grasses and forbs.  An occasional growing  season burn (April
-June) is necessary to reduce the 
number and vigor of hardwood sprou ts (Jose et. al.2006). 
If competing vegetation is not controlled ,  longleaf will 
remain in the “ grass stage” for up to 15 years,  rather than 
the mi nimum of 2 years (Jose et. al.  2006). Seedlings in 
the grass stage are capable of re- sprouting if damaged or 
top -k illed (Jose et. al.   2006).  Height growth can be rapid 
once seedlings emerge from the grass stage.  Young 
stands of longleaf tend to quickly develop a range of size 
classes reducing the risk of stagnation and the need for  
pre -commercial thinning (Bur ns 1983).    
 
Pests and Diseases  
The longleaf pine has two serious enemies —the hog and 
the brown spot needle disease ( Septoria acicola) which 
causes defoliation. Hogs root the seedlings up and can 
live on the stored food material in the roots. The needle 
disease is caused by a fungus which is often a very 
serious enemy of the young seedlings underneath a 
“rough” of dead grass. Burning the dead grass in winter at 
intervals of more than one year can control this disease  
(Chapman 1941; Greene 1931).  Longleaf pine is less 
susceptible to southern pine beetle , Dendroctonus 
frontalis , and pitch canker, Fusarium moniliforme var. 
subglutinans  than other southern pines.   
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.   Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected  Materials (and area 
of origin)  
This plant is available from native plant nurseries.  Select 
plants from seed collected from healthy vigorous local 
stands to maintain genetic diversity and integrity of 
ecotypes.  
 
References  
 
America’s Longleaf   2009.  Rangewide Conservation Plan for 
Longleaf Pine
. Regional Working Group for America’s 
Longleaf.  42 pp.  http://www.americaslongleaf.org/
  
Barlow, S.E. 2004. Vegetative characteristics of gopher 
tortoise ( Gopherus  polyphemus ) habitat on the Lower 
Suwannee National Wildlife Refuge: Implications for 
restoration and management of pine communities. 
Master's Thesis. University of Florida.  
Bartram,  W. 1996. William Bartram Travels and Other  Writings. Literary Classics of  the United States, Inc., New 
York, N.Y.

Boyer, W.D. 1990. Pinus palustris  Mill. Longleaf pine. Pages 
405- 412 In: Silvics of North America Volume 1. 
Conifers. USDA Forest Service Agriculture Handbook 
654.  
Bridges, E.L., and S.L. Orzell. 1989. Longleaf pi ne 
communities of the west Gulf coastal plain. Natural Areas 
Journal 9:246- 263. 
Burns, R. M., ed., 1983. Silvicultural Systems for the Mahor  Forest Types of the United States, pp. 153- 156.  W.D. 
Boyer and D.W. Peterson.  Ag. Handbook 445, USDA -
Forest Servi ce, Washington, 
DC.  http://www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/32974
  
Burns, R.M. and B.H. Honkala, 1990. Silvics of North 
America: Vol .  1.  Agriculture Handbook No. 654.  U.S. 
Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service, Washington, 
DC. 
http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/pubs/silvics_manual/tab
le_of_contents.htm    
Bushnell, D.L., Jr. 1909. The Choctaw of Bayou Lacomb, St. 
Tammany Parish, Louisiana. Bureau of American 
Ethnology Bulletin, Number 48. Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, D.C.  
Carey, J.H. 1992. Pinus palustris  In: Fire Effects Information 
System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mounta in Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory. Available at : 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  
Catesby, M. 1731 -1743. The Natural History of Carolina, 
Florida, and Bahama Islands. 2 Vols. London.  
Chapman, H.H. 1941. Controlled burning correspondence.  Journal of Forestry 39:888- 890. 
Cox, J. 1987. The breeding bird survey in Florida: 1969- 1983. Fla. Field Nat. 15:29- 56. 
Delcourt, P.A., H.R. Delcourt. D.F. Morse, and P.A. Morse. 
1993. History, evolution, and organization of vegetation 
and human culture. Pages 47 -79 In: Biodiversity of the 
Southeastern United States Lowland Terrestrial 
Communities. W.H. Martin, S.G. Boyce, and A.C. 
Echternacht (eds.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York, 
N.Y.  
Earley, L.S. 2004. Looking for Longleaf: The Fall and Rise  of an Ameri can Forest. The University of North Carolina 
Press, Chapel Hill.  
Estes, B.L. 2006. Impact of Interacting Disturbances on  Longleaf Pine Communities. Ph.D. Dissertation. School 
of Forestry and Wildlife Sciences. Auburn University. 
Auburn, Alabama.  
Franz, R. 1984. The Florida gopher frog and the Florida pine  snake as burrow associates of the gopher tortoise in 
northern Florida. Pages 16 -20 in: The Gopher Tortoise 
and its Community. D.R. Jackson and R.J. Bryant (eds.). 
Florida State Museum, University of Florid a, Gainesville. 
Frost, C.C. 1993. Four centuries of changing landscape  patterns in the longleaf pine ecosystem.  Pages 17 -44 in: 
Proceedings, 18
th  Tall Timbers Fire Ecology 
Conference—The  Longleaf Pine Ecosystem: Ecology, 
Restoration and Management, S.M. Hermann (ed.). Tall 
Timbers Research Station, Tallahassee, Fla.  
Garren, K.H. 1943. Effects of fire on vegetation of the  Southeastern United States. Botanical Review 9:617 -654.   Gettys, M. 1
979. Basketry of the Eastern United States. Self -
published.  
Gleason, H.A. and A. Cronquist. 1991. Manual of Vascular  Plants of Northeastern United States and Adjacent 
Canada. Second Edition. The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx.  
Greene, S.W. 1931. The forest that fire made. American  Forests 37:583- 84. 
Hammel, W.C. 1917. Pine -needle Basketry in Schools. 
Department of Interior Bureau of Education Bulletin 
1917, No. 3. Greensboro, N.C.  
Harlow, W.M.   and E.S. Harrar  1969.  Textbook of 
Dendrology.   McGraw -Hill,  Fifth Ed. pp.81- 84. 
Jackson, D.R., and E.R. Milstrey. 1989. The fauna of gopher  tortoise burrows. In Proceedings of the Gopher Tortoise 
Relocation Symposium. J.E. Diemer  D.R. Jackson, J.L. 
Landers, J.N. Layne, and D.A. Wood (eds.). Florida 
Game and Fresh W ater Fish Commission, Tallahassee.  
Jose, S., E.J. Jokela and D.L. Miller, ed., 2006.   The Longleaf 
Pine Ecosystem: Ecology, Silviculture, and Restoration .  
Springer.  438 pp.  
Kalisz, P.J., A.W. Dorian, and E.L. Stone. 1986. Prehistoric 
land -use and the dis tribution of longleaf pine on the Ocala 
National Forest, Florida: an interdisciplinary synthesis. 
Florida Anthropologist 39(3):183- 193. 
Kautz, R.S. 1993. Trends in Florida wildlife habitat 1936- 87. 
Florida Scientist 1:7 -24.  
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, and  G.A. Stokes. 1987. The 
Historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana From 1542 to the 
Present. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.  
Kral, R. 1993. Pinus Linnaeus, Sp. Pages 373- 398 in: Flora of 
North America Vol. 2: Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms. 
Flora of  North America Editorial Committee (ed.). 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Landers, J.L., D.H. Van Lear, and W.D. Boyer. 1995. The  longleaf pine forests of the Southeast: requiem or 
renaissance? Journal of Forestry 93: 39 -44.   
Lang, E. Mrs. 1926. Basketry Weaving and Design. Charles  Scribner’s Sons. New York, N.Y.  Longleaf Alliance   
2009.  Longleaf Academy: Longleaf 
101.   http://www.longleafalliance.org/academy/overview
 .  
Lawson, J. 1967. A Ne w Voyage to Carolina. University of 
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. Reprint. Original 
published in 1709.  
Longleaf Pine Partnership  Council  2013, in press.  Longl eaf 
Planting Density White 
Paper.  http://www.americaslongleaf.org/whosinvolved/pa
rtnership-council/ 
Mattoon, W.R. 1922. Longleaf pine. U.S.D.A. Bulletin 1061.  
Minno, M.C. 1995. Definitive destination: Ocala Nat ional 
Forest, Florida. American Butterflies 3(4):4 -11.  
Mooney, J. 1932. The Swimmer manuscript: Cherokee sacred  formulas and medicinal prescriptions. F.M. Olbrechts 
(ed.) Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American 
Ethnology Bulletin 99. U.S. Government Pri nting Office, 
Washington, D.C.  
Myers, R.L. 1985. Fire and the dynamic relationship between  Florida  sand hill  and sand pine scrub vegetation. Bulletin 
of the Torrey Botanical Club 112(3):241- 252.

Myers, R.L. and P.A. Peroni. 1983. Approaches to  determining  aboriginal fire use and its impact on 
vegetation. Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America 
64(3):217- 18. 
Noss, R.F., E.T. LaRoe III, and J.M. Scott. 1995. Endangered  Ecosystems of the United States: A Preliminary 
Assessment of Loss and Degradation. Bi ological Report 
28. National Biological Service,  U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Washington, D.C.  
Porcher, M.D., F.P. 1991. Resources of the Southern Fields 
and Forests, Medical, Economical, and Agricultural. 
Reprinted by Norman Publishing, San Francisco  
(Originally published in 1863 by Evans & Cogswell, 
Charleston).  
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, and C. R. Bell. 1968. Manual of  the Vascular Flora of the Carolinas. The University of 
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.  
Rogers, E.J. 2012. Longleaf Pine Tree Usag e by American 
Indian Tribes of Louisiana: Pine Cones, Needles and 
Logs. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service 
Report.  
Shantz, H.L. and R. Zon. 1924. Natural vegetation. Atlas  of 
American Agriculture, Pt. 1, Sec. E. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.  
Simberloff, D. 1993. Species -area and fragmentation effects 
on old- growth forests: prospects for longleaf pine 
communities. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire 
Ecolo gy Conference, No. 18, the Longleaf Pine 
Ecosystem: Ecology, Restoration and Management. S.M. 
Hermann (ed.). Tall Timbers Research Station, 
Tallahassee, FL.  
Swantion, J.R. 1931. Source material for the social and  ceremonial life of the Choctaw Indians. Bur eau of 
American Ethnology Bulletin 103. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C. U.S. Government Printing 
Office.  
__________. 1946. The Indians of the Southeastern United  States. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American 
Ethnology Bulletin 137. United States Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  
Tappan, G. 1930. Louisiana Basketry. Extension Circular No.  136. Louisiana State University and Agricultural and 
Mechanical College. Division of Agricultural Extension, 
W.B. Mercier, Director.  
Turnbaugh, S. P. and W.A. Turnbaugh. 1986. Indian Baskets. 
Schiffer Publishing Ltd. West Chester, Pennsylvania.  
Wagner, G.E. 2003. Eastern woodlands anthropogenic  ecology. People and Plants in Ancient Eastern North 
America. P.E. Minnis (ed.). Smithsonian Books. 
Washingt on, D.C. 
Walker, W.B. 2004. Creek Confederacy before removal.  Pages 373 -392 in: Handbook of North American Indians 
Vol. 14. Southeast. R.D. Fogelson (Vol. ed.). Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C.  
 
  Wallace, D. and T. Ward
 2011.   Pine Straw  – A Profi table 
Agroforestry  Enterprise . Agroforestry Notes, AF Note -37, 
USDA National Agroforestry Center, Lincoln, 
NE. 
http://nac.unl.edu/documents/agroforestrynotes/an37f
f06.pdf   
Ward, T. , 2011.  Minimum Impact Pine Straw Raking.  
Forestry Technical Note.  USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, E. National Technology Support 
Center, Greensboro, NC.  
Ware, S., C. Frost, and P.D. Doerr. 1993. Southern mixed 
hardwood forest: the former l ongleaf pine forest. Pages 
447- 493 In: Biodiversity of the Southeastern United 
States Lowland Terrestrial Communities. W.H. Martin, 
S.G. Boyce, and A.C. Echternacht (eds.). John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. New York, N.Y.  
Watson, Jr., L. 1940. Controlled burning and  the management 
of longleaf pine. Journal of Forestry 38:44- 47.  
Wells, B.W. 1932. The Natural Gardens of North Carolina.  Reprint 2002. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill.  
 
       Prepared By: M. Kat Anderson, Ethnoecologist, U SDA 
NRCS National  Plants Team;  Tim Oakes USDA NRCS 
Liaison -Conservation Pro gram Analyst to the Mississippi 
Band of
 Choctaw Indians and E. John Rogers, District 
Conservationist Sabine SWCD, Many, LA.  
  Citation  
Anderson, M.K., T. Oakes, and E.J. Rogers 2012. Plant 
G uide for Longleaf Pine ( Pinus palustris P. Mill.) . 
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, National 
Plants Team. Davis, CA 95616.  
 
Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to thank Mark Garland, Ramona 
Garner,  Garry Stephens  and Thomas Ward for editing  of 
this Plant Guide and to Beverly Moseley for her photo 
contributions. Appreciation is expressed to the Shields 
Library at UC Davis for use of its vast library collections 
and interlibrary loan services to find limited and obscure 
library materials in bo ok, report, and microfilm form from 
many institutions across the country.   
 
Published : May 30, 2013  
 
Edited:  June 7, 2013  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.  
 
PLANTS  is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL O PPORTUNITY PROVIDER 
AND EMPLOYER