Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE SPRUCE 
Picea glauca (Moench) Voss 
Plant Symbol = PIGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Canada spruce, skunk spru ce, cat spruce, single 
spruce, western white spruce  (var.  albertiana, 
Canadian Rocky Mts.), Porsild spruce (var.  porsildii, 
Alaska), Black Hills spruce (var.  densata, South 
Dakota); synonyms:  Picea alba (Aiton) Link;  Picea 
canadensis (Miller) B.S.P.  
  
Uses 
The wood of white spruce is used primarily for 
pulpwood and lumber for various construction, 
prefab houses, mobile homes, furniture, boxes and 
crates, and pallets.  It also is used for house logs, 
musical instruments, and paddles.  Because of its 
wide geographic range and abundance, it is (de facto) 
highly significant for food and cover of many 
wildlife species, for soil stability, watershed value, 
and recreation.  It was historically important for food, 
shelter, medicine, fuel, and other uses by American 
Indians.  White spruce is  the provincial tree of 
Manitoba and the state tree of South Dakota.  White 
spruce is much used in some areas for Christmas 
trees and is a good ornamental and shade tree. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native trees grows 
to 25 (-50) meters tall, the crown broadly conic to 
spire-like, or the plants sometimes shrub-like near 
treeline; branches slightly drooping; twigs not 
pendent, slender, pinkish-brown, without hairs.  Bark 
is gray-brown, thin scaly.   Needles are evergreen, 
borne singly from all sides of the twig but often 
crowded on the upper side, (0.8-) 1.5-2 (-2.5) cm 
long, blue-green, 4-angled, often inwardly curved, 
stiff, sharp-pointed.  Seed cones are light brown at 
maturity, 2.5-6 (-8) cm long, ellipsoid, pendent; cone 
scales fan-shaped, soft an d flexible, the tip smooth-
edged and extending 0.5-3 mm beyond seed-wing 
impression.  The common name is derived from the 
white waxy layer on the foliage.   
 ©  Naturhistoriska riksmuseet @ Den Virtuella Floran 
 
Variation within the species : White spruce is highly 
variable over its range and several varieties (apart 
from the typical) have sometimes been recognized.   
   P. glauca  var. albertiana  (S. Brown) Sargent – 
Canadian Rocky Mountains 
   P. glauca  var. densata  Bailey – Black Hills of 
South Dakota and adjacent Wyoming 
   P. glauca  var. porsildii  Raup – Alaska  
 
The diagnostic characteristic s of these variants are 
not well correlated and occur rather sporadically – 
some of the features may reflect interspecific 
hybridization and some may be phenotypic 
modifications.  More study is needed, but recent 
taxonomic treatments do not formally recognize 
variants within white spruce.  Most of the variation 
follows gradients of latitude and altitude.   
 
Where they occur together, white spruce and 
Engelmann spruce regularly hybridize and intergrade 
completely, the hybrids occurring in intermediate 
elevation.  Such trees ar e largely the basis for the 
description of  P. glauca var. albertiana .  White 
spruce also forms natural hybrids with Sitka spruce 
and black spruce.     
 
Distribution 
Widespread across northern North America, from 
Alaska, Yukon, and British Columbia continuously 
eastward to Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, New 
Brunswick, and Québec, in  the northeastern United 
States and sporadically in  the northern tier of states 
(Montana, Wyoming, South Dakota, Minnesota, 
Wisconsin, Michigan).   For current distribution,

please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: In muskegs, bogs, and river banks, to 
montane slopes; at 0-1000 (-2100) meters elevation.  
White spruce is a dominant tree of interior forests in 
Canada and Alaska and often an early colonizer in 
succession.  White spruce co-occurs with black 
spruce ( Picea mariana ) over a wide range – the two 
species have evolved a complex competitive 
relationship (habitat partitioning) involving contrasts 
in water tolerance, vegeta tive reproduction, flowering 
times, and rate of early growth.   Picea glauca grows 
best on well-drained mineral soils with deep or no 
permafrost, while  P. mariana is more tolerant of sites 
with flooding, permafrost, and high soil acidity.   
 
Planting : Cone crops have been reported for trees as 
young as 4 years, but seed production in quantity 
begins at age 30 or older for most natural stands.  
Good years of seed production may be 2-12 years 
apart.   
 
Germination under established or mature stands 
commonly occurs on a variety of seedbeds – 
particularly on rotted logs and moss beds, but 
exposed mineral soil after windthrow and floods is 
the best seedbed.  Large numbers of white spruce 
may become established immediately following 
disturbance.  Seedling growth  is greatest at full light 
intensity, but white spruce is capable of reproducing 
under mature stands of spruce and early succession 
tree species.   Because seedling and juvenile growth 
of white spruce is slower than its early successional 
associates, it remains in the understory for 50 to 70 
years.   
  
Trees 100-250 years old are common on good sites; 
older trees (250 to 300 years) are frequently found in 
areas protected from fire  and in relatively wet upland 
situations.  As in other species, maximum age 
appears to occur on stress sites at latitudinal or 
elevational treeline.  Trees 500-1000 years old are 
known from such sites.   
 
Management 
White spruce trees from very young to 200 or more 
years may show good growth after release resulting 
from natural causes or silvicultural treatment.  
 
Mature forests with white spruce are easily destroyed 
because of their high su sceptibility to fire.  The 
probability of elimination of this species increases 
with latitude because go od seed years become 
infrequent and seed quality poorer.  At relatively  short fire intervals (less th
an 40-50 years), the source 
of white spruce seed  can be eliminated.   
 
Delivery of seeds to seedbeds for germination may 
limit regeneration.  Squirrels may harvest as much as 
90 percent of the cone crop in Alaska.  Seed 
predation by insects and sm all mammals such as deer 
mice, red-backed and meadow voles, chipmunks, and 
shrews also can result in significant seed loss.    
 
Slow initial root growth makes young seedlings and 
transplants particularly susceptible to frost heaving. 
The severity of damage generally is greatest on fine-
textured and wet soils where water is adequate for ice 
crystal formation in the surface soil.  Defoliation by 
the spruce budworm and the western spruce 
budworm can cause mortality if defoliation continues 
for 2 or more years.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  The cu ltivar ‘Conica’ (dwarf 
Alberta spruce, or dwarf wh ite spruce) “is probably 
the best-known and most widely sold dwarf conifer 
in the United States (Dirr 1997).” 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Daubenmire, R. 1974.  Taxonomic and ecologic 
relationships between Picea glauca and Picea 
engelmannii .  Canad. J. Bot. 52:1545-1560.   
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr's hardy trees and shrubs: An 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.   
 
LaRoi, G.H. & J.R. Dugle 1968.   A systematic and 
genecological study of Picea glauca  and P. 
engelmannii, using paper chromatography of needle 
extracts.  Canad. J. Bot. 46:649-687.  
 
Little, E.L., Jr. & S.S. Pauley 1958.   A natural hybrid 
between black and white spruce in Minnesota . Amer. 
Midl. Naturalist 60:202-211.    
 
Naturhistoriska riksmuseet 1999.  Picea glauca .  IN:  
Den viruella floren .  Stockholm, Sweden.  
<http://linnaeus.nrm.se/flora/barr/pina/picea/picegla.h
tml>

Nienstaedt, H. & J.C. Zasada 1990.  Picea glauca.  
Pp. 204-226, IN R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.  
Silvics of North America . Volume 1.  Conifers.  
USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, 
Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Taylor, R.J. 1993.   Picea.  Pp. 369-373, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 05dec00; 13feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.