Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HOLLYLEAF CHERRY 
Prunus ilicifolia  (Nutt. ex 
Hook. & Arn.) D. Dietr. 
Plant Symbol = PRIL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Islay, yslay, evergreen cherry 
 
Warning : Hollyleaf cherry pits may be toxic when 
taken internally, without sufficient preparation.
 
Uses 
The name  islay, or yslay  is the Spanish version of the 
Salinan Native American name, “  slay”, and is the 
common name historically used by most Native 
Californian peoples to refer to the plant, the fruit, and 
the food made from the pits of  Prunus ilicifolia 
(Harrington 1944).  Don Pedro Fages, in his account 
of the Gaspar de Portolá expedition from Spain in 
1770, writes of the “good tamales” made from islay 
by the Salinan people (Fages 1937).  Hartweg (1848), 
in his report to the London Horticultural Society, 
remarks about the abundance of islay in the Santa 
Lucia Mountains and reports, “the kernel, after being 
roasted and made into gruel, is a favourite dish 
amongst the [Salinan].”   
 
 The fruits were eaten both fresh and dried. The thin, 
sweet flesh was eaten sparingly as it was purported to  upset the stomach if too much is consumed.  The thin 
pulp was welcome moisture for thirsty hunters.   The 
juice from the fruits was fermented and drunk.  The 
kernels within the large pits were particularly valued 
for food by many Native Californians.  In the past, 
for some tribes, the kernels within these wild cherry 
pits were second only to acorns in importance.  The 
fruit was usually hand picked from the trees. The 
fruits that were not consumed fresh were allowed to 
rot or sometimes placed in warm water in order to 
facilitate removal of pit.  The pits were then rubbed 
to remove any remaining pulp and skin before being 
spread out in the sun to dry.   When dry, the pits were 
cracked with a stone and the kernels removed.  The 
kernels contain hydrocyanic acid, a bitter tasting 
poisonous compound, which was removed by a 
leaching process prior to cooking.  The kernels, either 
left whole or pounded into 
a meal, were then leached 
in several changes of cold or warm water.  The 
ground meal was used as a base for soup and made 
into tortilla or tamale-like foods.   The whole kernels 
reportedly took several hours to cook.  Sometimes the 
kernels were roasted overnight in a grass-lined pit 
(Bocek 1984).   After cooking the kernels were 
mashed and made into cakes or balls. The finished 
cakes were served with meat or dipped into pinole.  
For an in-depth discussion of what is recorded about 
the differing preparations of islay by several Native 
Californian groups, see Timbrook (1982).  Prepared 
islay was considered a delicacy that was used for 
ceremonial offerings as well as offered as a 
welcoming gift for visitors.    
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © St. Mary’s College @ Calflora 
 
The Diegueño and the Cahuilla are among the tribes 
that treated colds and coughs with infusions made 
from hollyleaf cherry bark and roots (Almstedt 1977, 
Romero 1954).  During the spring and summer, while 
the sap of the tree was running the infusion was made 
from the bark.  During the winter, while the tree was 
dormant, the roots were used  for the infusion.   The 
Costanoan used the wood to make bows (Bocek 
1984).  The Tipai people of Baja California are 
among the few tribes that still gather islay today.    
 
Livestock :  The pits of hollyleaf cherry are poisonous 
to most livestock.  The leaves can also contain 
varying concentrations of hydrocyanic acid, which is 
poisonous to livestock.   
 
Wildlife :  Hollyleaf cherry is an excellent tree for 
encouraging wildlife into the garden.  The flowers 
attract bees.  The fruits are relished my many bird

species and the seeds are consumed by small 
mammals.  These birds and animals also help to 
disperse the seeds away from the parent plant.  In 
addition, many bird and animal species use the plants 
for cover as well as nesting places.  Hollyleaf cherry 
is an important browse species for bighorn sheep and 
California mule deer (McMurray 1990).  This is 
because it is still available long into the dry 
California summers when most other browse items 
are gone.   
 
Other :  Hollyleaf cherry is useful to control erosion 
and has been planted on steep, hillsides that are 
susceptible to erosion (McMurray 1990).  Hollyleaf 
cherry has been used to make holiday wreaths and 
decorations, especially in combination with the red-
berried branches of toyon ( Heteromeles arbutifolia), 
another native California plant that occurs in the 
same plant community.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Rose family (Rosaceae).  Hollyleaf cherry 
is a small, evergreen shrub or tree that is native to 
California.  The plants can reach 6 to 9 meters and 
are usually as broad as they are tall.  The bark is dark 
gray and smooth.  The twigs are grayish to reddish 
brown.  The many branches bear glossy dark green 
leaves that are lighter green beneath.  The leaves 
resemble holly leaves with serrated edges and tiny 
spines.   Leaves are 16 to 120 mm in length and 
alternately arranged.  Feathery blooms of flowers 
appear from March to May.  The white flowers grow 
on a raceme of several flowers with petals from 1 to 3 
mm long.   The stems of the individual flowers vary 
from 1 to 5 mm long.  The red to bluish-black cherry 
fruits ripen in September or October and are 12 to 
25mm in diameter.  A thin layer of sweet, fleshy pulp 
overlays a large smooth pit.   
 
Distribution : Hollyleaf cherry is native to western 
California.  It occurs in the mountains of the Coast 
Range from Napa County in the north to Baja in the 
south.  The subspecies  lyonni, is a tree to 15m whose 
native range is restricted to the Channel Islands off 
the coast of southern California.   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: These trees and shrubs grow in the moister 
areas of dry chaparral shrublands and foothill 
woodlands at elevations below 1600 meters.  They 
are often found in canyons and on north-facing 
slopes.   
 
Adaptation 
Hollyleaf cherry is adapted to fire and survives by 
resprouting from the root crown.   
 
Establishment 
Hollyleaf cherry grows best in full sun or part shade 
in an area with moderate moisture and course soil 
with good drainage.   The plants do not tolerate 
prolonged freezing.  In the best of conditions, the 
plants can reach up to 9 meters in height and make 
lovely specimens.  They ar e used as backgrounds and 
in screen plantings and ornamental hedges.  Hollyleaf 
cherry is easy to grow from seed and indeed, once the 
plant has established and reached the fruiting stage 
(about 2 to 3 years), the gardener will be provided 
with numerous volunteers.   Seeds are best sown 
directly into the ground, but they may be grown in 
gallon cans for transplanting later.  Use only fresh 
seed as the seeds do not store well and are reported to 
be viable for less than 9 months.   Plant several seeds 
in the prepared seedbed or gallon can.  The seeds 
should sprout within 20 to 40 days.  After sprouting, 
select one healthy seedling and remove the others by 
snipping them off with scissors so as not to disturb 
the roots.  Set container grown plants out once they 
have reached about 30 cm.  Do not leave the plants in 
cans longer as the roots will become coiled and not 
be able to develop correctly.   The seeds and 
seedlings may need to be  protected from rodents and 
other small mammals that will dig up the seeds and 
browse on the seedlings.  Water the plants regularly 
after planting and during the first season of 
establishment.    
 
Management 
Hollyleaf cherry does not require pruning unless it is 
serving as a short hedge.  In this case, it may be 
pruned once or twice per year.  The plants are neat all 
round and require very little care beyond an 
occasional summer irrigation.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Holly leaf cherry can suffer light damage from 
caterpillars and white flies.  It is resistant to oak root 
fungus.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Hollyleaf cherry is readily available from native plant 
nurseries.  It may also be obtained at California

Native Plant Society plant sales.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Almstedt, R.F.  1977.  Diegueño curing practices .  
San Diego Museum Paper No. 10.  Ballena Press,  
San Diego, CA.  38 pp.   
 
Bean, L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh (from the 
earth):  Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of 
plants.   Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian 
Reservation.  225 pp. 
Bocek, B.R.  1984.  Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.   
 
Brousseau, A. 1995.   Prunus ilicifolia.  St. Mary's 
College.  Digital Library Project, University of 
California, Berkeley.  Accessed 20 October 2001. 
 
Fages, P. 1937.   A historical, political, and natural 
description of California.  Translation by H.I. 
Priestley, University of  California Press, Berkeley, 
CA.  83 pp.   
 
Hartweg, T. 1848.   Journal of a mission to California 
in search of plants, Part IV.  Journal of the 
Horticultural Society of London, Vol. 3.  Pp. 217-
228.     
 
Harrington, J.P. 1944.   Indian words in southwest 
Spanish, exclusive  of proper nouns. Plateau.  Pp. 27-
40. 
 
Heizer, R.F. & A.B. Elsasser 1980.   The natural 
world of the California Indians .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, CA.  271 pp.   
 
Hickman, J.D., Editor 1993.   The Jepson manual:  
Higher plants of California.   University of California 
Press, Berkeley, CA.  1400 pp.     
 
Hoover, R.L. 1971.   Food plants of the California 
Indians .  Pacific Discovery Vol. 24, No. 3.  Pp.11-17. 
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
CA.  248 pp.   
 
Lenz, L.W. 1956.   Native plants for California 
gardens.   Abbey Garden Press, Pasadena, CA.  166 
pp.   
 
McMurrray, N.E. 1990.   Prunus ilicifolia. In: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory  
2001, May.    Fire Effects Information System , 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [20 October 
2001]. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
Munz P.A. & D.D. Keck  1963.   A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, CA.  1681 pp. 
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, NY.  425 pp. 
 
Romero, J.B. 1954.   The botanical lore of the 
California Indians.  Vantage Press, Inc., New York, 
NY.  82 pp. 
 
Schmidt, M. 1990.   Growing holly-leaved cherry 
(Prunus ilicifolia).    In B.M. Leitner, Editor. Native 
plants for your garden.  California Native Plant 
Society Special Pub. No.11.  California Native Plant 
Society, Sacramento, CA.  Pp. 81-82.   
 
Sparkman, P.S. 1908.   The culture of the Luiseño 
Indians.   University of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 8, No. 4. 
Pp. 187-234.   
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians Vol. 2:  Aborigin al uses of California’s 
indigenous plants.   Koeltz Scientific Books USA, 
Champaign, Illinois.  210 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. 1982.   Use of wild cherry pits as food 
by the California Indians .  Journal of Ethnobiology 
Vol. 2, No. 2.  Pp. 162-176.    
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o

Plant Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Edited: 09jan02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.