Plant Guide
 
WHITEBARK PINE 
Pinus albicaulis Engelm.  
Plant Symbol = PIAL  
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen , ID  
Whitebark pine  (left). Photo by Mar k W. Skinner , PLANTS 
Database ,  USDA- NRCS, 2011.   
Alternate Names  
None  
 
Status  
In 2011 the US DI Fish and Wildlife Service 
announced that listing  whitebark pine as threatened 
or endangered is warranted. However , higher priority 
actions precluded immediat e listing. Whitebark pine 
has been added to the candidate species list (USDI -
FWS, 2011).  
  Populations appear to be in decline throughout the 
species’ range of adaptation (Keane and others 2010). 
White pine blister rust 
(Cronartium ribicola) , an 
introduced fungal pathogen, and mountain pine beetle 
( Dendroctonus ponderosae ) are the greatest threats to 
this species. Infections continue to kill trees and 
reduce seed sources for reproduction. Climate change 
is also considered a threat to whitebark pine. Species 
not normally adapted to alpine areas at or near 
timberline are likely to spread to higher elevations 
with increases in temperatures. In Canada, the species 
is predicted to decline by 57% by 2100 (COSEWIC, 
2010).  
Fire suppression , resulting in fuel buildup over many 
years  followed by high intensity  wildfires is a major 
cause of mortality (USD I-FWS, 2011). Additionally, 
fire suppression has led to a shift in plant 
communities and a reduction in open habitat for 
whitebark pine germination. Sites previously subject 
to  relatively  frequent fires have become dominated 
by shade tolerant species, excluding whitebark pine.   
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Uses  
Whitebark pine  i ncreases biodiversity in alpine 
communities by perform ing several important  roles 
in  the  alpine ecosystems. As a pioneer species 
whitebark pines s tabilize loose soils after disturbance . 
The trees capture snow drifts  and create shade which 
slows snowmelt.   
 
Numerous  Native American tribes used the seed as a 
food source (Moerman, 1998).  
 
Whitebark pine seeds are eaten by Clark’s 
nutcrackers  (Nucifraga columbiana) and other birds 
and mammals.  Grizzly  bear (Ursus arctos horribilis) 
females, in the  Yellowstone  ecosystem utilize the 
energy -rich seed of whitebark pine to increase their 
fat reserves prior to  hibernation. The seeds are 
comprised of 21% carbohydrates, 21% protein, and 
52% fat, which is significantly more fat than most 
other bear food  sources. Female bears consume  more 
whitebark  pine seeds than males , and female grizzly 
bears that frequently made use of whitebark pine 
seeds reproduced at an earlier age and exhibited 
higher reproductive rates than females who

coat has been fairly successful, resul ting in 34 
percent germination (Hoff, 1980) . 
In areas with long -lasting snow  cover , whitebark 
pine trees reproduce by asexual layering. Snow bends 
low flexible branches into the soil. The resulting 
stand is  a patch of krummholz trees.
 
Management  
Physical management (pruning) of whitepine blister 
rust infected trees has proven labor intensive and 
ineffective.  Efforts are being made to develop 
white bark pine trees with inherited resistance to 
white pine bliste r rust.  
 
Chemical control options for mountain pine beetle 
are limited. At present, there are no labeled pesticides 
for use on mountain pine beetle Due to high 
elevations and  remote locations, seeding , planting 
and restoration efforts are challenging.  
 
Pe sts and Potential Problems  
White pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have 
significantly decreased stands and populations of 
whitebark pine. Mountain pine beetles are native to 
western North America and are a natural component 
in  forest disturbance; however occasionally the 
beetles reach epidemic levels causing widespread 
mortality of pine trees.   
 
White pine blister rust is an introduced fungal agent 
( Cronartium ribicola). This rust  has affected all of 
the  western  5-needle pines  causing high rates of  
mortality . In areas of northwestern U.S. and 
southwestern Canada, white pine mortality caused by 
blister rust and mountain pine beetle exceeds 50%.  
Problems relating to white  pine blister rust ar e 
exacerbated as climates become warmer in higher 
elevations  due to climate change.  The combination of 
these  factors (fire suppression, white pine blister rust, 
climate change, and epidemic levels of mountain pine 
beetles) cause federal listing as threatened or 
endangered to be warranted (USDI -FWS, 2011).  
 
Several  other pathogens are known to infect 
whitebark pine; however these are not seen as major 
concerns. Stem infections, cankers, wood rots, molds 
and dwarf mistletoe ( Arceuthobium spp.) have been 
identified on whitebark pine.  
References  
COSEWIC. 2010. COSEWIC assessment on the 
status of whitebark pine ( Pinus albicaulis) in 
Canada. Committee on the Status of Endangered 
Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa , Ontario, Canada. 
54p.  
Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho. Brigham Young 
University Press. Provo, Utah. 835p.  Hoff, R. J
. 1980. Unpublished data on file at: USDA 
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Forestry Sciences 
Laboratory, Moscow, ID.  
Keane, R.E., Parsons, R.A. 2010. Management guide  to ecosystem restoration treatments: Whitebark 
pine fo rests of the northern Rocky Mountains, 
USA. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS -GTR -232. Fort 
Collins, CO: US Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 133p.  
Mattson, D. J.; Blanchard, B. M.; Knight, R. R. 1991.  Food habits of Yellowstone grizzly bears, 1977 -
1987. Canadian Journal of Zoology. 9:1619-
1629.  
McCaughey, W., and W. Schmidt. 1990.  Autecology 
of whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis Engelm.).  In: 
Proceedings -Whitebark pine Ecosystems: 
ecology and management of a high- mountain 
resource. Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT; 1989 March 29- 31. Gen. Tech. Rep. Ogden, 
UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station.  
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany.  Timber Press. 927 p.   
Perkins, D.L. and T.W. Swetnam. 1996. A  dendroecological assessment of whitebark pine 
in the Sawtooth -Salmon River region, Idaho. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 26: 2123-
2133.  
Pitel, J. A., and B. S. P. Wang . 1980. A preliminary 
study of dormancy in Pinus albicaulis seeds. 
Canadian Forestry Service, Bi -monthly Research 
Notes. Jan -Feb: 4 -5.   
Tomback, D.F., and Y.B. Linhart. 1990. The  evolution of bird -dispersed pines. Evolutionary 
Ecology  4: 185- 219. 
[USDA NRC S] USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. 2011. The PLANTS 
Database. URL: http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 
Nov. 28, 2011). Baton Rouge (LA): National 
Plant Data Center.  
USDI -F ish and  Wildlife Service. 2011. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plan ts; 12-month 
finding on a petition to list Pinus albicaulis  as 
endangered or threatened with critical habitat.  
In: Federal Register. 76( 138): 42631- 42654. 
 
Prepared By
 
Derek Tilley,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials  Center , 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
 
Loren St. John,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials  Center , 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS , Boise, Idaho

Citation 
Tilley, D., L.  St. John, and D. Ogle . 2011. Plant  guide 
for  whitebark pine  ( Pinus albicaulis ). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. Aberdeen , ID . 
Published  December 2011 
Edited:  19Dec2011djt;  28Nov2011ls;  
30Nov2011dgo; 18Jangm  
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ 
or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER