Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SEASHORE 
PASPALUM  
Paspalum vaginatum  Sw. 
Plant Symbol = PAVA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
None 
 
Uses  
Seashore paspalum is used as a forage food for cattle 
and horses.  It is grazed from March to November 
and the green stolons are eaten during the winter 
months.  It is also used by wild geese for feed.   
 
Paspalum vaginatum is used in commercial and 
residential landscaping.  This plant has been very 
successful for golf courses all around the world, 
especially in the coastal states and in other areas near 
brackish or high saline waters.  It is considerably 
more salt tolerant than other standard golf course turf 
so it can be irrigated with salt water, which saves an 
enormous amount of money used in the  desalinization of the water used for irrigation.  
Because seashore paspalum 
grows low to the ground,  
 
it has a high tolerance for traffic and wear. It grows 
rapidly which provides a thick turf and competes 
against weeds when maintained properly.    
 
Paspalum vaginatum  has other important uses such 
as erosion control, wetland restorations, and site 
reclamation on oil and gas well sites. 
 
 Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants ©  University of Florida
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Seashore 
paspalum is a native, warm season, creeping 
perennial.  Culms are erect, smooth at the nodes and 
range in heights of 1-7.9 dm.  Sheaths are glabrous, 
overlapping and scantily pubescent apically.  Blades 
range in lengths of 2.5–15 cm and in widths of 3 –8 
mm, which may be flat or folded inward length wise.  
Blades are mostly glabrous having a sparse amount 
of long hairs located on the top surface close to the 
base.  Ligules are 1-2 mm in length.  Racemes are 
usually in numbers of 2-3 and range in lengths of 1.1-
7.9 cm.  They are erect an d spreading at maturity.  
Axes are winged, smooth, 1-2 mm wide and have 
scabrous margins.  Spikelets are solitary, glabrous, 
elliptic to ovate-lanceolate, faint-stramineous in 
color, 3-4.5 mm long and 1.1-2 mm wide.  First 
glume seldom developed, usually absent.  The second 
glume and sterile lemma are 3-nerved with the nerves 
suppressed.   The fertile floret is comose and white in 
color.  The caryopsis is yellow and is approximately 
3 mm long.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation  
Seashore paspalum inhabits brackish sand areas and 
saline areas along the coasts that stretch from North 
Carolina down to Florida and over to Texas. It is 
found as far south as Argentina and in the warm 
regions of the Eastern Hemisphere. It is suited for 
compacted inorganic marsh soils of average salinity

and flourishes when water levels are fluctuated 
between 2 inches above the surface to 6 inches below 
the soil surface.  However, it can withstand more than 
2 inches of water above the soil surface during the 
winter season. 
 
Establishment  
It is propagated asexually using stolons and 
rhizomes.  Since seeds are seldom available, seashore 
paspalum is available in sprigs, plugs and sod.  
 
For optimum results, plant 3 bushels of sprigs per 
1000 square feet during late spring or summer.  It 
prefers a pH above 6.0 and should be mowed after 
the first 60-90 days after planting. 
 
Management  
In managing Seashore paspalum for forage, it is 
recommended that less th an 50% of the present 
year’s production by weight  be grazed.  In addition, a 
90-day suspension of grazing is implemented to 
improve the strength of the crop and to obtain a 
forage reserve.  Overgrazing is usually not a problem 
because this forage grow s flat on the ground.  
 
In managing Seashore paspalum for landscape or golf 
courses, a low level of Nitrogen, about 3 to 4 pounds 
per 1000 square feet per year, is recommended.  
Fertilizer should be applied during the fall to prevent 
scalping.  Studies have proven that it produces higher 
shoot densities when mowed at lower heights.  This 
in turn provides a better playing surface and an 
attractive appearance.    
 
Seashore paspalum is considered invasive to the 
Hapuna Golf Course in Hawaii where they are using 
Bermuda grasses.  Seashore paspalum is out-
competing their established Bermuda turf.  They will 
be conducting a three-year study on how to get 
seashore paspalum off their course.  
  
Seashore paspalum is vulnerable to insects, such as 
armyworms and webworms eating and damaging the 
foliage.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Although seeds are produced several times during the 
year, they are rarely viable.  SALAM and ADALYD 
(also known as EXCALIBRE) are varieties of 
seashore paspalum, which are used on golf courses 
located around the world.  SALAM is glossy on the 
bottom side of the leaf, which allows the courses to 
be mowed and have a striped appearance. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allen, C.M. 1992.  Grasses of Louisiana. 2nd ed.  
Cajun Prairie Habitat Pres ervation Society, Monroe, 
Louisiana.  230 p. 
 
Duble, R.L.  1999.   Seashore paspalum.  Texas Agr. 
Extension Service.  The Texas A&M University 
System, College Station, Texas. <http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/plantanswers/turf/publications/
seashore.html> 
 
Environmental Turf Solutions, Inc. 1999.   Products 
and Services—Seashore Paspalum.  
<http://www.etsturf.com/products.html> 
 
Hawaii Golf Course Superintendents Association 
1999.   Hawaii golf course superintendents 
association news .  <http://www.hawaii-
golf.com/hgcsa.html> 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the Grasses of the 
United States .  2nd ed.  (revised by Agnes Chases.) 
U.S. Dept. of Agr. Misc. Publ. 200.  603 p. 
 
Leithead, H. L., L. L. Yarlett, & T. N. Shiflet 1971.  
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states .   
U.S. Dept. Agr. Handbook No. 389.  143 p. 
 
Seeds West 1999.   Warm season turfgrass infosheet .  
<http://www.seedswest.com/infoshet.htm> 
 
University of Florida 1999. Aquatic, wetland and 
invasive plant particulars and photographs .  Center 
for Aquatic and Invasive Plants, Gainesville, Florida.  
29nov2000.  <http://plants.ifas.ufl.edu/pasvag.html> 
 
Woerner Sports Turf International 1999.   SALAM – 
seashore paspalum .  Brookfield, Georgia.  
<http://woernersports.com/salam.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Marya Gates  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Lousiana State University, Agricultural Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana

Edited: 18jan01 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 10aug03jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.