Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RUSSIAN WILDRYE 
Psathyrostachys junceus 
(Fisch.) Nevski 
Plant Symbol = PSJU3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 ‘Bozoisky Select’ Russian Wildrye Courtesy of Larry Holzworth 
 
Alternate Names 
Elymus junceus (Fisch.) ELJU 
Leymostachys korovinii Tzvelev LEKO 
 
Uses 
Russian wildrye is one of the most versatile forage 
grasses available for drylan d pastures. Its forage can 
be utilized during all seasons, and when cured, 
retains a higher protein percentage than wheatgrasses. 
 
Use for Hay : Russian wildrye is not well suited to 
hay production. Most of the growth and production is 
from basal leaves, which are difficult to pick up with 
harvesting equipment. 
 
 
Use for Pasture : This grass is best adapted for use as 
pasture in dry areas. It is as long-lived as crested 
wheatgrass. Russian wildrye begins spring growth a 
little later than crested wheatgrass. It continues 
growth and stays greener longer into the summer than 
crested wheatgrass. The forage is very palatable. It 
has a longer growing period than most dryland 
grasses. Russian wildrye has the ability to cure later 
in the growing season with good protein levels. This 
allows for a long grazing season. It is generally 
recommended for late summer through winter 
grazing. It is tolerant of grazing and regrows quickly 
after clipping lending itself to use as irrigated as well 
as dryland pasture. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Russian wildrye 
gradually develops into stands with fairly wide 
spaced plants. It therefore is not considered the best 
choice for erosion control for either wind or water 
erosion objectives. In low  rainfall areas, Russian 
wildrye requires wide spaced rows (18 inches or 
greater) to be productive. It is very competitive with 
weeds once established. 
 
Salinity : Russian wildrye has good tolerance to 
salinity. It is a species of choice in low rainfall saline 
areas with moderate to well drained soils. 
 
Wildlife : Russian wildrye is highly palatable to 
wildlife, especially deer,  elk and antelope. It is 
generally utilized by wildlife in late summer through 
winter. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for status, such as 
state noxious status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Russian wildrye is a large,  cool-season, introduced, 
long-lived, perennial bunch grass. It has an 
abundance of long, dense,  basal leaves that are from 
6 to 18 inches long and up to ¼ inch in width. Plants 
vary from light to dark green, with many shades of 
blue-green. 
 
The erect, leafless reproductive stems are about 30 to 
40 inches tall. The seedhead is a short dense, erect 
spike with two or more short-awned spikelets 
clustered at axis joints. The seed shatters readily at

maturity. The seed is about the same size as crested 
wheatgrass seed. 
 
 
             
 
 
The roots are fibrous and may establish to a depth of 
6 to 8 feet. However, about 75 percent of the roots 
are in the surface 6 to 24 inches. Russian wildrye 
roots have an extended horizontal spread and may 
draw heavily on soil moisture for a distance of up to 
4 to 5 feet. Its long season of growth and its vigorous 
soil-feeding habit make this species an excellent 
competitor with weeds once the grass is well 
established. 
 
Distribution 
This species was introduced from Siberia. For current 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Russian wildrye can be grown successfully wherever 
crested wheatgrass is grow n, but it is primarily a 
dryland pasture grass adapted to 8 to 16 inch annual 
precipitation areas. 
 
Russian wildrye is well adapted to silt loam to heavy 
clay soils. It can be grown on a fairly wide range of 
soil types, but is most productive on fertile loam 
soils. It does poorly on soils with low fertility. It is 
more difficult to establish on sandy soils in dry areas 
than crested wheatgrass, but once established does 
very well. 
 
It grows at elevations up to 7,500 feet in northern 
latitudes and to 9,000 feet in southern latitudes. Wide 
row spacing plantings (18 to 36 inch) produce more 
forage than narrow row spacing (6 to 14 inch) 
plantings. 
 
It is exceptionally cold and drought tolerant and has 
moderate tolerance of salinity and sodic to saline-
sodic soil conditions. Its production is affected 
beginning at electrical conductivity (EC) levels of 12.  
This grass is not tolerant of spring flooding or high 
water tables.    
 
Establishment       
Russian wildrye requires special attention during the 
year it is seeded because it is  difficult to establish. It 
must be planted in a firm , weed-free seedbed at ¼ 
inch depth or less. Wide row spacing plantings, 18 
inches or greater, are recommended. The 
recommended seeding rate at this spacing is 4 pounds 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  
 
Seedlings are slow growing and weak requiring more 
time to establish a stand. The plants should be 
allowed to mature and set seed before they are 
grazed. Stands generally develop into widely spaced 
plants over time. 
Russian wildrye spikelet Russian wildrye seed 
 
Stands are often open because Russian wildrye is 
usually seeded with wide  row spacing, leaving the 
soil between plants susceptible to erosion. It should 
be planted on the contour where slopes are greater 
than 2 percent or may not be desirable at all where 
erosion control is the mo st important objective. 
Forage yields are similar to those of crested 
wheatgrass. Wide row spacing increases forage 
production. 
 
Forage yields are also incr eased by seeding mixtures 
with legumes. Seeding the legume in alternate rows 
or cross-seeded rows decreases competition from 
Russian wildrye and optimizes forage quality and 
yield. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
‘Bozoisky-Select’ Russian wildrye 
Bridger PMC – Salinity Study Mark Majerus  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Russian wildrye is long-lived and spreads via seed. It 
is not considered "weedy" or an invasive species.

Most established stands do not spread beyond 
original plantings. It is not known to hybridize with 
native species. 
 
It is subject to attack by grasshoppers, cutworms and 
other insects, but no troublesome diseases have been 
noted. 
 
Properly established and managed stands of Russian 
wildrye generally exclude weeds and native grasses 
and forbs. Some native shrubs such as big sagebrush 
and rabbitbrush can invade Russian wildrye stands if 
seed sources are nearby. 
 
  
 
 
Management 
Russian wildrye begins growth in the spring a little 
later than crested wheatgrass and should not be 
grazed as early. However, fall regrowth of Russian 
wildrye is better than crested wheatgrass. 
 
Russian wildrye is very tolerant of grazing and 
regrows quickly after grazing. Although grazing can 
occur from spring to winter, it is best to graze this 
grass lightly in the spring, if at all, and save most 
growth for late summer to fall to winter when other 
grasses are less productive or low in forage quality. 
Stands can be injured from extensive use by livestock 
and wildlife in early spring. Grazing should be 
carefully managed to avoid over utilization. 
 
It remains palatable and of adequate nutritive quality 
for mature stock on winter maintenance rations. It is 
palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife. It is 
high in protein and retains higher protein content than 
most grasses after maturity. Protein levels of 5 to 7 
percent can be expected in late fall through winter. 
Because of its high palatability, competitiveness with 
other vegetation as well as itself, it is recommended 
for planting in pure stands and fenced for better 
utilization. 
 
As a pasture grass, it recovers rapidly after grazing if 
soil moisture is available. Because of this 
characteristic, it has been used for irrigated pasture in 
rotational grazing systems. 
 
It responds very well to applications of fertilizer and 
also to supplemental irrigation. 
 
Because of its high digestibility and long season of 
use, Russian wildrye is unique among the semi-arid 
cool season grasses. In  comparison trials with 
domestic sheep, Russian wildrye had a digestibility 
coefficient of 60.2 percen t while crested wheatgrass 
had a coefficient of 45.1 pe rcent. Its yield of forage 
per acre may not be as great as other adapted grasses, 
but high digestibility and its extended season of 
growth are compensating factors for livestock use. 
 
In studies using protein supplements in the fall with 
yearling cattle at the Lee A. Sharp Experimental 
Area, Idaho by the University of Idaho, yearlings 
benefited from supplements when grazing crested 
wheatgrass, but not while grazing Russian wildrye. 
This study indicates that protein was not a limiting 
factor in fall while grazing Russian wildrye. 
 
Seed Production Alternate row planting with  Russian wildrye and alfalfa Larry Holzworth Seed production of Russian wildrye has been very 
successful under cultivated conditions. Row spacing 
of 36 inches-irrigated (seeding rate 3.0 pounds PLS 
per acre) to 48 inches-dryland (seeding rate 2.0 
pounds PLS per acre) are recommended. Cultivation 
will be needed for weed control and to maintain row 
culture.  
 
For seed production, Russian wildrye benefits from 
low levels of fertilization based on soil tests. Apply 
enough phosphorus fertilizer to last 3 years and 
incorporate into the soil. During establishment, apply 
approximately 30 pounds actual N (nitrogen) per acre 
on dryland plantings and 60 to 80 pounds actual N 
per acre on irrigated plantings for optimum stand 
establishment. On established stands apply at least 50 
pounds actual N per acre on dryland plantings and 60 
to 80 pounds actual N per acre on irrigated plantings 
each fall. 
 
The seed heads have moderate rates of shatter and 
require close scrutiny of maturing stands to determine 
optimum harvest date. Seed is generally harvested in 
late July. The preferred method of harvest is to swath 
field when seed is in the hard dough stage prior to 
shatter. Allow 2-3 days curing time in the windrow 
and then combine using a pickup attachment. Seed

must be dried immediately after combining (Moisture 
content: 12 percent bins and 15 percent sacks). 
 
Crop residues from seed fields must be removed after 
harvest to maintain plant health, plant vigor and good 
future seed yields. 
 
Seed production declines as stands get older. Seed 
fields are productive for at least four years. Average 
production of 100 to 200 pounds per acre can be 
expected under dryland conditions in 14- inch plus 
rainfall areas. Average production of 300 to 700 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions. Seed remains viable for at least ten years 
under good seed storage conditions. 
 
Releases 
Russian wildrye was introd uced from Siberia as a 
forage crop. It was first grown in nurseries near 
Mandan, North Dakota in 1927. Because of its erratic 
seed yields, it did not come into common use until 
the 1950s. 
 
The Russian wildrye cultivars that have performed 
the best in replicated plan tings in the Northern Great 
Plains and Intermountain West (Idaho, Montana, 
Nevada, North Dakota, Wyoming and Utah), are 
‘Bozoisky-Select’ and ‘Mankota’. 
 
‘Bozoisky-Select’ Russian  wildrye was selected by 
USDA ARS at Logan, Utah for improved seedling 
vigor and increased forage yield. It was released in 
1984 and has shown good seedling performance. 
Forage yields are about 123 percent of Vinall. 
Breeder seed is maintained by ARS in Logan, UT 
and Foundation seed is produced at the NRCS 
Bridger, MT PMC. 
 
‘Bozoisky II’ Russian wildrye was developed by 
USDA ARS at Logan, Utah  and selected for seedling 
vigor (emergence from a deep planting depth), seed 
mass, seed yield, vegetative vigor, total dry matter 
production and response to drought. It is a broad-
based 15 clone synthetic that is much broader than 
other Russian wildrye releas es. It was released in 
2004. Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained by 
USDA ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory 
in Logan, Utah. 
 
‘Cabree” Russian wildrye  was selected by Agr. 
Canada Research Station, Lethbridge, Alberta, 
Canada for its improved seed retention, resistance to 
powdery mildew, leaf rust and spot blotch. It was 
released in 1976. 
 
‘Mankota’ Russian wildrye  was selected by USDA 
ARS at Mandan, North Dakota for resistance to leaf 
spot and improved forage yields. Breeder seed is 
maintained by ARS in Mandan, ND and Foundation 
seed is produced at the  NRCS Bismarck, ND PMC. 
 
‘Mayak’ Russian wildrye was selected by Agr. 
Canada Research Station, Lethbridge, Alberta, 
Canada for its high forage and seed yields and 
resistance to leaf spot. It was released in 1971. 
‘Swift’ Russian wildrye was selected by Agr. Canada 
Research Station, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada for 
better seedling emergence and good resistance to leaf 
spot. It was released in 1978. 
‘Tetracan’ Russian wildrye was selected at Agr. 
Canada Research Station, Lethbridge, Alberta, 
Canada for its excellent seedling vigor, large seed 
size, and better seedling emergence from deeper 
seeding depths. It was released in 1988. 
 
‘Vinall’ Russian wildrye was selected by USDA ARS 
at Mandan, North Dakota. It  was the first released 
cultivar in 1960. It is no longer recommended and 
has been replaced by ‘Mankota’. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Prepared By 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA, NRCS, Boise, ID 
Loren St. John , Manager, Plant Materials Center, 
USDA, NRCS, Aberdeen, ID 
Jim Cornwell, Range Conservationist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, ID 
Larry Holzworth , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Bozeman, MT 
Mark Majerus, Manager, Plant Materials Center, 
USDA, NRCS, Bridger, MT 
Dwight Tober , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Bismarck, ND 
Dr. Kevin B. Jensen, USDA-ARS, Forage and Range 
Research Laboratory, USU, Logan, UT 
Dr. Ken Sanders, Rangeland Ecologist, University of 
Idaho, Twin Falls, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA, NRCS, Boise, ID  Edited: 28sept04dgo; 10sept04kbj; 13sept04lsj; 20sept04ks; 
21sept04jc; 22sept04lkh; 27sept 04dt; 28sept04mm; 12oct04rln; 
16feb05rln; 060803 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.