BLUEBUNCH 
WHEATGRASS
 
Pseudoroegneria spicata               
(Pursh)  A. Löve
 
Plant Symbol = PSSP6 
Common Names:  Bluebunch  wheatgrass    
Scientific Names:  Agropyron spicatum, Elytrigia 
spicata  
Description  
General : Grass Family (Poaceae). Bluebunch 
wheatgrass is a perennial native bunchgrass.  
Bluebunch wheatgrass is highly variable and grows to 
1.5 to 4 feet (0.4 to 1.2 m) tal l with seed spikes 3 to 8 
inches (76 to 200 mm) long.  The auricles are pointed and semi -clasping to nearly lacking.  Leaves are lax, cauline, flat to in -
rolled, 0.6 to 0.25 inches (4 to 6 mm) wide, and green to blue in color.  The sheath is generally glabrous.  Reproductive stems 
are erect, slender, and sometimes wiry with a wavy rachis.  The lemma awns range from being short to prominent and 
divergent except on the beardless type where the awn is lacking (Hitchcock 1950).   
Distribution :  Bluebunch wheatgr ass is common to the northern Great Pl ains, Northern Rocky Mountains and the 
Intermountain regions of the western United States.  It is a long -lived cool -season native grass with an extensive root system 
with strong tillers.  Bluebunch wheatgrass spreads b y seed; in high rainfall zones it may spread by short rhizomes (Anderton 
and Barkworth 2009).  For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
Adaptation  
Bluebunch wheatgrass does best on medium to coarse- textured soils, but can be found on heavy to medium to coarse -textured 
soils over 10 inches deep including fairly sandy sites.  It can be found on thin, rocky sites and on very steep slopes.  It w ill 
tolerate weakly saline conditions. It does not gr ow on highly acidic sites.  It is cold tolerant, moderately shade tolerant, and 
highly fire tolerant (USDA Forest Service 1996).  It is not tolerant of high water tables, poor drainage, and periods of 
extended inundation.  
Uses  
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife : Bluebunch wheatgr ass can be used for native hay production and will make nutritious feed, but 
is b etter suited to grazing use.  Bluebunch wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is preferred 
forage for cattle and horses year -r ound, but it is considered coarse in summer.   
It is preferred forage for sheep, elk, deer, and antelope in spring.  It is considered desired forage
 for elk in summer.  It is 
desirable forage for sheep in summer, desirable feed for sheep, elk, deer, and an telope in fall and desirable forage for sheep, 
elk, and deer in winter (Ogle and Brazee 2009).  In spring, the protein levels can be as high as 20 percent decreasing to abo ut 
4 percent protein as the forage matures and cures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 percent throughout the active 
growth period.    
 
Erosion control/reclamation: Bluebunch wheatgrass is very drought resistant, persistent and adapted to stabilization of 
disturbed soils.  It is very compatible with slower developing native specie s, such as thickspike wheatgrass (Elymus 
lanceolatus ), western wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum smithii), and needlegrass species ( Achnatherum spp.,  Nassella  spp., and 
Hesperostipa  spp.).  It does not compete well with aggressive introduced grasses.  Its drought tol erance, combined with 
extensive root systems and good seedling vigor, make this species ideal for reclamation in areas receiving 10 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  'Secar' and ‘Discovery’ compete well in areas as low as 8 inches annual rainfall.  They can be used in 
urban and low water use areas to stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and roadsides.  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

‘Discovery’ Snake River wheatgrass  was released in 2008. It was developed from four accessions that were found to have 
improved vigor in comparison to Secar .  These accessions were crossed and seed was harvested in bulk to generate 
Discovery.   Discovery was compared to Secar in seeded trials at two sites in the Intermountain Region and four sites in the 
Great Plains (Jones, 2008). Stand frequency of Discover y in the Intermountain locations for year 2 was 49.3% compared to 
27.4% for Secar.  Forage yield of Discovery for years 2 to 4 was 108.0% greater than Secar.  No significant differences were 
observed at the Great Plains locations.  Discovery was also compared to Secar in a transplanted trial at Millville, Utah where 
it produced 18% greater straw weight across two densities the summer after establishment. The populations used to generate 
Discovery trace to materials collected in Whitman and Asotin counties i n southeastern Washington and Idaho County in 
central Idaho.   
 
Breeder seed is maintained by the USDA -ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory, Logan, UT, and is available to 
growers through the Utah Crop Improvement Association for production of Foundati on, Registered, and Certified 
generations.     
 
'Secar'  is the first release of Snake River wheatgrass . It was released as a bluebunch wheatgrass, but cytological examination 
later determined it to be Snake River wheatgrass (Carlson and Barkworth 1997).  Th e collection site for Secar is along the 
Snake River Gorge near Lewiston, Idaho. The Idaho - Oregon-  Montana -Wyoming AES, Washington Agriculture Research 
Center, and Pullman Plant Materials C enter released Secar in 1980.  It is one of the most drought-toler ant native perennial 
grasses available and can survive down to 8 inches rainfall. It is a bunchgrass with fair to good seedling vigor and establis hes 
well under droughty conditions.  While Secar is considered to be highly drought tolerant as a mature plant,  drought often 
reduces the stand during establishment. 'Secar' is intended for use on rangeland to re -establishment of native -plant 
communities and for cropland retirement plantings.  Certified seed is available and Breeder seed is maintained by Pullman 
PM C. Foundation seed is available through the Washington State Crop Improvement Association (Alderson and Sharp 1994).  
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local  
land grant u niversity, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area.  
 
Literature Cited  
Anderton, L.K. and M.E. Barkworth (Eds.) 2009 Grasses  of the Intermountain Region. Intermountain Herbarium p 60. 
Alderson,  J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. USDA, SCS, 
Washington, D.C.  
Barkworth, M.E., L.K.Anderson, K.M. Capels, S. Long and M.B. Piep. 2007. Manual of grasses for North America.  
Intermountain Herbarium and Utah State University Press, Logan, Utah.  
Carlson, J.R. & M.E.Barkworth 1997.  Elymus wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with Pseudoroegneria spicata  (Triticeae, Poaceae) .  Phytologia 83:312- 330. 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L.  Reveal, & P. K. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain flora.  Vol. 6. The New 
York Botanical Garden. Columbia  University Press, New York, N ew York. 
Jones, T.A., 2008. Notice of Release of Discovery Snake River Wheatgrass.  USDA, ARS, Logan, Utah. 7 p. Hitchcock, A. S . 
1950.  Manual of the grasses of the United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
Jones, T.A., I.W. Mott. 2016.  Notice of release of Columbia germplasm of bluebunch wheatgrass . Native Plants Journal 17 
(1): 53 -58.  
Miller, R.P., J.M. Seufert, and M.R. Haferkamp.   1987.  The ecology and management of bluebunch wheatgrass  (Agropyron 
spicatum):  A review.  Oregon  Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 669. 
Ogle, D. and B. Brazee. 2009. Estimating Initial Stocking Rates. Idaho Range Technical Note No. 3. Appendix B.  USDA -
NRCS. Bo ise, Idaho.  
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information system .  Version: 000413. <http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory,  Missoula, Montana.  
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database . Version:  000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana.   
 
 
Citation  
Ogle, D.G., L. St John and T.A. Jones. 2010. Plant guide for bluebunch wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Idaho and Washington Plant Materials Program. Published