Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TWO-NEEDLE PINYON  
Pinus edulis  Engelm. 
Plant Symbol = PIED  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Pinyon, common pinyon, New Mexico pinyon, 
Colorado pinyon, mesa pinyon, two-leaf pinyon, nut 
pine, twoneedle pinyon.  Spanish spellings are piñon 
and piñón.   
 
Uses 
The edible nuts of pinyon  and are in demand because 
of their delicate flavor an d are probably the most 
commercially valuable product of the species.  
Pinyon ranks first among the native nut trees that are 
not also cultivated.  The nuts are commonly sold and 
eaten after roasting in the shell, but small quantities 
are sold raw.  They were  once a staple food of 
Southwestern Indians.  Local residents now harvest  quantities for the local and gourmet market, but they 
are in competition with many wild animals that also 
seek the nuts as food.   
 
Pinyon nuts are a preferred food for turkeys, pinyon 
jays, woodrats, bears, and ot
her wildlife, and they are 
a common food for deer, particularly during harsh 
winters with deep snows.  Pinyon-juniper woodlands 
provide habitat for a varied wildlife population, 
including mule deer, white-tailed deer, elk, desert 
cottontail, mountain cottontail, and wild turkey.   
 
 ©  James Manhart Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M Univ., Bioinformatics Working Group 
Poor growth form and small size of two-needle 
pinyon has limited its use for sawn products.  
Specialized woodworking  shops use the wood for 
novelties, and small sawmills produce mine timbers 
and railroad ties.  Two-needle pinyon has been used 
for pulping in the Southwest, but only to alleviate 
shortages of normally used mill-residue chips and 
pulpwood of other species.  It has been widely used 
for fuel since the pitchy wood has a higher heat value 
than any of its associates except the oaks and burns 
with a pleasing aroma.  It is also occasionally 
processed for charcoal.   
 
Pinyons have been cut fo r private and commercial 
use for Christmas trees.  These beautiful little trees 
are slow growing but should be more widely used for 
ornamental purposes.  Two-needle pinyon is the state 
tree of New Mexico.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native shrubs or 
trees growing 5-12(-21) mete rs tall, with a strongly 
tapering trunk, single-stemmed and tallest at higher 
elevations, multi-stemmed, bushy and sprawling on 
lower sites, the crown usually compact, rounded and 
spreading.  Bark is reddish-brown, shallowly and 
irregularly furrowed.  Needles are evergreen, 2 per 
bundle, less commonly 1 or 3, 2-4 cm long, 
upcurved, yellow-green to blue-green, mostly 2-3-
sided, all surfaces with pale stomatal bands, the 
margins smooth or finely toothed.  Seed cones about 
(3.5) 4(5) cm long at maturity, ovoid before opening, 
depressed-ovoid to nearly globose when open, short-
stalked to nearly sessile.  Seeds mostly ellipsoid to

obovoid 10-15 mm long, light brown, wingless.  The 
seeds rest in a deep depression on each cone scale 
and a flap of tissue holds th em in place, so the seeds 
are readily available to birds.  The common name 
represents a species of pinyon pine producing two 
needles per bundle.  The Spanish “piñon” refers to 
the large seed (pine in Spanish is “pino”).   
 
Variation within the species : the California outlier of 
two-needle pinyon has been considered a distinct 
species, California Pine ( Pinus californiarum) 
(Bailey 1987), or a population of 2-needled trees of 
single-leaf pinyon ( Pinus monophylla var. 
californiarum ).  Pinus edulis var. fallax  is seen by 
some to combine features of  P. edulis and P. 
monophylla  – but it has most recently been treated as 
part of other species ( P. californiarum subsp. fallax; 
P. monophylla  var. fallax ).  The differences in 
opinion regarding these species of pinyon pine are 
further reflected in the ob servation that even the 
typical form of  P. edulis has been treated as a variety 
of both P. monophylla  and P. cembroides.  Naturally 
occurring hybrids have been reported between two-
needle pinyon and single-leaf pinyon in several areas.   
 
Distribution 
Southwestern United States, in southern California 
(rare), the intermountain region (Wyoming, Utah, 
Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico), to western 
Oklahoma (rare) and western Texas, and south into 
Chihuahua, Mexico.  For cu rrent distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Dry mountain slopes, mesas, plateaus, 
growing scattered in open woodlands at 1200-2450 (-
2700) meters elevation, in pure stands, or commonly 
mixed with one or more of several species of juniper.  
Two-needle pinyon is one of the most slow-growing 
and drought-resistant species of pines, requiring only 
12-18 inches of rainfall a year, but it grows best on 
the higher, wetter sites, just below the zone of 
ponderosa pine.    
 
Planting : Trees may begin producing cones when 25 
years of age but produce significant quantities of seed 
only after reaching 75-100 years old.  Good seed 
crops occur every 4 to 7 years (on average) or more 
frequently on better sites, and cone bearing tends to 
be synchronous over large geographical areas.  
Germination is generally above 80%.   
 
A relationship of mutual benefit exists between two-
needle pinyon and four species of corvid birds: 
Clark’s nutcracker, Steller’s jay, scrub jay, and  pinyon jay.  These birds 
are the primary agents of 
dispersal of this pine, which provides a large portion 
of their diet and subsistence, but only the scrub jay 
and pinyon jay cache seed s in the pinyon-juniper 
zone and are responsible for its regeneration.   
 
Seed germination and establishment of the two-
needle pinyon are best in the shade of trees or shrubs 
and probably depend on an adequate moisture supply 
during the first summer.  Growth through all stages is 
extremely slow.  Dominant trees in a stand are often 
400 years old, and individuals 800-1000 years old 
have been found.   
 
Management 
Grazing pressure by sheep and goats greatly reduces 
the regenerative capacity of the two-needle pinyon, 
and huge areas of pinyon-juniper woodlands have 
been extensively cattle-grazed.  Range improvement 
practices to increase forage for wildlife and livestock 
have removed the trees over  large areas.  Woodland 
watersheds also have been mechanically cleared or 
chemically treated in the  past, but future treatments 
may be limited to specific areas, because the 
possibility of generally increasing water yield does 
not appear promising.   
 
Compared to pinyon pines, junipers have deeper root 
penetration and drought resistance and will dominate 
regeneration for up to 70 years after severe 
disturbance at a site.  If small junipers and pines 
survive a less severe disturbance, the site may be 
naturally reforested after 2-3 decades.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, D.K.  1987.  A study of Pinus subsection 
Cembroides 1: The single-needle pinyons of the 
Californias and the Great Basin .  Notes Roy. Bot. 
Gard. Edinburgh 44(2):275-310.   
 
Kral, R.  1993.   Pinus.  Pp. 373-398, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>

Ronco, F.P., Jr.  1990.  Pinus edulis.  Pp. 327-337, 
IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North 
America . Volume  1 .   Conifers .  USDA Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.