Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
SYCAMORE  
Platanus occidentalis L. 
Plant Symbol = PLOC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names  
Planetree, American pl anetree, buttonball tree  
 
Uses 
Industry: American sycamore is grown in short-
rotation plantations primarily for pulp and it also is 
used for rough lumber.  The heavy, close-grained 
wood is difficult to sp lit and work because of 
interlocking fibers.  It has been used for butcher's 
blocks, furniture, veneer and interior trim, boxes and 
crates, flooring, and particle and fiberboard.      
 
Conservation : American sycamore is a good planting 
where a large, fast-growing tree is desired.  Negative 
features are the relatively weak limbs (susceptible to 
wind and ice damage) and the large leaves that decay 
slowly after falling.  The huge size quickly attained 
by these trees is often underestimated.  The London 
planetree, Platanus hybrida Brot. (=  Platanus 
acerifolia  (Ait.) Willd.), is widely planted as a street 
tree, probably due to its disease resistance and 
tolerance of air pollution (American sycamore is 
susceptible to ozone damage).   The London plane is a  hybrid between American sycamore and oriental 
plane (
P. orientalis ) and perhaps includes a number 
of backcrosses.   
 
American sycamore is reco mmended for planting on 
all types of strip-mined land, and it is useful in 
rehabilitation of various sites with saturated soils.  It 
is often a natural early colonizer of disturbed sites 
such as old fields, spoil banks, streambanks degraded 
by channelization, and waterway disposal sites.   
 
 Oklahoma Biological Survey 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used sycamore for a 
variety of medicinal purposes, including cold and 
cough remedies, as well as dietary, dermatological, 
gynecological, respiratory, and gastrointestinal aids.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Planetree family (Platanaceae).  
Monoecious, native, deciduous trees with an open 
crown, among the largest of Eastern deciduous 
forests, reaching heights of 18-37 meters, and the 
greatest diameter of any te mperate hardwood tree -- 
the largest known range 3-4 meters d.b.h.; twigs zig-
zag, with only lateral buds, these completely covered 
by a single scale within the petiole base and not 
visible until after the petiole detachment; bark of 
upper trunk exfoliating in patches, leaving areas of 
inner bark exposed, a patchwork of browns, yellows, 
and greens against a background of white, the darker 
bark with age falling away in thin brittle sheets, 
exposing younger and lighter -colored bark.  Leaves 
are deciduous, alternate,  10-35 cm long, palmate-
veined and roughly star-shaped, with 3-5 sharp lobes, 
the blades often as broad or broader than they are 
long, truncate to cordate at  the base, on petioles to 12 
cm long; a leaf-like stipule at the petiole base is 
persistent during early growth.  Staminate and 
pistillate flowers in separate, tightly compacted, ball-
shaped clusters.  Fruit is single-seeded and 
indehiscent (an achene), 8-9 mm long, with a ring of 
bristles at the base, numerous achenes in a pendulous, 
ball-shaped fruiting head 2-5 cm in diameter, the 
individual achenes drifting in the wind if the head 
breaks up on the tree.  Common name apparently 
borrowed from the European sycamore maple ( Acer 
pseudoplatanus  L.), which has similar leaves. That

name in turn comes from the Middle Eastern 
sycomore fig, Ficus sycomorus  L., its specific epithet 
from the Greek “sykomoros,” mulberry.  
 
Variation within the species : geographic variation in 
sycamore is extensive, but variants are not currently 
formally recognized.   Platanus occidentalis var. 
glabrata and P. occidentalis  var. attenuata  are treated 
as synonyms of the typical expression.    
 
The similar London planetree (below) distinguished 
by the lobes of its larger leaves being somewhat 
longer and narrower (often longer than wide), the 
fruiting heads 1-2 on each stalk, and the bark often 
somewhat greener.    
 
Distribution 
American sycamore is widespread in the eastern 
United States, from Texas to Nebraska, Iowa, and 
Wisconsin and into southern Ontario, Canada; 
apparently extirpated in Maine.  It also occurs in the 
mountains of northeastern Mexico.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
It often is a pioneer on upland sites in the central part 
of its range, but it is primarily a species of 
bottomland and alluvial soils, also occurring on creek 
banks, mesic coves and lower slopes, on a wide range 
of soil types.  It is a ma jor pioneer species in the 
floodplains of large rivers and occurs on a variety of 
wet sites, including shallow swamps, sloughs, and 
wet river bottoms where soil is saturated 2-4 months 
during the growing season.  Water dispersal often 
results in seed deposition on muddy flats highly 
conducive to germination because seed dispersal 
occurs when water is receding after spring floods.  
American sycamore is most commonly found in 
mixture with sweetgum, bo xelder, silver and red 
maple, cottonwood, and willows.  It is found at 0-300 
(-750) meter elevation.      
 
American sycamore can tole rate weeks of flooding, 
even complete submersion of seedlings, provided that 
the water is aerated.  A significant portion of young 
sycamores can survive almost 2 months of 
continuously waterlogged soils during dormancy, but 
sycamore of various stages will die if the entire tree 
is inundated for more than two weeks during the 
growing season.  Saplings top-killed by flooding may 
resprout from the root crown.    
 
Flowers appear with the le aves in April-May or as 
early as late March in the South.  Fruits ripen 
September-October (-November), usually breaking  up and falling from the tree through the winter and 
into spring.   
  
Establishment 
Open-grown American sycamores usually begin 
flowering in 6-7 years.  Natural stands of sycamore 
usually produce appreciable numbers of seed at 
approximately 25 years; optimum seed production 
occurs from 50-200 years of
 age.  Good seed crops 
are produced every 1-2 years.  Sycamore seeds do not 
require any pretreatment for good germination.  They 
do not germinate well in heavy litter or in deep shade 
or in temperatures outside of 59-86 
o Fahrenheit (15-
30 o C.).   
 
Sycamore seedlings require direct sunlight for good 
growth and establishment, except perhaps on clay 
soil.  One-year-old seedlin gs may reach 10 feet, and 
sprouts may reach 25 feet.  The potentially great size 
of mature trees is correlated with exceptionally rapid 
growth, and maximum age probably does not exceed 
250 years, although Smith (1952) notes that 500-600 
may be the upper range.   
 
Management 
American sycamore can be regenerated from natural 
seed sources, by planting, or by stump and root 
sprouting.  On "silvicultural biomass farms" aimed at 
maximum fiber production, fertilization is usually 
necessary, especially with rotations shorter than 5 
years.  Sycamores in managed plantations 
interplanted with legumes or other nitrogen-fixing 
species were larger than control plants 6 years after 
establishment of the nitrogen fixers.  Sycamore has 
good coppice regeneration potential, although it has 
been reported that trees  died after two successive 
harvests.  A high percentage of stumps sprout, 
regardless of stump size or time of harvest, although 
larger and heavier sprouts are produced from dormant 
season cuts (vs. growing season).      
 
Significant diseases and insect problems occur in 
managed plantations and landscaping trees of 
American sycamore but are largely absent from 
natural stands.  Important problems include 
anthracnose and eastern mistletoe ( Phoradendron 
spp.).   
 
Prescribed fire is not recommended for bottomland 
forests in which sycamore occurs.  Bottomland fires 
usually move rapidly along the surface, consuming 
shrubs and herbs and usually killing saplings and 
seedlings of all species.  Larger trees suffer bark 
wounds that create points of entry for rots, stains, and 
insects.  Under extreme co nditions, large trees may

be killed outright.  Fire also reduces soil organic 
layers, leading to site degradation.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Elias, T.S. 1980.  The complete trees of North 
America: Field guide and natural history.  Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, New York. 
 
Kaul, R.B. 1997.   Platanaceae.  Pp. 358-361, IN: 
Flora of North America, North of Mexico .  Vol. 3.  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Oklahoma Biological Survey 2000.   Platanus 
occidentalis .  IN: Catalogue of woody plants of 
Oklahoma .  Norman, Oklahoma.  22sep2000. 
<http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/> 
 
Santamour, F.S. Jr. 1972 .  Interspecific hybridization 
in Platanus .  Forest Sci. 18: 236-239.    
 
Smith, N.F. 1952.   Trees of Michigan and the Upper 
Great Lakes .  Thunder Bay Press, Lansing, Michigan.   
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Platanus occidentalis .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler). The Fi re Effects Information 
System [Database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Wells, O.O. & R.C. Schmidtling 1990.   Platanus 
occidentalis .  Pp. 511-517, IN R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America .  Volume 2.   
Hardwoods .  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.