Plant Guide  
 
 
 
BULBOUS 
BLUEGRASS  
Poa bulbosa L. 
Plant Symbol = POBU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
 Dave Skinner, Pullman PMC 
 
Alternate Names  
Winter bluegrass 
 
Uses 
Cultural: Bulbous bluegrass is currently considered 
to be a weedy species, but was used in the mid 1900's 
as a grass for turf, pasture and erosion control.   
 
Grazing:   In early spring, when lush and green it is 
thought to be a desirable forage species.  However, it 
matures quickly and does not provide a significant 
amount of forage for livestock. 
 
Wildlife:   The bulblets of bulbous bluegrass contain 
high levels of starch and fat, and therefore are  attractive to rodents and birds (Locke & Burrill, 
1994).   
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web ( http://plants.usda.gov
) 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Bulbous bluegrass is often the first invading species 
on disturbed shallow soils that are moist during the 
winter and early spring (Locke & Burrill, 1994).   
 
The grass is known to move from marginal sites to 
nearby fields of crop and ha y.  It is easily controlled 
with early season cultivation using implements such 
as a spiketooth harrow or viber shanks and herbicides 
for grass control. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Bulbous bluegrass 
is an introduced, short-lived perennial cool-season 
grass.  It is the only grass known to have true bulbs 
(Halperin, 1933).  The bulbs are normally dormant 
from mid-May through early October.  When the 
weather begins to cool, leaves emerge from the bulbs.  
Growth is slow during the winter months, and by 
early March the plant is typically around 3 inches 
tall.  As weather becomes warmer, it grows to a 
height of 6 to 24 inches.  Leaf blades are narrow, flat 
or loosely rolled, with membranous ligules about 1/8 
inch long.  Few culms are produced per plant.  
Flowers are usually modified to bulblets with a dark 
purple base.  The panicle has a plume-like 
appearance from the long, slender lemma (some refer 
to them as bracts) attached to each bulblet.  The 
bulblets typically mature around early May, and soon 
after the grass senesces.  The bulblets produced 
within the inflorescences germinate after a period of 
dormancy lasting a few months up to 2 years.   
 
The formation of bulblets in bulbous bluegrass is a 
type of apomictic vivipary.  The lowermost floret of 
the spikelet usually has a developed lemma, but lacks 
a palea.  The lemmas of the second and third florets 
are long and leaf-like and are attached to a bulblet, 
which develops from the floral parts (Gould & Shaw, 
1983).   
 
Bulbous bluegrass reproduces primarily through 
asexual means in North  America (USDA, 1948;

Hitchcock, 1971; Gaines & Swan, 1972; Cronquist, 
1977).  However, it is believed to reproduce 
primarily through sexual means in its native habitat 
of Europe and mid East Asia (Youngner & McKell, 
1972).  This phenomenon may be explained by 
differences in climate.  Youngner (1960) conducted a 
study to determine the effects of day length and 
temperature on reproductive structures of bulbous 
bluegrass, and found high temperatures (70-80ºF) and 
long days (16 hrs.) following inflorescence initiation 
promoted seed production, whereas cool 
temperatures (68ºF or less) and short days (8 hrs.) 
promoted bulblet production.  Long days and cool 
temperatures or short days and high temperatures 
produced panicles with both seeds and bulblets.   
 
Sexual reproduction of bulbous bluegrass may occur 
more frequently in North America than originally 
expected.  Novak & Welfley (1997) used bulbous 
bluegrass to evaluate genetic diversity within and 
among populations of an introduced, vegetatively 
reproductive species, and found the diversity to be 
surprisingly high at both the species and population 
levels.  They concluded the diversity likely resulted 
from a combination of sexual reproduction, the 
autopolyploid nature of the species, and multiple 
introduction events.   
 
Bulbous bluegrass was introduced to North America 
accidentally, as a contamin ant of alfalfa and clover 
seed.  The grass was also introduced intentionally, for 
research purposes.  In 1906 the USDA Office of 
Foreign Plant Introduction received bulblets of 
bulbous bluegrass from Russia (Vinall & Westover, 
1928).  The bulblets were grown by the Arlington, 
VA Experimental Farm in 1907, 1908 and 1909, and 
at Pullman, WA in 1907.  At that time the grass was 
reported as having no particular promise, and the 
investigations soon ended.    
 
Bulbous bluegrass was re-evaluated in 1915 after the 
groundskeepers at the state  capitol in Richmond, VA 
asked the USDA for assistan ce identifying the grass 
and determining methods to eradicate it.  The 
groundskeepers considered the grass to be 
undesirable since it performed poorly in the summer 
months.  The USDA grew the grass in a greenhouse 
and determined the grass to be Poa bulbosa.   They 
advised the groundskeepers not to eradicate it, but 
instead manage it as winter grass in combination with 
Bermuda grass for the summer months (Vinall & 
Westover, 1928). 
 
In 1916 bulblets of the grass were distributed by the 
USDA to several experiment stations.  Commercial 
production of the grass followed, and in 1928,  Medford, OR was considered the center of 
production (Vinall & Westover, 1928).  During this 
time, bulbous bluegrass was used to compliment 
Bermuda grass in pastures and turf, but new 
evaluations were beginning to demonstrate the grass 
did not tolerate frequent clipping, and actually 
outcompeted Bermuda grass when both were grown 
together. 
 
Bulbous bluegrass was still thought to have value in 
1948, when it was recommended to replace 
cheatgrass on poor condition sites and as an 
understory species in seed mixtures in southern Idaho 
(Hull & Stewart, 1948). 
 
The Pullman Plant Materials Center (PMC) evaluated 
bulbous bluegrass for use in critical area plantings in 
the 1950's.  In 1956, P-4784 was released but the 
bulblets failed to retain acceptable levels of 
germination.  Consequently, P-4784 was not 
distributed to growers.   
 
As recently as 1997, the merits of bulbous bluegrass 
were still being considered, when it was included in a 
study to determine optimal species for low-input 
sustainable turf grass in the upper Midwest.  The 
grass performed poorly and was not recommended 
for this use (Diesburg, 1997).   
 
Distribution
: Bulbous bluegrass grows in nearly all 
temperate and subtropical  regions throughout the 
world.  In North America, it inhabits roadsides and 
hay and crop fields.  It tends to be more common in 
western states than eastern states.  
 
Adaptation 
Bulbous bluegrass is best adapted to areas that have 
dry summers, mild winters, and winter rainfall.  It is 
typically found within the 12" – 40" precipitation 
zones. 
 
Establishment 
This species is not recommended for seeding. 
 
Mechanical Control 
Spring tillage is very effective in controlling bulbous 
bluegrass.  Fall tillage is less effective.  Haying and 
mowing are not effective because the seed heads are 
frequently shorter than the cutting height.  Burning is 
not effective because it rarely reduces the number of 
bulblets in the soil. 
 
Environmental/Cul tural Control 
Infestations can be prevented by using crop seed, hay 
and straw that is free of bulbous bluegrass bulblets or 
seed.  In addition, cleaning equipment before moving

from a site infested with bulbous bluegrass and 
controlling weeds along fence rows and roadsides 
will prevent its spread. 
 
Within crop fields where bulbous bluegrass has 
established, it can be controlled by rotation with a 
spring crop or to permanent pasture or alfalfa.  In 
uncropped areas, bulbous bluegrass can be managed 
by establishing a stand of competitive perennial 
grass. 
 
Intensive spring grazing can reduce bulbous 
bluegrass populations providing that intensive 
grazing is applied over a period of several growing 
seasons.  Consult with the NRCS or a Certified 
Rangeland Management Specialist to determine if 
this practice could adversely impact other grazing 
plants and/or soil conditions. 
 
Chemical Control 
There is a wide range of chemicals available to 
control bulbous bluegrass.  Contact your local 
agricultural extension agent or county weed specialist 
to learn what products work  best in your area and 
how to use them properly.  Always read and follow 
label and safety instructions. 
 
Biological Control 
No biological controls are known. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials 
Including Area of Origin 
The Pullman Plant Materials Center (PMC) evaluated 
bulbous bluegrass for several years in the 1950's.  P-
4784, an ecotype collected near the Washington-
Idaho state line exhibited very robust late maturing 
growth.  It was released in 1956 in cooperation with 
the Idaho Agricultural Experiment Station.  The 
Pullman PMC grew P-4784 for several years but the 
bulblets failed to retain acceptable levels of 
germination.  Consequently, P-4784 was not 
distributed to growers.  All seed stock of P-4784 was 
destroyed in 1976 based on its poor seed storage 
characteristic and its weedy nature.  Currently no 
seed is commercially available. 
 
Illustrations and Photographs 
Burrill, L. C., et al.  1996.  Weeds of the West, 5
th 
ed., T.D. Whitson, editor.  University of Wyoming.  
Larimie, WY.  pp. 482-483. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Revcal, P.K. Holmgren.  1977.   Intermountain Flora, 
vol. 6.  Columbia University Press, New York. p. 
235.  
  Gaines, X.M. and D.G. Swan.  1972.  Weeds of 
Eastern Washington and Adjacent Areas.  C.W. Hill, 
Spokane, WA.  pp. 54-55. 
 
References 
Burrill, L. C., et al.  1996.  Weeds of the West, 5
th 
ed., T.D. Whitson, editor.  University of Wyoming.  
Larimie, WY.  pp.  482-483. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Revcal, P.K. Holmgren.  1977.   Intermountain Flora, 
vol. 6.  Columbia University Press, New York. pp. 
234-235.  
 
Diesburg, K.L., et al.  19 97.  Species for low-input 
sustainable turf in the U.S. upper Midwest.  Agron. J. 
89:690-694. 
 
Gaines, X.M. and D.G. Swan.  1972.  Weeds of 
Eastern Washington and Adjacent Areas.  C.W. Hill, 
Spokane, WA.  pp. 54-55. 
 
Gould, F.W. and R.B. Shaw.  1983.  Grass 
Systematics, 2
nd ed.  Texas A & M University Press, 
College Station, TX.  p. 82. 
 
Halperin, M.  1933.  The taxonomy and morphology 
of bulbous bluegrass,  Poa bulbosa vivipara.  J. Am. 
Soc. Agron. 25:408-413. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S.  1971.  Manual of the Grasses of the 
United States, 2
nd ed., vol. 1.  Dover Publications, 
New York.  p. 122. 
 
Hull, A.C. and G. Stewart.  1948.  Replacing 
cheatgrass by reseeding w ith perennial grass on 
southern Idaho ranges. J. Am. Soc. Agron. 40:694-
703. 
 
Locke, K. and L.C. Burrill.  1994.  Bulbous 
Bluegrass.  Pacific Northwest Extension Publication. 
 
Novak, S.J. and A.Y. Welfley.  1997.  Genetic 
diversity in the introduced clonal grass  Poa bulbosa 
(Bulbous bluegrass).  Northwest Sci. 71:271-280. 
 
United States Department of Agriculture.  1948.  The 
Yearbook of Agriculture:  Grass.  U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington D.C.  pp. 687 – 688.   
 
Vinall, H.N., and H.L. Westover.  1928.  Bulbous 
bluegrass,  Poa bulbosa .  J. Am. Soc. Agron. 20:394-
399. 
 
Youngner, V.B.  1960.  Environmental control of 
initiation of the inflorescence, reproductive structures

and proliferations in Poa bulbosa.  Am. J. Bot. 
47:753-757. 
   
Youngner, V.B. and C.M. McKell.  1972.  The 
Biology and Utilization of Grasses.  Academic Press, 
New York.  pp.  390-391. 
 
Prepared By:  
Pamela Scheinost,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Mark Stannard,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Dan Ogle,  USDA NRCS, Boise, ID 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Pamela Scheinost,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Edited: 072908 ps; 072908 ms; 073008 dgo; 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.