Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FROSTED MINT 
Poliomintha incana  (Torr.) 
Gray 
Plant Symbol = POIN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Rosemary mint, purple sage 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Comanche medicine women chewed 
the leaves of frosted mint  to sweeten the taste of 
other drugs.  The Hopi and Tewa used frosted mint to 
treat rheumatism and ear trouble.  They also used the 
flowers for flavoring in food preparation. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Mint Family (Labiatae).  Frosted mint is a 
shrub that reaches 5 dm in height and is very 
branched.  The branches are straight, slender, and 
erect.  The branches have a silvery color and a dense 
covering of small hairs.  The leaves are attached 
directly to the branches without a supporting stalk.  
The leaves are long and narrow with almost parallel 
sides (1-3 cm long).  The leaves are veinless and  covered with white, soft, wooly hairs.  The flowers 
grow in groups of 1 to 3 and are located below their 
axils.  The flowers are 6 to 7 mm long.  The calyx has 
15 simple veins, is oblong shaped, and covered with 
white, soft, shaggy hairs.  The calyx has conspicuous 
awl-shaped teeth.  The corollas are 1 to 1.4 cm long 
and have a lavender color with purple dots on the 
lower lip.  The tube of the corolla has long, soft, 
straight hairs in the form of a ring.  
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 © Ronald Martin Intermountain Wildflowers Southern Utah University 
 
Habitat: Frosted mint is found on eroded slopes and 
in sandy soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, frosted mint should not be prone to debilitating 
pests. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Colton, H.S. 1974.  Hopi history and ethnobotany .  
IN D.A. Horr (ed).  Hopi Indians.  Garland Press, 
New York, New York.  424 pp. 
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas.  1392 pp. 
 
Jones, D.E. 1968.   Comanche plant medicine .  Papers 
in Anthropology 9:1-13. 
 
Martin, R.E. et al. 2002.   Intermountain wildflowers .  
Southern Utah University, Cedar City, Utah.

<http://www.suu.edu/faculty/martin/utahwildflowers.
htm>.  Accessed: 30May2002. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999 .  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
 
Whiting, A.F. 1939.  Ethnobotany of the Hopi.  
Museum of Northern Arizona Bulletin #15. 120 pp. 
 
Prepared By:   
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 30May2002 jsp ; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.