Plant Guide
NARROWLEAF 
MOUNTAINMINT 
Pycnanthemum tenuifolium 
Schrad. 
Plant Symbol = PYTE 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May  Plant 
Materials Center   
 
Narrowleaf mountainmint  (Pycnanthemum tenuifolium) (Photo by, 
Jolie Dollar, Xerces Society  
 
Altern ate Name s 
Common Alternate Names:   
Virginia thyme  
slender mountain mint  
common horsemint  
 
Uses  
Wildlife Use : Pycnanthemum . tenuifolium  provides a 
nectar source for pollinators and is well suited for use 
in pollinator restoration habitat. Preliminary 
observ ation found that P. tenuifolium  attracted 20 
different species of Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera in 
Cape May, New Jersey. The sweat bees  
Lasioglossum vierecki , Halictus  confusus, and 
Halictus ligatus  were most frequently observed 
visiting the flower. Both  Lasioglossum  sp. and 
Halictus  confuses  in particular  are important 
pollinators of pepper , watermelon, strawberry, and 
tomato plants . 
 
Robertson (1928) collected 29 species of Lepidoptera 
from  P. tenuifolium  in Central Illinois. This  is one of 
the  greatest  numbers  of species to visit a flower from 
the 244 species of flowering plants in his study.  In 
Tooker et al.  (2006),  9 species of fly  were found on  P. tenuifolium; and 
Robertson (1929) captured  31 
species of fly.  
 
Deer  may browse the leaves and a variety of animals 
will eat the seeds. It  is reported that the seeds are too 
sma ll to attract birds (Hilty, 2012 ). 
 
Erosion Control : P. tenuifolium  s preads quickly 
through rhizomes and so would make  a good soil 
stabilizer.  
 
Ethnobotany  
P. tenuifolium  has been used in  herbal teas and by 
many native tribes as a seasoning in food to improve 
flavor. Members of the genus Pycnanthemum  were 
once referred to as American wild basil; so 
widespread was its use as a food additive (Austin and 
Honychurch, 2004).  
 
Status  
Please cons ult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) . 
 
Description  
General : P. tenuifolium  is a native, warm seas on, 
perennial forb that grows 2 –3 f t tall and spreads 
equally  wide. It is a member of the Lamiaceae (mint) 
family and the  crushed flowers or leaves emit a minty 
scent. Like other mints, it has a four angled stem and 
small opposite leaves. The stem is smoot h, without 
hairs, and is slender and stiff.  The plant has a taproot 
and rhizomes.  
 
The  pale green leaves are approximately 0 .1 5–0.6  in  
wide  and 0.5–2 in  long. They are smooth or minutely 
hairy on the uppermost leaves. The upper leaves are 
stalkless  while  the lowest leaves ha ve short stems. 
There are sho rt leafy branches in the axils.  
 
The plant has profuse clusters of small, tubular,  white 
flowers which bloom in the middle of summer; July 
through August.  The flower petals have an upper lip, 
and three -lobed  lower lip. C lusters stagger their 
bloom period over a long period of time. It is thought 
that pollinators prefer this species because the florets  
are tightly clustered, have short corolla tubes, and are 
white ( Tooker et al ., 2002).  
 
Distribution : The plant  grows from Canada south to 
Florida, west to Tex as, and northwest to Minnesota.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant

Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat : P. tenuifolium  grows in dry to medium wet 
soils and in full s un to partial shade. It is  found in 
rocky ground  in open prairies and upland  woods, as 
well as in low areas,  wet thickets, pine barrens, oak 
woods, and on the edges of wooded areas. Gleason 
and Cronquist (1963) observe that it is  most often 
found  in dry so ils of upland woods and prairies.  
 
The wetland indicator status of this plant is both 
facultative (FAC) and facultative wetland (FACW) 
depending on the region under consideration. 
Facultative species are equally likely to occur in 
wetlands as non -wetlands.  Facultative wetland plants 
usually occur in wetl ands (estimated probability 
67% –99%).  Please consult the PLANTS Web site to 
determine the wetland status for your region.  
 
Establishment  
P. tenuifolium should be  g row n in full sun in mo ist to 
slightly dry s oils. Although seeds are small and 
difficult to use, it can be propagated by seed. Seeds 
germinate without pretreatment. It may also be 
propagated by cuttings or division. Cuttings should 
be made in June and divisions should be done during 
dormancy (f rom late fall to early spring).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are n o major pests or problems known  for this 
plant, although i t may be vulnerable to rust.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
It forms colonies by spreading through rhizomes and 
can show aggressive growt h.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seeds  mature in late September and should be 
collected  when the black seeds can be shaken out of 
old blooms. The seeds do not have hairs but can still 
be easily carried by the wind. One  ounce  of seed 
contains roughly 375,000-  378,000  seeds. The seeds 
have  low protein content.  
 
References  
Austin, D.F., and  P.N. Honychurch. 2004. Florida 
ethnobotany. CRC Press. Boca Raton, FL. p. 
941.  
Carr, M.E. 1985. Plant species evaluated  for new 
crop potential. Econ. Bot . 39(3):336-345. 
Gle ason, H.A., and A. Cronquist. 1963. Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company. New York, NY.  
Hilty, J. 2012. Illinois wildflowers: Pycnanthemum 
tenuifolium (slender mountain mint).  http://www
.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_
plant=PYTE  (accessed 17 Apr.  2012).  
Missouri Botanic Garden. 2012. Pycnanthemum  tenuifolium (slender mountain mint)  
http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/gardens
- gardening/your -garden/plant -finder/plant -
details/kc/r690 /pycnanthemum -tenuifolium.aspx 
(accessed 17 Apr. 2012).  
Robertson, C. 1928. Flowers and insects: lists of  visitors of four hundred and fifty -three flowers. 
The Science Press Printing Company, Lancaster, 
PA.   
Stone, W. 1973.The plants of Southern New Jersey . 
Quarterman Publications, Inc. Boston, Mass.  
The University of Texas at Austin Wildflower  Center.  2012. Pycnanthemum tenuifolium  
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_
plant=PYTE  (accessed 17 Ap r. 2012).  Native 
Plant Database, Austin, Texas.  
Tooker, J.F., M. Hauser, and L. M. Hanks. 2006.  Floral host plants of Syrphidae and Tachinidae 
(Diptera) of Central Illinois. Ann. Entomol. Soc. 
AM. 99 (1): 96- 112. 
Tooker, J.F., P. F. Reagel , and L.M. Hanks. 2002. 
Nectar s ources of day -flying Lepidopt era of 
C entral Illinois. Anal. Entomol. Soc. of Am. , 95 
(1): 84 -96.   
Toupal, R.S. 2006. An ethnobotany of Indiana Dunes  National Lakeshore: A baseline study 
emphasizing plant relationships of the Miami 
and Potawatomi Peoples . Bureau of Applied 
Research in Anthropo logy. University of 
Arizona. 
http://www.csu.edu/cerc/documents/Ethnobotany
INDunesNationalLakeshore2006.pdf  (accessed 
17 Apr. 2012)   
 
Prepared By : Christopher M. Sheahan. USDA -
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, 
NJ.  
 
Citation:  Sheahan, C.M. 201 2. Plant guide for 
narrowleaf mountainmint ( Pycnanthemum. 
tenuifolium ). USDA-NRCS, Cape May Plant 
Materials Center. Cape May, NJ.   
 
Edited:   
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation Dist rict at  
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Mate rials Program Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER