Plant Guide

VIRGINIA CREEPER

Parthenocissus quinquefolia 
(L.) Planch. 
Plant Symbol = PAQU2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Warning: Virginia creeper berries are highly toxic 
to humans and may be fatal if eaten. Its sap can 
also cause skin irritation in some people. 
Alternate Names  
Woodbind, woodbine, false grapes, five leaves, 
American Ivy, five leaved Ivy, thicket creeper 
Uses 
Wildlife: The berries of this plant are eaten by many 
animals especially birds. Animals such as mice, 
skunks, chipmunks, squirrels, cattle and deer will 
munch on the leaves and stems.  This plant provides 
great cover for small animals because of is thick 
foliage. The vines provide birds with perches, 
nesting places and leaf surfaces to find food. 
Erosion Control: Virginia creeper is used as a ground 
cover to control soil erosion in shaded areas and on 
slopes. 
Medicinal: The bark has been has been used in 
domestic medicine as a tonic, expectorant, and 
remedy. The berries have been found serviceable in 
rheumatic complaints and are found to help cure 
dropsy.  The roots are used for diarrhea and the bark 
and twigs are made into cough syrup. 
Ornamental: It is often cultivated as an ornamental 
because of its fall foliage and to replace many exotic 
plants.  It is an excellent covering for walls, trellises, 
arbors or fences.  It may also be grown on the ground 
to cover old stumps, rock piles and other “eyesores”. 
Description 
Vine Family (Vitaceae). Virginia creeper is a native, 
fast-growing, perennial, woody vine that may climb 
or trail along the ground.  The leaves are compound, 
containing five leaflets.  Leaflets range in size from 
2-6 inches and have toothed margins.  The leaflets 
are red when they first emerge but turn green as they 
mature. In the fall, leaves turn a bright red to maroon 
color. The inconspicuous green color flowers are 
borne in small clusters during the spring and 
followed by small clusters of fruit in early summer. 
This fruit is a 4 to 6 mm diameter bluish-black berry 
that usually contains two to three seeds.  The vines 
adhere to surfaces by means of five to eight branched 
tendrils ending in cup-like adhesive tips.  New stems 
are brownish-green and finely hairy but gradually 
acquire pale, raised dots and turn purplish-brown 
with age. 
Virginia creeper is often confused with eastern 
poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans), however; a 
clear distinction between the species is that eastern 
poison ivy has three leaflets and Virginia creeper has 
five leaflets.  The PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov contains an image of eastern poison 
ivy. 
Reproduction: Virginia creeper flowers from June to 
August, matures fruits from August to October and 
drops fruits from September to February.  The seeds 
are dispersed by birds.  The seeds usually germinate 
the first or second spring after dispersal. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Virginia creeper is found throughout the southern, 
midwestern and eastern half of the United States.  
The plant is also native to northern Mexico and 
southeastern Canada from Nova Scotia to Ontario. 
Virginia creeper can be found in new and old forests 
and forest margins.  It can also be found on the 
borders of clearings, on trees, along fencerows and 
streambanks.  The plant thrives in partial shade to full 
sun.  It prefers acidic soil, and tolerates a wide range 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

of soils from dry sandy soils to moist loamy soils.  
The plant is also salt tolerant.  The species is 
cultivated as an ornamental in many moist temperate 
areas of the world. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Establishment 
Seeds can be sown in the fall or in the spring after 
cold-moist stratification. Seeds should be drilled 3/8 
inches deep in soil or mulch. Optimum planting is 10 
plants per square foot.  Virginia creeper can also be 
propagated from hardwood cuttings or layering. 
Management 
Once Virginia creeper is well established, it grows 
quickly.  It must often be pruned to prevent it from 
getting out of control.  The species can handle 
periods of sparse rain fairly well; however, if a 
drought persists, water the vine every week soaking 
the soil at least six inches.  Virginia creeper can be a 
rampant grower with a climbing height of over 60 
feet and a spread of over 50 feet.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
No pests or diseases are of major concern, but 
mildews, leaf spots, canker and wilt are occasional 
problems.  Virginia creeper is sometimes bothered by 
beetles, scale, leaf hoppers, caterpillars and other leaf 
eating insects.  These pests cause the leaves to be 
ragged and tattered. 
Some literature suggests that Virginia Creeper is not 
poisonous, but the sap of the plant contains oxalate 
crystals and can cause skin irritation and rashes in 
some people. 
Ornamental: If you grow Virginia creeper on walls, 
make sure you want it as a permanent fixture. Once it 
is established, it is very difficult to remove. You 
could damage the wall trying to remove the species. 
Environmental Concerns 
Virginia creeper will grow up any tree and most 
shrubs.  This species will slowly kill the host on 
which it is growing, because it prevents the host from 
receiving an adequate amount of sunlight.  It can also 
crowd or choke other plants. 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist, or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area.  If chemicals are 
recommended be sure to read the label and follow all 
application and safety instructions for each control 
method.  Trade names and control measures appear in 
this document only to provide specific information.  
USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named, and other 
products may be equally effective.  Below is an 
internet site that contains control information for 
Virginia creeper:  
North Carolina State University 
http://ipm.ncsu.edu/apple/orchardguide/Herbicides. 
pdf 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The commercial nursery trade has developed three 

Virginia creeper cultivars:  

‘Engelmanii’-This has smaller leaves and  better 

clinging characteristics than the species general 

population.

‘Monham’-The leaves have white variegations . 

‘Variegata’-It is less vigorous than the sp ecies’ 

general population, but the leaves are marked with

yellow and white then develop a pink and red color in

the fall. 

Contact your local Natural Resources Cons ervation 

Service (formerly Soil Conservation Serv ice) office 

for more information.  Look in the phone book under 

”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources

Conservation Service will be listed under th e 

subheading “Department of Agricultu re.” 

References 
Allen, C.M., D.A. Newman and H.H. Winters. 2002. 
Trees, and shrubs, and woody vines of Louisiana. 
Allen’s Native Ventures, LLC. p. 172 
Beaulieu, David. 2005. About home and garden-
landscaping. http://landscaping.about.com 
Kress, Stephen W. 2005. Brooklyn Botanical Garden.  
http://www.bbg.org/gar2/topics/wildlife/handbooks/b 
irds/index.html 
Michigan State University Extension. 2005. 
Ornamental plants. 
http://web1.msue.msu.edu/msue/imp/modzz/ 
00001040.html 
Missouri Botanical Garden. 2005. Web site. 
http://mobot.org/gardeninghelp/default.asp 
Mohlenbrock, R.H. 2005. Image of Virginia creeper 
IN Southern wetland flora: Field office guide to plant

species (1991).  USDA NRCS South National 
Technical Center, Fort Worth, TX. 
http://plants.usda.gov 
Neal, J.C. and Uva, R.H. 2005. Cornell University 
horticulture department. Ithaca, New York. 
http://www.gardening.cornell.edu/ 
Poison ivy, oak, and sumac information center. 2005. 
Web site. http://poisonivy.aesir.com 
University of Florida. 2005. Landscape plant fact 
sheet. http://hort.ifas.ufl.edu/shrubs/ 
USDA FS 2005. Fire effects information system. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/vine/parqui/ 
all.html 
Weedalert.com. 2005. The turf professional’s online 
source for weed control options. http://weedalert.com 
Yardener. 2005. Care of Virginia creeper. 
http://www.yardener.com/CareofVirginiaCreeper.htm 
l 
Prepared By: 
Kellie King and James Henson, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Species Coordinator: 
James Henson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Edited: 19sep05 jsp; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.