Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK CHERRY 
Prunus serotina Ehrh. var. 
serotina  
Plant Symbol = PRSES 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Wild black cherry, mountain black cherry, rum 
cherry 
 
Uses 
Black cherry wood is a rich reddish-brown color and 
is strong, hard, and close-grained – one of the most 
valued cabinet and furniture woods in North 
America.  It is also used for paneling, interior trim, 
veneers, handles, crafts , toys, and scientific 
instruments.  Black cherry  is used for reclamation of 
surface mine spoil.   
 
The leaves, twigs, bark, and seeds produce a 
cyanogenic glycoside.  Most livestock poisoning 
apparently comes from eating wilted leaves, which 
contain more of the toxin than fresh leaves, but 
white-tailed deer browse seedlings and saplings 
without harm.  The inner bark, where the glycoside is 
concentrated, was used historically in the 
Appalachians as a cough remedy, tonic, and sedative.  
The glycoside derivatives act by quelling spasms in 
the smooth muscles lining bronchioles.  Very large 
amounts of black cherry pose the theoretical risk of 
causing cyanide poisoning.   
 
The fruit has been used to  flavor rum and brandy 
(“cherry bounce”).  Pitted  fruits are edible and are 
eaten raw and used in wine and jelly.  Black cherry 
fruits are important food  for numerous species of 
passerine birds, game birds, and mammals, including 
the red fox, black bear, raccoon, opossum, squirrels, 
and rabbits.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 ©  James L. Reveal Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 38 m tall; bark of larger trunks fissured 
and scaly, but thin.  Leaves are alternate, simple, 
ovate to oblong-lanceolate, 5-15 cm long, 2.5-5 cm 
wide, with finely toothed margins, glabrous or 
commonly with reddish hairs along the midrib 
beneath, near the base.  Inflorescence is an oblong-
cylindric raceme 10-15 cm  long at the end of leafy 
twigs of the season, with numerous flowers; calyx 
tube of short lobes, petals 5, white.  Fruits are berry-
like, about 8-10 mm in diameter, obovoid, black 
when ripe; seed a single, black, ovoid stone 6-8 mm 
long.  The common name is from the black color of 
the ripe fruits.  
 
Variation within the species : The species has a 
number of geographic variants:  
    Var. eximia  (Small) Little  - Edwards Plateau of 
central TX 
    Var. rufula  (Woot. & Standl.) McVaugh  - TX, 
NM, AZ 
    Var. serotina   -  widespread in the eastern US 
    Var. virens (Woot. & Standl.) McVaugh  - TX, 
NM, AZ 
    Var. salicifolia  Koehne - Mexico and Guatemala 
 
Var. serotina may reach 38 meters  tall in the eastern 
US, but southwestern US varieties typically are 
smaller; southwestern black cherry (var.  rufula) 
seldom grows taller than 9 m, and escarpment black 
cherry (var.  exima) no taller than 15 meters.  The 
leaves of var.  serotina are thin compared to those of 
the other varieties.  Domesticants and wild 
populations of  P. serotina in Mexico and Central 
America, called "capulin" (var.  salicifolia), have 
larger (2 cm) fruits, apparently through selection by 
native peoples.  Plants previously recognized as  P.

serotina var. alabamensis  (Mohr) Little have been 
taxonomically returned to species rank, as P.  
alabamensis  Mohr.     
 
Distribution 
Widespread in eastern North America, from Nova 
Scotia, New Brunswick, and Quebec, Canada, 
Minnesota and North Dakota, southward to Florida 
and east Texas, with outlying populations in central 
Texas, west Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, and 
south in Mexico to Guatemala.  Known to be highly 
invasive in forests of Holland and other countries of 
Western Europe; also naturalized in northern South 
America.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Black cherry is a shade-intolerant species that 
primarily occurs in successional vegetation or in 
forest openings as well as in old fields and along 
fencerows.  It usually occurs as scattered individuals 
in various types of mesic woods and second-growth 
hardwood forests; at elevations of 0-1520 meters.  
Black cherry in the southwestern US is confined to 
canyons, valleys, and rich bottomlands.  Flowering: 
May-July (March-April in the Southwest); fruiting: 
June-October.   
 
Establishment 
Seeds may be produced on trees as young as 10 
years, but maximum production in natural stands 
occurs on trees 30-100 y ears old.  Some seed is 
produced yearly, with good crops produced at 1-5-
year intervals.  High pr oportions of the seeds are 
viable.  Because of long-d istance seed dispersal by 
birds and mammals, seedlings are often abundant in 
sites with no or few reproductive black cherry trees.  
Seeds that pass through the digestive tracts of 
passerine birds also have higher germination rates 
than undigested seeds.   
  
Seeds from one crop germinate over a period of 3 
years –– this delayed germination allows large 
numbers of seeds to be banked in the forest floor.  
After cold stratification, seeds germinate in loose soil 
and forest litter; germination is higher in litter than in 
mineral soil.  Seedlings typically grow to a height of 
5-10 cm within 30 days after germination.   
  
Black cherry also reproduces by stump sprouts 
following cutting or fire, and sprouting frequency 
remains high for trees up to about 60 years of age.   
  
Black cherry rarely occurs in the canopy of late 
successional deciduous forests but buried seeds are  present and an abundance 
of small seedlings is 
common in the understory.  These grow slowly in 
dense shade, sometimes reaching 15 cm in height in 
3-4 years, but any canopy opening will release this 
bank of suppressed plants, which grow rapidly to 
overtop shade-tolerant as sociates.  Black cherry 
saplings in the understory may repeatedly die back to 
the stem base and resprout and can persist for 40-60 
years by maintaining a small above-ground size until 
released.  Because of its abundant soil-stored seeds 
and sprouting ability, black cherry may dominate 
secondary succession following logging, fire, or 
wind-throw.  Trees have been reported to grow to 
more than 250 years, although mortality increases 
rapidly after 80-100 years.   
  
Management 
Black cherry is sometimes grown in even-aged 
management –– clearcutting or shelterwood cuts are 
used, depending on the availability of soil-stored 
seed.  Where deer populati ons are high, successful 
regeneration may require that larger seedlings be so 
abundant that deer cannot eat  them all.  Because it is 
shallow-rooted and has a tendency to overtop its 
associates in mixed st ands, black cherry is 
susceptible to wind throw.  Best results in 
establishing black cherry on reclamation or 
rehabilitation sites are by planting 1-year or older 
nursery grown seedlings.  Direct seeding has 
generally been unsuccessful.    
 
The thin bark of black cherry makes it highly 
susceptible to girdling and it is usually killed or top-
killed by fires of moderate severity.  As fire severity 
increases, the percentage of tree-sized individuals 
killed also increases.  When aboveground portions 
are killed by fire, black cherry sprouts prolifically 
from the root crown or stump.  This vegetative 
reproduction, however, depletes carbohydrate 
reserves and leaves plants in a weakened condition.  
Quickly repeated fires would probably kill any 
seedlings and saplings that survived the first fire by 
resprouting.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The eastern tent caterpilla r and the cherry scallop 
shell moth defoliate black cherry and can cause 
growth loss and mortality.  The fungal disease “black 
knot” is common on black cherry – it causes 
elongated, rough, black swellings on the twigs, 
branches, and trunk.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural

Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Allard, H.A. 1944.  Second year sprouts of black 
cherry, Prunus serotina, fruiting .  Castanea 9:117.   
 
Carter, K.K. 1980.  Geographic variation in black 
cherry (Prunus serotina Ehrh.) .  Ph.D. diss., West 
Virginia Univ., Morgantown, West Virginia. 
 
Downey, S.L., R. Karle, A. F. Iezzoni, J.F. Hancock, 
& B.K. Epperson 1998.   Patterns of genetic diversity 
within and among black cherry (Prunus serotina 
Ehrh.) populations from the U.S., Mexico, and 
Ecuador .  Abstract, 1998 Annual Meeting of the Bot. 
Soc. Amer., Baltimore, Maryland.  
[http://www.ou.edu/cas/botany-micro/bsa-
abst/section4/abstracts/11.shtml]   
 
McVaugh, R. 1951.   A revision of the North 
American black cherries (Prunus serotina Ehrh. and 
relatives) .  Brittonia 7:279-315.  
 
McVaugh, R. 1952.   Suggested phylogeny of Prunus 
serotina and other wide ranging phylads in North 
America .  Brittonia 7:317-346.  
 
Marquis, D.A. 1990.   Prunus serotina Ehrh.  Black 
Cherry.  Pp. 594-604, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America .  Volume 2.   
Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Mulligan, G.A. & D.B. Munro 1981 .  The biology of 
Canadian weeds, 51.  Prunus virginiana L. and P. 
serotina Ehrh .  Canad. J. Pl. Sci. 61:977-992.    
 
Uchytil, R.J. 1991.   Prunus serotina.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler ).  The fire effects information 
system  [Database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.   
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
  
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 04dec00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.