Plant Guide
MAGUIRE PRIMROSE 
Primula cusickiana  (A. Gray) A. 
Gray var.  maguirei (L.O. 
Williams) N.H. Holmgren & S.  Kelso 
Plant Symbol = PRCUM  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 
 
Maguire’s primrose (Primula cusickiana var. maguirei). Photo from 
USDA -FS  
Alternate Names  
Primula  maguirei   
 
Uses 
There are no known uses associated with Maguire’s 
primrose.   
 
Status  
Maguire’s primrose has  an estimated population size of 
about 3,000 individuals in six sites in Logan Canyon, 
Utah. The entire known habitat of Maguire’s primrose lies 
within Federal lands managed by the Logan Ranger 
District of the Wasatch -Cache National Forest. It was 
listed a s a threatened species in 1985 (USDI -FWS, 1985). 
The species is highly vulnerable due to its restricted 
habitat and small population size. Its primary threats 
include habitat loss due to road construction and 
recreational activities.  
 
Consult the PLANTS We b site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  Description
 
General : Primrose family (Primulaceae). Maguire’s 
primrose is a small, herbaceous, perennial forb. The 
leaves are clustered around the base of the plant and are 
oblanceolate to spatulate and range from 2 to 7 cm (1 to 3 
in) long. They can be smooth edged or toothed and have 
glands on both sides. The flowers are born in a 1 to 3 
flowered cluster on a naked stem reaching 15 cm (6 in) in 
height. Each plant can have 1 to several flower bearing 
stems. The flowers are rose to lavender in color with a 
yellow center (Welsh et al., 2003).  
 
Distribution : 
There are six known pop ulations of Maguire’s primrose; 
all located in Logan Canyon, Cache County, Utah. For 
current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Maguire’s primrose is restricted to shallow dolomitic soils 
of the  Laketown and Fish Haven geologic formations. It 
can be found in north facing exposures in cracks and 
crevices of cliff and boulder faces from 1,400 to 1,800 m 
(4,800 to 6,000 ft) elevation. It is always found in cool, 
moist microclimates. It can be found growing in 
association with pink alumroot ( Heuchera rubescens ), 
mat rockspirea ( Petrophytum caespitosum ), tadpole 
buttercup ( Ranunculus  ranunculinus ), and narrowleaf 
wildparsley ( Musineon lineare ), surrounded by mountain 
shrub and coniferous forest plant communities.  
 
Adaptation  
Maguire’s primrose is found in cool, moist microclimates 
on dolomitic limestone derived soils. Mean annual 
precipitation in the canyon ranges from 18 to over 25 
inches.  
 
Management  
The greatest threats to the continuing survival of  
Maguire’s primrose come from habitat loss as a result of 
highway construction and other activities (USDI -FWS, 
1990). Maintenance and improvements of water pipelines 
through the canyon could also impact the species. Other 
threats include camping, rock clim bing and horticultural 
plant collecting.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with Maguire’s primrose.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Maguire’s primrose.

Seeds and Plant Production  
Limited efforts have been attempted to propagate and 
produce Maguire’s primrose.  Past gardening attempts 
have been mostly unsuccessful.  
 
References 
USDI -FWS.  1985. Endangered and threatened wildlife 
and plants; final rule to determine primula maguirei 
(Maguire primrose) to be a threatened species. In: 
Federal Register. 50(162): 33731- 33737. 
USDI -FWS. 1990. Maguire primrose (Primula maguirei) 
recovery plan. USF WS, Denver, CO. 13 pp.  
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C.  Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
 
Prepared By  
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Loren St. John,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho.  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
Maguire’s primrose ( Primula cusickiana var . maguirei). 
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho 
Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID.  
Published  January, 2011  
Edited: 20Dec2010djt; 20Dec2010lsj; 20Dec2010dgo 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
Distric t at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER