Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LARGE 
BEARDTONGUE  
Penstemon grandiflorus  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = PEGR7 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
large-flowered beardtongue, showy beardtongue, 
pink beardtongue, shell-leaf penstemon, shell-leaf 
beardtongue, wild foxglove, Canterbury bells 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans treated toothache by 
chewing the root pulp of  plants in this genus and 
placing it in the cavity (Runkel & Roosa 1989).  The  Navajo applied a wet dressing of pounded leaves of 
large beardtongue to rattlesnake bites; they 
considered this an absolute antidote (Ibid.).  A 
decoction of the leaves has been used in the treatment 
of chills and fevers (Moerman 1998). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 © Kurt Adolfson Native Wildflowers of the North Dakota Grasslands USDI, GS, Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center 
 
Description 
General
: Snapdragon family (Scrophulariaceae).  
Large beardtongue is a native perennial that grows up 
to four feet tall.  The leaves are opposite, simple, 
ovate to oblong, thick and fleshy; bluish-green with a 
waxy blue sheen and clasping at the base.  The large 
two inch, pale purple flowers are five lobed and short 
lived (Runkel & Roosa 1989).  The fruits are woody, 
egg shaped capsules that contain numerous small, 
angular, brown seeds (Fr eeman & Schofield 1991). 
 
Distribution: Large beardtongue ranges from 
Wyoming to Texas, east to Wisconsin, Illinois, 
Missouri and Oklahoma (Steyermark 1963).  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Penstemon grandiflorus  is commonly found in 
prairies, often in sandy or loamy soils.  This plant 
prefers acid, neutral and alkaline soils and requires 
well-drained soils.  It grows well when planted in 
open dry situations (Steyermark 1963), and can grow 
in semi-shade or no shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Penstemon grandiflorus  seeds 
are best sown in the fall or spring in a greenhouse 
(Heuser 1997).  The seeds should germinate within 
one to four months (Ibid.).  When the seedlings are 
large enough to handle, place them into individual 
pots and plant them out in their permanent positions 
in the late spring. 
 
Management 
Stem tip cuttings should be taken from the tips of 
healthy, non-flowering, semi-mature or mature 
shoots, between early summer and fall (Heuser 
1997).  Shoots can be cut into a number of usable

sections at almost any time during the growing period 
(Ibid.). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Somewhat available through native plant seed 
vendors in the Great Plains region.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Freeman, C.C & E.K. Schofield. 1991.   Roadside 
wildflowers of the southern Great Plains .  University 
Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut.  
 
Huxley, A. 1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillan Press, New York, New York. 
 
Ladd, D. 1995.   Tallgrass prairie wildflowers : a 
falcon field guide.  Falcon Press Publishing 
Company, Helena, Montana. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Owensby, C.E. 1980.  Kansas prairie wildflowers .  
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Runkel, S.T. & D.M. Roosa 1989.   Wildflowers of the 
tallgrass prairie: the upper Midwest .  Iowa State 
University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Stamen, T.R. & W.S. Myers 1937.  Oklahoma flora .  
Harlow Publishing Co., Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.