Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROYAL PENSTEMON
Penstemon speciosus Douglas 
ex Lindl. 
Plant Symbol = PESP  
 
Contributed by: Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and Idaho NRCS State Office 
 Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Sagebrush penstemon, showy penstemon, royal 
beardtongue 
 
Uses 
Royal penstemon is chiefly used as a forb component 
for wildlife habitat enhancement projects and 
restoration efforts. Its showy flowers attract 
numerous pollinators and other insects which provide 
a food source for birds and other vertebrates. This 
species is also commonly used in xeriscaping and 
other low-water-use landscaping. It is also suited for 
roadsides and other beautification projects.    
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. st
ate noxious status). 
 
Description 
General : Figwort Family (Scrophulariaceae).  
Royal penstemon is a perennial herb/forb reaching 3 
to 6 dm (1 to 2 ft) tall. Several ascending to erect 
stems arise from a branched caudex. Flowers are sky 
blue reaching 4 cm (1.5 in) long and about 1 cm (0.4 
in) wide at the mouth. Leaves are entire and narrow, 
to 15 cm (6 in) long and 1 to 12 mm (0.04 to 0.5 in) 
wide, rounded to acute at the tip. The leaves are 
mostly sessile with some of the upper leaves clasping 
the stem. Anthers are blue-margined, glabrous, with 
sacs about 2mm (0.08 in) long, partially dehiscent; 
the suture line not reachi ng the connective (Welsh 
2003). Flowering season is from May to July. There 
are approximately 400,00 0 seeds/lb (USDA-NRCS 
2008). 
 
 
Close-up of flowers. 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Distribution : Royal penstemon is found in scattered 
populations throughout the Great Basin Floristic 
Province. The species is common in western
 Utah,

southern Idaho, and most of Nevada and into east 
Cascade and Sierra portions of Washington, Oregon 
and California.  
 
Habitat: Royal penstemon inhabits dry flats, slopes 
and draws in the sagebrush-grass, mountain shrub 
and juniper forestland communities. Plants typically 
occur at low to middle elevations in lowlands and 
foothills from 0 to over 10,000 feet (Hitchcock et al 
1959). 
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to loam to fine sandy loam 
soils with a pH range of 6.0 to 8.0 (Las Pilitas 2008). 
For xeriscaping and low water gardening the species 
is recommended for use in USDA hardiness zones 3a 
through 7b (Dave’s Garden 2008) in areas receiving 
greater than 10 inches  annual precipitation.
   
 
Management 
When planted in a native reclamation mix, royal 
penstemon will be a minor component of the 
establishing plant community; therefore management 
should be based on other key species in the mixture.  
Grazing on seeded lands should be deferred for at 
least two growing seasons to allow for establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Impact from insect pests on penstemon seed 
production can be significant. Penstemon borer larva 
can infect the crown and upper root area of all 
Penstemon species resulting in the loss of individual 
plants to entire fields. Presently, penstemon borers 
are known only from  extreme southwestern 
Colorado.  Penstemon  clearwing (Penstemonia spp .)  
attacks multiple  Penstemon species. The larvae feed 
within the stems of the crown and lower above 
ground portion of the plant. A pheromone is available 
for monitoring of adults. Other potentially significant 
pests include Lygus bugs and raceme-boring moths 
(Western Colorado Extension 2008).  
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Fields for seed production can be established by 
transplanting greenhouse grown containerized stock 
or from direct seeding. Di rect seeding should take 
place in the fall to allow fo r natural stratification of 
the seed. Greenhouse materials can be established by 
seeding into cones or flats in winter for natural 
stratification or by stratifying the seed for 8 to 12 
weeks in cold/moist conditions. Pre-chilling 
requirements are reduced with a liquid smoke 
treatment (Shaw et al. 20 03). Germination can also 
be enhanced by watering with a weak solution of 
gibrillic acid (250 ppm) though treated seedlings 
appear to be less vigorous than non-treated. Royal  penstemon plants have also been successfully 
propagated from herbaceous stem cuttings (Dave’s 
Garden 2008). Seed should be sown to a depth of 0 to 
6 mm (0 to 0.25 in). 
 
In herbicide tolerance screening trials royal 
penstemon has shown sensitivity to pre-emergence 
applied pendimethalin and benefin. Limited damage 
was observed to plants with post-emergent herbicide 
treatments. Plants showed good tolerance to post-
emergent applied clethodim, dimethanamid-P and 
pendimethalin and had seed yields comparable to 
untreated plants, but untreated plots had highest 
yields overall.  
Penstemon plants showed high 
sensitivity to prometryn and linuron (Shock et al. 
2008).  
 
Royal penstemon seedlings grown in weed barrier fabric for seed 
production. 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
 
Because of the limited number  of available herbicides 
that can be used on broadleaf forbs, planting into 
weed-barrier fabric (pictured above) is a viable 
alternative to control weeds in forb seed production 
fields. Holes should be three to four inches in 
diameter at 9 to 16 inch spacing. 
 
Pollinators :  Successful pollinatio n is essential for 
commercial seed production of royal penstemon. In 
pollinator studies manual pollination more than 
doubled the weight and count of seeds/capsule when 
compared with auto-pollination. Outcrossing also 
yielded five times more seed than self-pollinating and 
bumblebee pollinations enhanced seed yield an 
additional 25% (Cane 2005).  
 
Royal penstemon is visited by selective pollinators. 
In one study hived honey bees favored distant  Dalea 
ornata , while wild bumblebees and ground nesting 
species were attracted to royal penstemon from 
surrounding rangelands. (Cane 2005). Other 
identified pollinators include Pseudomasaris 
vespoides and  Osmia spp.

Seed harvest can be accomplished by hand or by 
direct combining. Harvest should occur when the 
stems and capsules begin to dry and open. Seed can 
be cleaned with a small c lipper or air-screen cleaner. 
Seed yields range from 20 to 50 lb/ac. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no sel ected releases of royal 
penstemon. Wildland harvested seed is available 
through commercial sources.  
 
References 
Cane, J. 2005. Pollinator and seed predator studies. 
In:  Great Basin Native Plant Selection and Increase 
Project FY05 Progress Report.  
 
Dave’s Garden. 2008. 
http://davesgarden.com/guides/pf/go/91817/ 
(accessed 7 Aug 2008). 
 
Hitchcock, C.L., Cronquist, A., Ownbey, M. and 
J.W. Thompson. 1959. Vascul ar Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest, Part 3: Saxifragaceae to Ericaceae. 
University of Washington Press. Seattle, WA. 
 
Las Pilatas Nursery. 2008. 
www.laspilitas.com/plants/4 86.htm (accessed 7 Aug 
2008). San Margarita, CA. 
 
Shaw, N., Walker, S., Jensen, S., Thompson, T. and 
A. DeBolt. 2003. Native plant material development 
and seed and seeding technology for native Great 
Basin forbs and grasses. In : Great Basin Native Plant 
Selection and Increase Project  FY03 Progress Report.  
 
Shock, C., Ishida, J. and E. Feibert. 2008. 
Identification of herbicides for use in native forb seed 
production. In: Great Basin Native Plant Selection 
and Increase Project  FY07 Progress Report. 
 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
2008. The PLANTS database, version 3.5. URL: 
http://plants.usda.g ov (accessed 13 Aug 2008). Baton 
Rouge, LA. National Plant Data Center. 
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press, Provo, Utah. 
 
Western Colorado Extension: Native Plant Seed 
Production. 2008. http://wsprod.colostate.  edu/cwis487/wci/seed_production.html. (accessed 13 
Aug 2008). 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley
, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho St ate Office, Boise, 
Idaho 
 
Loren St. John , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Nancy L. Shaw , USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Boise, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho St ate Office, Boise, 
Idaho 
 
Edited: 090308djt; 081608lsj; 090308dgo; 082508 nls; 081006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.