Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ENGELMANN SPRUCE  
Picea engelmannii  Parry ex 
Engelmann 
Plant Symbol = PIEN  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names  
Silver spruce, white spruce, mountain spruce, 
Columbian spruce  
 
Uses 
The wood of Engelmann spruce is light-colored, 
relatively soft, low in resin, and sometimes contains 
many knots and is more valuable for pulp than for 
high-grade lumber.  It has been used for home 
construction, pre-fabricated wood products, and 
plywood manufacture.  Less commonly it is used for 
specialty items such as food containers, and sounding  boards for violins, pianos, and guitars.  Engelmann 
spruce is widely used for Christmas trees.  Spruce 
beer was sometimes made from its needles and twigs 
and taken to prevent scurvy.  The Engelmann spruce–
subalpine fir forest associ
ation occupies the greatest 
water-yielding areas in the Rocky Mountains and the 
natural adaptations of these trees are important in 
maintaining stable vegetation.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  These are native 
trees growing to 60 meters tall, the crown dense and 
narrowly conic or spire-like.  Br anches spreading 
horizontally to somewhat drooping, the lower often 
persistent (not strongly self-pruning); twigs not 
pendent, rather stout, yellow-brown.  Bark usually 
reddish- to purplish-brown and thin scaly.  Needles 
are evergreen, borne singly  from all sides of the twig, 
1.6-3 (-3.5) cm long, 4-angled, stiff and sharp-
pointed, blue-green.  Seed  cones are violet to deep 
purple, ripening buff-brown, ellipsoid, pendent, 
mostly 3-6 cm long, the cone scales relatively small, 
papery, and flexible, remaining intact after cones fall 
from the tree.  Ssp.  mexicana differs from the typical 
ssp. in its lighter (gray) bark, narrower needles (1-1.2 
mm wide) and its narrower and slightly larger cones 
(4.5-8 cm long) and longer cone scales (4-6 mm), 
although the measurements are overlapping.  Named 
for physician and botanist George Engelmann.   
 
Variation within the species : a primarily Mexican 
segment of Engelmann spruce is formally 
distinguished  
   Picea engelmannii  ssp. engelmannii     
   Picea engelmannii  ssp. mexicana  (Martínez) P.   
   Schmidt     
These populations also have been recognized as  P. 
mexicana  Martínez,  P. engelmannii  var. mexicana  
(Martínez) Taylor & Patterson (illegitimate name), 
and  P. engelmannii  var. mexicana (Martínez) Silba.    
 
Variation in seed dormancy and hardiness has been 
documented over the broad geographic range of the 
typical subspecies, but no other varieties are 
generally recognized.  In the northern part of its 
range, Engelmann spruce  hybridizes freely and

intergrades with white spruce (P. glauca).  In the 
Chilliwack River Valley of British Columbia, it 
apparently hybridizes with Sitka spruce ( P. 
sitchensis ).   
 
Distribution 
Alberta and British Columbia southward through 
Nevada, Utah, and Colorado, into Arizona and New 
Mexico; the southernmost populations in Arizona 
(Chiricahua Mountains) and New Mexico (Sierra 
Blanca) are ssp.  mexicana, which otherwise extends 
southward into both the eastern and western sierras of 
northern Mexico.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : In montane and subalpine forests, 
occurring as krummholz at  timberline, sometimes 
growing down into the fir-aspen belt on moist, north 
facing slopes and in canyons; at 1000-3000 meters 
elevation.  Engelmann spruce and subalpine firs form 
one of the most common forest associations in the 
Rocky Mountains.   
   
Planting : Open-grown trees of  Engelmann spruce 
begin cone production at 15-40 years of age but the 
best seed production is between 150 and 250 years.  
Good seed crops are generally borne every 2-5 years   
 
Although Engelmann spruce will germinate in all 
light intensities found in nature, seedlings do not 
establish readily in the open – 40 to 60 percent of full 
shade is most favorable for seedling establishment at 
high elevations.  Germination and establishment in 
undisturbed forest occur on duff, litter, partially 
decomposed humus, decay ing wood, and mounds of 
mineral soil upturned by wi nd thrown trees.  Because 
of its slow initial root penetration and extreme 
sensitivity to heat in the succulent stage, drought and 
heat girdling kill many first-year spruce seedlings.  
Drought losses can continue to be significant 
throughout the Rocky Mountains during the first 5 
years of seedling development, especially during 
prolonged summer dry periods.  Once established (at 
least 5 years old), the ability to survive is favored by 
adequate soil moisture, cool temperature, and shade.  
The strong shade tolerance of Engelmann spruce 
allows it to occur both as a persistent long-lived seral 
species and as a major climax species.   
 
Engelmann spruce will grow steadily for 300 years, 
long after the growth of mo st associated tree species 
slows down.  Dominant spruces are often 250-450 
years old and trees 500-600 years old are not  uncommon.  Trees reaching 760-850 years are 
known.   
 
Management 
The shallow root system of Engelmann spruce makes 
it susceptible to windthrow, particularly after cutting 
opens a stand.  Downed wood from windthrow also 
makes a site vulnerable to attack from the spruce 
beetle, which has periodically caused severe damage.  
The western spruce budworm is another potentially 
damaging insect that attacks both Engelmann spruce 
and subalpine fir.   
 
Complete removal of a spruce-fir stand by fire or 
logging results in such drastic environmental changes 
that spruce and fir are usually replaced by lodgepole 
pine, aspen, or shrub and grass communities.  The 
kind of vegetation initially occupying the site usually 
determines the length of time it takes to return to a 
spruce-fir forest.  It may vary from a few years, if the 
site is initially occupied by lodgepole pine or aspen, 
to as many as 300 years, if grass is the replacement 
community. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Alexander, R.R. & W.D. Shepperd 1990.  Picea 
engelmannii
.  Pp. 187-203, IN R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America . Volume 1.  
Conifers.  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
LaRoi, G.H. & J.R. Dugle 1968.   A systematic and 
genecological study of Picea glauca and P. 
engelmannii, using paper chromatography of needle 
extracts.  Canadian J. Bot. 46:649-687.  
 
Taylor, R.J. 1993.   Picea.  Pp. 369-373, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>

Taylor, R.J. & T.F. Patterson 1980.  Biosystematics 
of Mexican spruce species and populations .  Taxon 
29:421-469.  
 
Taylor, R.J., T.F. Patterson, & R.J. Harrod 1994.  
Systematics of Mexican spruce – revisited .  Syst. Bot. 
19:47-59.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.