Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
QUAKING ASPEN 
Populus tremuloides  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = POTR5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Trembling aspen, golden aspen, mountain aspen, 
trembling poplar, white poplar, popple; aspen 
 
Uses 
Industry: Quaking aspen is an important fiber source, 
especially for pulp, flake-board, and other composite 
products.  The wood is light and soft with little 
shrinkage (see Wheeler 2000) and is used for pallets, 
boxes, veneer, and plywood.  Higher grades are used 
for other solid wood products, such as paneling, 
furniture components, and flooring.  The wood 
characteristics make it useful in miscellaneous 
products, including excelsior, animal bedding, 
matchsticks, toys, beehives, tongue depressors, 
spoons, and ice cream sticks.  It makes good 
playground structures b ecause the surface does not 
splinter, although the wood warps and susceptible to 
decay.   
 
Conservation : Quaking aspen is valued for its white 
bark and brilliant fall color, especially when 
clustered.  The species been widely used in 
landscaping but is best in sites away from structures 
that might be damaged by the aggressive roots.  The 
trees provide good visual screening and noise 
abatement.   
 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau ©  St Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
Aspen stands are good firebreaks, often dropping 
crown fires in conifer stands  to the ground when they 
reach aspens and even so metimes extinguishing the 
fire because of the small amount of flammable 
accumulation.  They allow more ground water 
recharge than do conifer fo rests and they also play a 
significant role in protecting against soil erosion.   
They have been used in restoration of riparian 
habitats.   
 
Wildlife : Young quaking aspen provides food and 
habitat for a variety of w ildlife: black bear, deer, 
beaver, porcupine, elk, moose, ruffed grouse and 
many smaller birds and animals, including small 
mammals such as mice, voles, shrews, chipmunks, 
and rabbits.  Bark, buds, new sprouts, twigs from the 
tops of fallen or logged tr ees, and fallen leaves all are 
wildlife foods.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used  Populus bark 
(including aspen) as a food source.  They cut the 
inner bark into strips, dried and ground it into meal to 
be mixed with other starches for bread or mush.  
Catkins were eaten raw, and the cambium was eaten 
raw or in a soup.      
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description  
General : Willow Family (Salicaceae): This is a 
native tree 5-30 m high, typically less than 15 m, 
with a rounded crown; lateral roots may extend over 
30 meters and vertical sinker roots from the laterals 
may extend downward for nearly 3 m; bark typically 
smooth, greenish-white to gray-white, often thin and 
peeling, becoming thicker and furrowed with age, 
especially toward the base.  Leaves simple, 
deciduous, broadly ovate to nearly round, 4–6 cm 
long, with small, rounded teeth on the margins, on a

slender, flattened petiole, dark green and shiny 
above, pale green below, turning bright yellow, 
yellow-orange, gold, or reddish after the first frosts.  
The male (staminate) and female (pistillate) flowers 
are on separate trees (the species dioecious – or 
‘polygamodioecious,’ because bisexual flowers may 
be produced at low frequencies on staminate and 
pistillate trees), each type of flower borne in pendent 
catkins.  The fruits are narrowly ovoid to flask-
shaped capsules 5-7 mm long, splitting to release the 
seeds; seeds ca.2 mm long, each with a tuft of long, 
white, silky hairs, easily blown by the wind.  The 
common name is in reference to the shaking of the 
leaves in light wind.   
 
Variation within the species : Considerable genetic 
and morphological variation exists over the range of 
quaking aspen.  A number of species and varieties 
have been described but none are currently 
recognized.  Entire stands are often produced as a 
single clone from root sprouts – this sometimes easily 
observable on a single mountainside in different 
timing in leaf appearance or in different hues and 
timing of fall coloration.  Distinctively large triploid 
trees are sometimes found.   
 
Quaking aspen hybridizes naturally with bigtooth 
aspen ( Populus grandidentata ), narrowleaf 
cottonwood ( P. angustifolia ), curly poplar ( P. 
canescens ), balsam poplar (P. balsamifera ), eastern 
cottonwood ( P. deltoides), and white poplar (Populus 
alba, a naturalized European species), and hybrids 
with black cottonwood ( P. trichocarpa) occur rarely 
in Alaska.  Quaking aspen, bigtooth aspen, European 
aspen ( P. tremula ), and three Asian species are 
closely related and sometimes classed together as a 
single, circumglobal supers pecies (see Peterson and 
Peterson 1992).   
 
Distribution 
Quaking aspen is the most widely distributed tree 
species in North America.   It grows from Alaska 
across the Northwest Terr itories to Quebec and 
Newfoundland, south to West Virginia and Virginia, 
and in all of the western North America US states 
(except Oklahoma and Kansas) --  in all Canadian 
provinces and all but 13 US states (absent from the 
Southeast).  It occurs in  both the eastern and western 
sierras of Mexico, into the south-central part of the 
country.  Outside of the main range, it is represented 
by a huge number of disjunct populations.   For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Quaking aspen occurs in a wide variety of habitats 
(including soil type and moisture conditions) and at a 
great range of elevation,  matching its extensive 
geographic range.  It characteristically forms pure 
stands or mixed stands with bigtooth aspen, but it 
occurs with scrub oaks and sagebrush at lower 
elevations and as a prostr ate form above timberline 
and exists as a dominant species in many 
communities at mid elevations.  It is a shade-
intolerant, disturbed site species and is quickly 
replaced in succession by more tolerant species.   
 
Some trees are self-pruning, dropping numerous 
small twigs with excess fall foliage and returning 
nutrients to the soil.  Leaves decay relatively rapidly, 
and a characteristic "aspen soil," with a higher pH 
than on conifer-dominated soils, develops on sites 
that have supported aspen for a number of 
generations.    
 
Flowering occurs March–April (East) or May–June 
(West), before the leaves appear and fruiting in May–
June (–July), often before the leaves are fully 
expanded.  Temperatures above 12 ° C for about 6 
days apparently trigger flowering.  Female trees 
generally flower and leaf out before male trees.   
 
Establishment 
Quaking aspen commonly establishes from seed in 
Alaska, northern Canada, and eastern North America.  
Seedling establishment is less common in the West 
but occurs there in moist sites such as kettles and 
other topographic depressions, seeps, springs, lake 
margins, and burnt-out riparian zones.  Drought stress 
kills seedlings, as does standing water.      
 
Young trees first flower at 2-3 years but production 
of large seed crops begins at about 10-20 years; 
maximum seed production occurs at 50-70 years.  
Heavy seed crops are produced  at 4-5-year intervals.  
Seeds are wind-dispersed for distances of 500 meters 
to several kilometers.   
 
Germination generally begins nearly immediately 
after moisture is received and can occur across a 
broad temperature range, with optimal germination at 
15-25 ° C.  Surface placement or a very shallow depth 
of burial on exposed mineral soil (such as burned or 
scarified sites) apparently provide the best 
environment for germination.  Continuous moisture is 
required.   
 
Asexual reproduction and clones  
Reproduction of quaking aspen is primarily by root 
sprouts, and extensive clones of root-interconnected

trees are characteristic of the species.  Most root 
sprouts develop within 10 meters of the parent stem, 
although some are produced at 30 meters or more.  
They develop from roots within 2-10 centimeters of 
the surface.  Growth in primordia and buds is 
suppressed by apical dominance but resumes after 
stems are top-killed by fire, harvest or wind-
breakage, or after defoliation and many thousands of 
sprouts per acre may be produced.  Removal of the 
above-ground plant portion in June or July after 
maximum auxin production (the chemical agent of 
apical dominance) results in fewer suckers than top-
removal during the dormant season.  Sprouts 
produced in a closed stand usually die unless in a 
canopy gap.  Saplings may begin producing root 
sprouts at 1 year of age.    
 
Stands of quaking aspen may consist of a single clone 
or represent a mosaic of different clones.  Even in a 
small area, wide variation in genetic traits exists 
between clones – differences may be seen in leaf 
shape and size, bark colour and texture, branching 
habit, resistance to diseas e and insect attack, sexual 
expression, growth rate, and phenology.  The most 
conspicuous differences may be in the timing of 
spring leaf flush and in autumn leaf coloration.    
 
The staminate-pistillate ratio of clones is 1:1 in most 
localities, but in the eastern US staminate trees may 
outnumber pistillate ones by 3:1.  Some clones 
alternate between staminate and pistillate forms in 
different years or produce combinations of perfect, 
staminate, and pistillate flowers.   
 
Individual trees of quaking aspen are short-lived 
(maximum age in the Great Lakes states is 50–60 
years, up to 150 years in the West).  Stands may be 
even-aged (after a single top-kill event) or only 
broadly even-aged (from sprouting of a gradually 
deteriorating stand).  The clones are much older:  
many in the Rocky Mountain and Great Basin 
regions are at least 8000 years old, persisting since 
the last glacial retreat.  A male clone in the Wasatch 
Mountains of Utah occupies 17.2 acres (43 ha) and 
has more than 47,000 stems – this clone is estimated 
to be 1 million years old and may be the world's most 
massive known organism.  Clones east of the Rocky 
Mountains usually cover no more than a few acres.   
 
Management 
The thin, soft bark of quaking aspen makes it 
susceptible to many diseases and insect infestations 
as well as mechanical and fire damage.  Fires may 
kill trees or cause basal scars that serve as entry 
points for wood-rotting fungi, which are common in 
older stands.  The wood decays easily.  Fires may  also kill surface roots that could reduce sucker 
regeneration.   
 
The poplar borer beetle, 
one of the most common 
wood borers of aspen, weakens trees by boring 
galleries in the trunk near the lower portion of the 
crown.  Outbreaks of forest tent caterpillar may last 
4-5 years and result in serious defoliation -- cold 
weather in the spring shortly after the eggs hatch and 
above-average fall temperatures can cause a rapid 
decline in caterpillar populations by killing eggs and 
larvae.  Overgrazing by livestock or big-game 
animals disturbs roots and compacts soil, limiting 
sucker formation.  Heavy grazing of young sucker 
stands by cattle for three years in a row may destroy 
them.   
 
Quaking aspen can be propag ated by seed, following 
cold stratification.  Germination of fresh seed may be 
80-95%, but viability lasts only 2-4 weeks under 
favorable natural conditions (low temperature and 
humidity).  Seeds dried for 3 days and stored at cool 
temperatures may retain good viability for up to a 
year.    
 
The species roots poorly  from woody stem cuttings, 
but newly initiated (softwood) shoots can usually be 
induced to root by dipping in IBA (indolebutyric 
acid) or other commercially available rooting 
powders.  A more preferred method uses root sprouts.  
Collect dormant lateral roots in early spring -- plant 
root cuttings 1-2 in diameter and 3-5 centimeters long 
in vermiculite and place in the greenhouse for 6 
weeks.  Excise the young sucker shoots and root in 
perlite/vermiculite (2-3 weeks, using IBA), misting 
frequently.  Transplant the developing plants to 
peat/vermiculite mix and grow  at 15-25º C.  Or, the 
root cuttings may be planted directly into the perlite 
mix, with the top of the cutting just below the media 
surface.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bozie, T. 1999.  The aspen tree (Populus 
tremuloides).  In your woodlot, Vol. 8, Issue #3 .  
Farm Woodlot Assoc. of Saskatchewan.  SEP00.  
<http://www.aginfonet.com/a gricarta/content/farm_w
oodlot_assoc_of_sask/aspen.html>

Perala, D. A. 1990.  Populus tremuloides. Michx.  
Quaking aspen .  Pp. 555-569, IN: R.M. Burns and 
B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  
Hardwoods .  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Volume
_2/populus/tremuloides.htm>  Accessed September 
2000.   
 
Peterson, E. B. & N. M. Peterson 1992.   Ecology, 
management, and use of aspen and balsam poplar in 
the Prairie Provinces, Canada .  Special Report 1.  
Forestry Canada, Northwest Region, Northern 
Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
 
Prasad, A. M. & L. R. Iverson 1999.   A climate 
change atlas for 80 forest tr ee species of the eastern 
United States .  USDA, Forest Service, Northeastern 
Research Station, Delaware, Ohio.  SEP00.   
<http://www.fs.fed.us/ne/delaware/atlas/> 
 
The Australian Naturopathic Network 2000.   Populus 
tremuloides .  SEP00.  
<http://www.ann.com.au/herbs/Monographs/populus.
htm> 
 
Tirmenstein, D. 1988 (rev. J.L. Howard 1996).  
Populus tremuloides .  IN: D. G. Simmerman 
(compiler).   The fire effects information system  [Data 
base]. USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station, Interm ountain Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  AUG00.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/poptre
/> 
 
Wheeler, E. E. 2000.   Forest Products – Commercial 
Species .  Dept. of Community and Economic 
Development.  Alaska Division of Trade and 
Development.  AUG00.  
<http://www.dced.state.ak.us/econdev/tree5.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.