Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HONEY MESQUITE 
Prosopis glandulosa Torr. var. 
torreyana  (L. Benson) M.C. 
Johnston 
Plant Symbol = PRGLT  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Park Botanic Garden 
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic: Many parts of honey mesquite were 
useful to indigenous groups of California, the 
Southwest and northern Mexico, and some of these 
uses are still enacted today.  The Cahuilla picked the 
flowers of honey mesquite in the spring and roasted 
them in a pit of heated st ones, after which they were 
formed into balls and eaten.   The blossoms were also 
utilized in making a tea.  Many tribes in southern 
California and the Southwest including the Timbisha 
Shoshone, Nevada and Utah Southern Paiute, 
Kawaiisu, Cahuilla, Panamint, Luiseno, Pima, Yuma, 
and Commanche ate the ed ible pods.  The seeds 
made into a fermented pinole was a favorite 
intoxicating drink.  The Cahuilla gathered the pods in 
two stages, green or ripe.  The green pods were 
pounded into a juicy pulp  and consumed as a summer 
beverage.  The ripe pods were eaten without any 
processing or were pounded into a flour in a mortar 
and then placed in a vessel, dampened with water, 
and left for 24 hours to harden.  The meal was 
formed into cakes and eaten dry, made into a mush, 
or mixed with water for a beverage. 
 
All other parts of honey mesquite were used.  The 
leaves were used to neutra lize stomach acidity by the 
Commanche.  The Cahuilla, Kamia, and Yuma tribes 
used the inner bark of trunks or branches for cordage 
and rough wrapping material.  The roots of young 
trees were harvested and made into cordage for 
harpoon lines, to bundle reeds, and make carrying 
nets by the Seri of northwestern Mexico.  The trunk 
was made into wooden mortars and the smaller 
branches were used for bow making.  Sometimes 
arrow foreshafts were of mesquite wood.  Mesquite 
made excellent firewood for cooking, baking pottery, 
and warmth and mesquite bark was good for 
kindling.  Large branches were used for construction 
such as posts for houses and rafters.  The Seri use 
mesquite to make the ribs of wooden boats.  Thorns 
were used as a needle in puncturing the skin for 
tattoos.  Mesquite gum was used to glue foreshafts of 
arrows and adhere baskets to  mortars.  Tribes of the 
southwest used the gum secreted from the bark to 
mend pottery, make candy, and furnish a black dye.  
 Charles Webber © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Wildlife : Honey mesquite is an important tree to 
wildlife.  The seeds are eaten by jack rabbits, Gambel 
quail, songbirds, various small mammal, and 
domestic livestock.  Western chipmunks, ground 
squirrels, pocket mice, and various species of 
kangaroo and wood rats consume the foliage.  
Different birds also nest in the tree's canopy. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  The honey 
mesquite can penetrate downward into the water 
table, often at great depths.  This shrub or small tree 
reaches less than 10 m in height and has a broad 
crown of arched branchlets.  The ascending branches 
have straight, stipular spines.  The jugate leaves have 
many long, narrow, leaflets that are more than five 
times longer than wide, glabrous, and widely spaced 
on the rachilla or stem.  The greenish yellow flowers 
have fused petals and in dense racemes, 5-12 cm. and 
spikelike.  The fruit is a pod with a prominent beak at 
the end.

Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is the common mesquite tree of the 
subtropical scrub south and southeast of the Sonoran 
desert in Sonora.  In the desert it is found northward 
from Guaymas on the coast to the Colorado River 
and into the low elevation deserts of southeastern 
California and western Arizona.  It occurs in plains, 
riverbanks, washes and playas in grasslands and 
deserts below 1800 m. 
 
Establishment 
Gather seed pods and remove the seeds from the 
pods.  Scarify the seeds before planting.  Plant 
scarified seeds in the fall  in a well-drained soil in 
deep pots.  Sprinkle soil on  top of the seeds and cover 
soil with one-quarter inch of gravel.  The seeds 
should be spaced one-half inch apart and the pots 
placed in partial shade.  Wa ter the pots right away.  
Keep pots moist if the rains are insufficient.  As soon 
as the plants form one true leaf, transplant one plant 
per pot and water.  Keep the pots damp.  Out plant 
each seedling, in the groun d, the following winter 
when dormant in full sun, and well-drained soil.  
Protect the plants from animals.  Water the plants and 
keep them damp if annual rains are insufficient.  
Continue to water throughout the life of the plant 
once in awhile.  Mesquite should be lightly damp all 
summer long. 
 
Management 
The Timbisha Shoshone pruned honey mesquite, 
keeping areas aroun d the trees clear of undergrowth, 
and also of dead limbs and lower branches.  The 
Cahuilla in southern California also pruned mesquite 
trees and broke and cut branches regularly to provide 
easier access to the seedpods. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This plant is available through most sources in the 
southwest specializing in native seed.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barney, R.C. 1989.  Prosopis.  Pages 4-6 IN: 
Fabales, Vol. 3, Part B in Intermountain Flora:  
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A .  
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L.  Reveal, & P.K. Holmgren (authors).  New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.  
Temalpakh: Cahuilla 
Indian knowledge and usage of plants .  Malki 
Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Bell, W.H. & E. F. Castetter 1937.   The utilization of 
mesquite and screwbean by the aborigines in the 
American Southwest .  Ethnobiol. Studies in the 
American Southwest Bulletin 5.   Biological Service.  
University of New Mexico 4(5):3-63. 
 
Carlson, G.G. and V.H. Jones 1939.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Commanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters Paper 25:517-
542. 
 
Coville, F.V. 1892.   The Panamint Indians of 
California .  The American Anthropologist 5(4)351-
362. 
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California. 
 
Felger, R.S. and M.B. Moser 1985.   People of the 
desert and sea: Ethnobotany of the Seri Indians .  
University of Arizona Pr ess, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.  Subsistence.  Pages 64-97 IN: 
Handbook of North American IndiansVolume 11, 
Great Basin.  Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1996.   Historical perspectives on 
Timbisha Shoshone land management practices, 
Death Valley, California .  IN: Case Studies in 
Environmental Archaeology.  E.J. Reitz, L.A. 
Newsom, and S.J. Scudder (eds.).  Plenum Press, 
New York, New York. 
 
Krochmal, A., S. Paur, and P. Duisberg 1954.   Useful 
native plants in the American Southwestern deserts .  
Economic Botany 8(2):3-20. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Shreve, F. & I.L. Wiggins 1964.   Prosopis.  Pages 
602-605, IN: Vegetation and Flora of the Sonoran 
Desert Vol. I.  Stanford University Press, Stanford, 
California.

Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department University of 
California, Davis, California  
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 30nov00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.