Plant Guide
BLUESTEM 
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon cyanocaulis  Payson  
Plant Symbol = PECY4  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  and the Upper Colorado Environmental Plant 
Center  (UCEPC)  
 
Figure 1: Bluestem Penstemon detailing the wavy  leaf bases.  Photo by 
Suzette Jones, Colorado State University Extension (CSU) Native Plant 
Master Program.  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  Payson penstemon, dusty 
penstemon,  bluestem penstemon, b luestem beardtongue, 
d usty beardtongue.  
 
Uses  
Pollinator:   As with other species of Penstemon , t he 
s howy flowers of b luestem penstemon attract numerous 
pollinators  including bumble bees ( Bombus spp.), mason 
bees ( Osmia  spp. ), and  mining bees Andre na spp. (Cane, 
2012).     
 
Wildlife habitat:   Bluestem penstemon ma y be used in a 
mix for wildlife habitat enhancement and restoration 
efforts  post -fire and mine reclamation  (Ogle, et al, 2011) .  
Penstemon  s pecies  may be utilized by small birds for 
cover and seed and are considered desirable forages for 
deer and antelope (Ogle, 1996).     
 
Landscaping:   This species  may be used in xeriscaping 
and other low -water -use landscaping.   It is a drought-
tolerant perennial  a nd may be grown in  full sun or  partial shade.
  It is also well suited for  roadside and other 
beautification  plantings. 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Figwort Family ( Scrophulariaceae), however, 
taxonomic revision based on DNA analysis places 
Penstemon  in the  Plantaginaceae Family, a closely related 
plant family  (Albach, et al. , 2005;  Wolfe et al ., 2006; 
Stevens 2012;  and Freeman , 2012) .  The genus  name 
Penstemon  is derived from the Greek “pente” ( five) and 
“stemon”  (stamen ), with the distinctive feature of the 
genus, the prominent infertile  stamen, or “staminode.”    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bluestem penstemon is a  cool -season,  short-lived 
perennial forb, 8” to 1.5’ (2 to 4.5 decimeters) tall, with 
showy blue flowers.  One to several stems arise from a 
short -branched woody caudex (woody base of an 
otherwise herbaceous perennial) . Stems are glabrous and 
ascending to erect .  Leaves are opposite, mostly basal, and 
commonly wav y-margined (crisped)  (Weber , 2001)  and 
not folded  (Figure 2).   The basal leaves  are  ob-ovate  to 
ob- lanceolate  narrowed to a peti oled (stalked) base and 
the upper leaves are  oblong to ob-lanceolate and sessile to 
Figure 2: Bluestem penstemon detailing the 
wayvy leaf bases.  Photo by 
Suzette Jones, Colorado 
State University Extension 
(CS U) Na tive Plant Master 
Program.

clasping (Welsh, et al., 1987) . The cymose (opposite -
branched flower cluster  with a terminal flower) 
inflorescence  is glabrous and arranged in pairs at the 
nodes, in a false whorl,  called  a  verticillaster .
  Cymes are 
1 -4 flowered . The at least partially united sepals (green)  
are subtended by  5  blue to lavender lobed petals.  Corolla 
is  bilabiate with a 2 -lobed  upper lip and 3 -lobed lower lip.  
Flowers  contain 4 fertile stamens and an infertile  sparsely 
yellow -bearded staminoid.  Anther sacs are pubescent and 
open  partially at anthesis (Hitchcock et al ., 1959).  
F lowers are ovate to broadly lanceolate, c orolla (petals) 
approximately 0.64 to 0.96  in. (16 -24 mm ) long, with 
lavender -blue  tube and throat  (Cronquist, et al. , 1984) .  
The fruit (a capsule) is mature when it turns brown and 
begins to open, which typically occurs 5 to 8 weeks after 
flowering.   
 
Welsh, et al ( 1987), differentiate s b luestem penstemon 
from  P. strictiformus  by its broader and  more obtuse and 
crisp leaves, its  shorter  and  more hispid pubescence  of the 
anthers, and by the ovate to broadly acute shape if the 
calyx lobes. P. strictiformus occurs in similar habitat as 
b luest em penstemon  but more to the south. 
 
   
Flowering season is from  April to June. Fruit is a two -
chambered capsule.  
Ethnobotany  
Species of Penstemon  have been utilized by Native 
American tribes for cultural, medicinal and culinary 
purposes.  Uses range from a beverage for tea, to  making 
blue  paint  for moccasins and spear heads , and  as  remedies 
for snakeb ite, toothache , and vomiting (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database , 2012). 
Distribution :  Bluestem penstemon occurs in south-
western Colorado and eastern Utah  in the  canyonlands of 
the  Colorado  Plateau.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat:   Bluestem penstemon  is  found scattered as 
individuals or in dense stands on high and dry mesas  
(Schultz et al ., 1987) . It is  locally  common on canyon 
slopes among Gamble oak (Holmgren , 1979) and 
occurs on cryptogamic soils, rimrock pavement, 
sandstone , and canyon slopes and walls.   It occurs in 
elevations from 4,600 to 7,500  ft.  (1 ,400m to 2, 300m) in 
6” to 15  inches precipitation zones.  
 
Adaptation  
Bluestem penstemon is adapted to occur in  Pinyon-
juniper  and Sage  communities,  where it thrives in 
moderately coarse  sandy soils with a neutral pH.  It is 
adapted to dry wash and adjacent hillsides and to  barren, 
granitic gravel .  It occurs  with scattered  Artemisia  ssp. , 
Yucca  ssp. , Purshia  ssp. , Rosa  ssp. , Ephedr a ssp.  and 
Cercocarpus  ssp.  i n red sandstone, sandstone benches 
above creeks, and sandy soils .   It also  grows  with  p
onderosa  pine, Gambel’s  oak, Amelanchier  ssp. , and 
a ntelope  bitterbrush  in dry- wash areas and adjacent 
hillsides  ( Hartman , 2012). 
 
Figure 3:  Photo by Steve Parr, UCEPC Manager  taken of production 
fields of b luestem penstemon in 2009.  
Establishment 
Bluestem penstemon is a member of the section of 
Penstemons which reproduce exclusively from seed 
( Kitchen and Meyer , 1991) .  Plant seed to a depth of 1/8” 
to  1/4”  into a well- firmed and weed-free seed bed at a 
full seeding rate of  1lb/ac (2kg/ac), for 2 5 to 30 Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) per linear foot with 22” to 36” row 
spacing for cultivation.  There are approximately 656,000 
seeds  per pound.  When used as a component of a seed 
mix, adjust to the percent of mix desired.  To address the 
small seed size, add r ice hulls or cracked grain to provide 
more accurate seed flow through planting.  For 
greenhouse production, s ow under thin cover 12 weeks at 
40ºF (4ºC) , move to 50ºF (10ºC) for germination  
(Swayne, 2000) .  Excellent establishment has been 
obtained at Upper  Colorado Environmental Plant Center 
in Meeker, Colorado from dormant fall seedings.  
Management 
Bluestem penstemon should be used as component of 
seed mixtures  for pollinator plantings and restoration 
projects throughout its range .  Management strategies 
should be based on the key species in the established plant 
community.   Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands 
for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand 
establishment (Ogle , 2011).   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Bluestem penstemon  is susceptible to soil- borne fusarium 
and  rhizoctonia root  rot and smut infections ( Tilley et al., 
2012).   These infections can be prevented by limiting 
irrigation and increasing spacing between plants under 
cultivation.  
Environmental Concerns  
Bluestem pe nstemon is a native plant species in western 
North America and has no known negative impacts on 
wild or domestic animals.  It is not considered a weedy or 
invasive species but can spread to adjoining vegetative

communities under ideal conditions.  It co-ex ists with 
other native species and adds biodiversity to plant 
communities.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Capsules do not retain seed for more than two  weeks 
beyond  maturation.   Fields for seed production can be 
established from direct seeding or from  transpl anting 
greenhouse grow n containerized stock.   Direct seeding 
should take place in the fall to allow for natural 
stratification of the seed  (Meyer and Kitchen , 1994  and 
Tilley , 2012) .  In greenhouse plant production, tre atment 
of seed with gibberellic  acid (GA
3) may reduce the 
stratification requirement (Kitchen and Meyer, 1991 ). 
After collection, the thoroughly dried capsules may be 
placed in a standard freezer for 48 hours to remove insect 
pests  (Winslow , 2002) . 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
The  Uncompahgre Partnership (UP)  Native Plant 
Program s, UP  San Miguel Germplasm Bluestem 
penstemon ,  was  collected at Burn Canyon located in 
western Colorado  at 6979 feet (Free , 2012) .  Common 
wild land  collected seed is avail able from commercial 
sources. There are currently no commercial releases of 
blue penstemon.  
 
Prepared By :   
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist,  USDA 
NRCS  Denver, Colorado.  
 
Steve Parr ; Manager,  Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado.    
 
Citation  
Taliga, Christine E. and Steve Parr,  2012. Plant Guide for 
Bluestem penstemon ( Penstemon cyanocaulis) . USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State 
Office.  Denver, 80225- 0426. 
Published  September, 2012  
 
Edited:  19Sep2012jab , 20Sep2012cga  
References  
A lbach , D. C., H. M. Meudt , and  B. O xelman . 2005. 
Piecing together the‘‘new’’ Plantaginaceae. 
American Journal of Botany 92: 297 –315.  
Cane, J. 2012. Personal communication. Logan (UT)  USDA -Agricultural Research Service, Bee 
Systematics and Biology Laboratory.  
Cronquist, A. J., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. L.  Reveal & P. K. Holmgren. 1984. Vascular Plants of 
the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 4: 1 –573. In A. J.  
Free, Jim. 2012.  Personal Communication.  Uncomphagre  
Partnership Native Plant Program.  
Freeman, Cr aig.  2012.  Personal Communication .  
Biodiversity Institute.  Lawrence, Kansas.  Hartman, R.L. (2008 onwards). University of Wyoming. 
Rocky Mountain Herbarium Database.  Penstemon 
cyanocaulis , accessed:  9/4/20 12.   
Hitchcock, C.L., Cronquist, A., Ownbey, M., and J.W. 
Thompson. 1959. Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. Part 4: Ericaceae through 
Campanulaceae. University of Washington Press. 
Seattle, Washington. 510p.  
Holmgren, Noel, 1979.  New Penstemons  (Schrophulareacea) from the Intermountain Region.  
Brittonia,  31(2), 1979, pp. 217 -242.  
Kitchen, S.G. and S.E. Meyer. 1991. Seed germination of  Intermountain penstemons as influenced by 
stratification and GA
3 treatments. J. Environ. Hort. 
9(1): 51 -56.  
Native American Ethnobotany Database. Un iversity of 
Michigan, Dearborn.  [Online] at:    
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  (Accessed September 5, 
2012 ).    
Meyer, S.E. and S. G. Kitchen. 1994. Habitat- correlated 
variation in seed germination response to chilling in 
Penstemon section glabri (scrophulariaceae). Am. 
Midl. Nat. 132: 349- 365. 
Ogle, D., 1996.  Plant Guide.  Management and Use of  Penstemon.  USDA NRCS, Boise ID.  
Ogle, D., St. John,  L.,. Stannard , M. and L. Holzworth. 
2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation pl ant species 
for the Intermountain West. USDA -NRCS, Boise, 
ID -Salt Lake City, UT -Spokane, WA. ID -TN 24. 
57p.  
Rocky Mountain Herbarium database.  University of  Wyoming.  http://www.rmh.uwyo.edu/about.php.  
Accessed September 8, 2012.  
Schultz, L.M., E.E. Neely , J.S. Tuhy.  1987.  FLORA OF 
THE ORANGE CLIFFS OF UTAH.   Great Basin 
Naturalist.  Vol.47 No.2.  
Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards) . Angiosperm Phylogeny 
Website. http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/AP
web/.   Accessed 23 August 2012.  
Swayne, Jim.  November 2000.   Th e Penstemons.  Seed 
Germination  Methodology.  
http://tomclothier.hort.net/page08.html.  
Ti lley, D., L. St. John, D. Ogle, and N. Shaw, 2012.  Plant 
Guide for blue penstemon ( Penstemon cyaneus).  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Serive, 
Aberdeen Plant  Materials Center.  Aberdeen, Idaho 
83210.  
University of Wyoming. 2012 . Rocky Mountain 
Herbarium Database.  Penstemon cyanocaulis,  
accessed:  9/4/2012.    
Weber, W.A. and R. C. Wittmann, 2001. Colorado Flora: 
Western Slope  and Eastern Slope . Colorado 
Associ ated University Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
530pp.  
Welsh et al. 1987.  A Utah Flora.  Bringham Young  University, Provo, Utah.  
Winslow, S .R. 2002. Propagation protocol for production 
of  Penstemon cyaneus  seeds; USDA NRCS  - Bridger 
Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana.  In: Native

Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 5 
September  2012 ). Moscow (ID). 
Wolfe, Andrea, D., C.P. Randle, S.L. Datwyler,, J. J. 
Morawetz,  Arguedas, N. and J. Diaz.  Phylogeny, 
Taxanomic  Affinities, and Biogeography of 
Penstemon (Plantaginaceae), based on ITS and 
cpDNA Sequence Data.  Journal of Botany.  93(11): 
1699 –1713. 2006.   For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
D
istrict  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER