Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SITKA SPRUCE 
Picea sitchensis (Bong.) Carr. 
Plant Symbol = PISI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
sitka spur, coast west spru ce, coast spruce, tideland 
spruce, yellow spruce, wester n spruce, silver spruce, 
menzies’ spruce 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The sharp needles of spruce were 
believed to have special powers for protection against 
evil thoughts (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The 
Ditidaht and other Nuu-chah-nulth peoples used the 
boughs in winter dance ceremonies to protect the 
dancers and scare spectators (Ibid.).  The inner bark 
was eaten fresh, or dried  into cakes and eaten with 
berries.  It was also dried and grounded into a powder 
and used as a thickener in soups or added to cereals 
when making bread. 
 
The roots were burnt over an open fire to remove the 
bark, then dried and split to make hats and ropes 
(Moerman 1998).  The roots were also used by 
several native North American tribes to make tightly 
woven baskets that would hold water (Lauriault 
1989).  A pitch obtained from the tree was used as 
glue or as a protective varnish-like coat on wood 
(Moerman 1998).   
 
Sitka spruce was widely employed medicinally by 
several native North American Indian tribes who 
used it especially for its antiseptic qualities in the 
treatment of lung complaints, sores and wounds  (Moerman 1998).  It has been chewed in the 
treatment of throat prob
lems, coughs, and colds 
(Ibid.).  Sitka spruce pitch was also used as a 
medicine for gonorrhea, syphilis, internal swelling, 
and toothaches (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  A 
decoction of the roots has been used in the treatment 
of diarrhea. 
 
Economic : Sitka spruce produces high-grade lumber 
that is the most important wood for airplane and 
glider construction.  In World War II, this wood was 
utilized in the British Mosquito bombers (Viereck & 
Little 1972).  Other important uses are oars, ladders, 
scaffolding, and boats, par ticularly racing sculls 
(Ibid.).  This wood is valued in making piano 
sounding boards and guitars.  It is harvested as saw 
timber and pulpwood and processed into lumber, 
plywood and various paper products.   
 Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Science @ CalPhotos
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Sitka spruce is often planted 
as an ornamental tree in  the eastern and northern 
states and in western and northern Europe (Sargent 
1961).  This forest species provides habitat for a large 
variety of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and birds.  
It is browsed only in the spring by a variety of birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Spruce Family (Pina ceae). Sitka spruce is a 
large, native, evergreen tree  that can grow up to two 
hundred feet in height.  The needles are yellowish-
green to bluish-green, stiff, very sharp, 1 to 1½ 
inches long, with white lines of stomata on the upper 
surface (Pojar & MacKinnon  1994).  The cones are 
one to four inches long, hanging down, with very thin 
scales, rounded, and irregularly toothed.  The bark is 
gray and smooth on small trunks, becoming dark 
purplish-brown on older trunks. 
 
Distribution : Sitka spruce is native to the Pacific 
Coast region from Alaska, to western British 
Columbia, Washington, Oregon, and northwestern 
California.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.

Adaptation  
Picea sitchensis is often found on moist well-drained 
sites such as alluvial floodplains, marine terraces, and 
headlands (Pojar & MacKi nnon 1994).  This species 
prefers full sun and is in tolerant of shade and 
atmospheric pollution.  Sitka spruce grows in pure 
stands, more often mixed with western hemlock, 
Douglas fir, western redcedar, yellow cedar, grand 
fir, red alder, and black cottonwood (Farrar 1995). 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Picea sitchensis  seed requires 
no pretreatment if the seed is sown fresh, however a 
period of cold unifies and hastens germination (Dirr 
& Heuser 1987).  Sow stored seeds as early in the 
year as possible.  Prefer ably sow the seeds in a 
position in light shade.  Seeds should be stored in a 
cool place and should not be  allowed to dry out.  Put 
seedlings into individual pots when they are large 
enough to handle and grow them in the greenhouse 
for the first winter.  They can be planted into their 
permanent positions in early summer of the following 
year. 
 
Propagation by Cuttings : The cuttings, five to ten 
centimeters long, are cut in June with a heel of older 
wood, treated with  3000 ppm IBA-talc, and placed in 
sand without removal of the needles (Dirr & Heuser 
1987).  After rooting, the cuttings have one to two 
roots that should be pruned to stimulate lateral root 
development before transplanting to flats.  Staking is 
also required to develop a symmetrical plant form 
(Ibid.). 
 
Management 
General : Sitka spruce prefers c ool temperatures and 
moisture soil.  Several times in the spring, pinch the 
new growth of young seedlings when shoots are 
about one inch long to check if watering is necessary.  
Major pruning should be done in the early fall and all 
the needles should never be removed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Readily available through nurseries within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Lauriault, J. 1989.   Identification guide to the trees of 
Canada .  Fitzhenry & Whiteside, Ontario, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of pacific coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the pacific 
northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Pratt, M.B. 1922.   Shade and ornamental trees of 
California .  California State Board of Forestry, 
California. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 410. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.