Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN GINSENG
Panax quinquefolius L. 
Plant Symbol = PAQU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
wild ginseng, sang 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: American ginseng was used by 
Menominee hunters, who chewed the root to impart a 
lure to the breath and to attract deer.  The plant was 
used by Meskwaki women to obtain a husband.  A 
mixture consisted of ground ginseng, mica, gelatin, 
and snake meat.  The Pawnee also used ginseng roots 
in combination with certai n other substances as a 
love charm.  The Ojibwe considered the root a good-
luck charm if carried in the pocket.  Huron Smith  (1932) recorded a potentially sustainable way to 
harvest the roots among the Ojibwe.  “They only 
gathered the root when the red berries were mature, 
but before they were ready to drop.  Into the hole 
from whence the root came,
 they would thrust the 
whole fruiting top, and carefully firm the soil upon it.  
Knowing the location well, they would revisit the 
place in three to five years and find more roots than 
they harvested in the first instance.”  The roots were 
used in eyewash by the Iroquois to treat the sore eyes 
of two-year-old children.  The root could also be 
steeped in warm water and  drunk for alleviating sores 
on the body.  The pulverized root was smoked to treat 
asthma.  Women of the Penobscot tribe took an 
infusion of the root to increase fertility.  The 
Delaware used the roots and other plant parts as a 
general tonic.  American ginseng is in high demand 
in the United States and Chin a as an herbal remedy.  
It is used for stress and to  increase energy and mental 
acuity in the United States.   In China, it is a panacea 
for sexual impotency, nervousness, vomiting, and 
dyspepsia.  
from Voss (1985) 
 
Status 
In general, this species has been depleted by over-
collecting for commercial purposes.  Many states, 
such as Maryland, have a permit process instituted 
for collectors in the wild.  Certain U.S. ports have 
been designated by th e USDA, APHIS as ports 
through which ginseng can be exported.  The 
Canadian Museum of Nature (2000) considers it a 
species at risk.  Please c onsult the PLANTS web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status. 
 
Description 
General:  Ginseng Family (Araliaceae).  This 
aromatic herbaceous perennial has once palmately 
compound leaves arranged  in a single whorl.  The 
leaves are oblong-obovate to  obovate, 6-15 cm, and 
conspicuously serrate.  The stems are solitary, 2-6 
dm, and with one flower umbel per stem.  The 
flowers are greenish-white,  all or mostly perfect.  
There are two styles and five stamens.  The fruits are 
berry-like, bright red drupes, 1 cm thick. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is now considered rare and collection 
in the wild is either prohibited or strictly regulated in 
the states in which it is found.  Most regulations

allow digging only in autumn, after ginseng seeds 
have dropped.  It is found in rich woods from Quebec 
to Minnesota and South Dakota to Georgia and 
occurs in Louisiana and Oklahoma.  It grows in full 
shade underneath deciduous hardwood species. 
 
Establishment 
Ginseng is widely cultivated in the U.S., Canada, and 
China.  In natural conditions, the seed may take two 
or three years to germinate and the plant three to four 
years to produce seed.  The root takes at least three to 
four years before it is ready to harvest (Sadler 1999).  
Detailed growing instructions are available from 
Michigan State University Extension (1996). 
 
Propagation by seeds: Fruits should be collected 
when they are red, usually August or September.  
Seeds can be separated from the pulp and sown fresh 
in the fall in flats.  If stored, they should be stored 
moist.  If buying seed, soak it in a 10 percent bleach 
solution for 20 minutes and rinse before sowing to 
kill any fungus spores that may have come along with 
them.  After a 3-fingered leaf emerges in the spring, 
transplant each of these in bun ches of 3 to deep pots.  
They will be ready to plant outside the following fall.  
Plant the plants in full shade under deciduous trees in 
a well-drained soil and keep them moist.  Wild 
American ginseng is typica lly found in calcium rich 
forest soils well supplied with organic matter. 
 
Management 
If American ginseng has been planted in an acid soil, 
apply dolomite every fall to heighten the plant’s 
vigor and color.  Hand weed around the plants. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is generally available from those 
nurseries that specialize in  herbs.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Beyfuss, R.L. 1999.  American ginseng production in 
woodlots .  Agroforestry Notes 14.  USDA, Forest 
Service and USDA, Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.  USDA, National Agroforestry Center, East 
Campus-UNL, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Bourne, J. 2000.   On the trail of the ‘sang poachers .  
Audubon 102:2(84-91). 
 
Canadian Museum of Nature 2000.   Species at risk in 
Canada: American ginseng .  Version: 000504.  
<http://www.nature.ca/english/ginseng.htm>.  
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
 
Crosby, M.R. 2000.   Ginseng.  IN: Microsoft® 
Encarta® Online Encyclopedia 2000.  
<http://encarta.msn.com>.  Microsoft Corporation, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   Growing and propagating 
wildflowers of the United States and Canada .  The 
New England Wild Flower Society Guide.  Houghton 
Mifflin Company, New York. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1932.   Some Chippewa uses of plants .  
Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts 
and Letters  17:119-143. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region.   University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
Adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Gupton, O.W. & F.C. Swope 1982.  Wildflowers of 
Tidewater Virginia .  University Press of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia.  208 pp. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany.  
Syracuse University Pres s, Syracuse, New York. 
 
Michigan State University Extension 1996.  
Growning ginseng.  Home Horticulture.   
<http://www.msue.msu.edu/msue/imp/mod03/03900
053.html>.  East Lansing, Michigan. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998  Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Phillips, H.R.  1985  Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.   The University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
 
Sadler, T. 1999.   Ginseng in Australia .  The 
Australian New Crops Newsletter, No. 11.  
<http://www.newcrops.uq.edu.au/newslett/ncn11167.
htm >. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1923.   Ethnobotany of the Menomini .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee  4:1(8-175).

Smith, H.H. 1928.  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4:2(175-326). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928 .  Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4:2(175-326). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1932 .  Ethnobotany of the Ojibwe .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee  4:3(327-525). 
 
Speck, F.G.  1917 .  Medicine practices of the 
Northeastern Algonquians.   Proceedings of the 19th 
International Congress of Americanists , pp. 303-321. 
 
Tantaquidgeon, G. 1972.   Folk medicine of the 
Delaware and related Algonkian Indians.  
Pennsylvania Historical Commission 
Anthropological Papers, Number 3.  Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000504.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Vestal, P.A. & R.E. Schultes.  1939.   The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians as it relates to the 
history of the tribe.   Botanical Museum, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Voss, E. 1985.   Michigan flora.  Part II.  Dicots 
(Saururaceae-Cornaceae) .  Bulletin 59.  Cranbrook 
Institute of Science and University of Michigan 
Herbarium, Ann Arbor, Michigan.  724 pp. 
 
Williams, L. & J.A. Duke 1978.   Growing ginseng.  
Farmers' Bulletin No. 2201.  USDA, Science and 
Education Administration, Washington, D.C.  
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat Anderson & J. Scott Peterson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Environmental Horticulture, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.