Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLE 
PASSIONFLOWER  
Passiflora incarnata L. 
Plant Symbol = PAIN6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Wild passionflower, maypop, apricot vine, old field 
apricot, Holy-Trinity flower, mayapple, molly-pop, 
passion vine, pop-apple, granadilla, maycock, 
maracoc, maracock, white sarsaparilla. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Houma, Cherokee and other 
Native American tribes used purple passionflower for 
food, drink, and medicinal purposes.  Captain Smith, 
in 1612, reported that Native Americans in Virginia 
planted the vines for the fruits.  The fruits were eaten 
either raw or boiled to make syrup.  A beverage was 
made from the fruits by crushing and straining the 
juice.  Sometimes the juice was thickened by mixing 
it with flour or cornmeal.  The young shoots and 
leaves were eaten, cooked with other greens.  The 
roots were used in an infusion to treat boils, and to 
“draw out inflammation” of wounds from briers or 
locusts.  Babies were given a tea made from the roots 
to aid in weaning.  The roots were beaten with warm 
water and used as eardrops to treat earaches.  Root 
infusions were used to treat liver problems.  Soaking 
the crushed roots in drinking water made a “blood  tonic.”  The plant was also used as a sedative to treat 
nervous conditions and hysteria. 
 
Wildlife
: Purple passionflowers attract butterflies. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
Considered rare in some states. 
 © Charles S. Lewallen  Oklahoma Biological Survey 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed and 
invasive information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Description 
General : Passionflower Family (Passifloraceae).  
Purple passionflower is a native, perennial vine.  The 
slightly pubescent vines climb with tendrils that arise 
from the axils of the leaves.  The vines can range 
from 2 to 6 m long.  The alternate leaves (6 to 15 cm 
long and wide) are palmate with 3 lobes and finely 
serrated margins.  The spectacular flowers are pale-
lavender or, rarely, white, with five petals (3 to 4 cm 
long, 4 to 7 mm wide) and five sepals (2.5 to 3.5 cm 
long).  The complex flower has a “crown” or corona 
of numerous fringelike segments that arise from 
above the petals.  The corona is white or lavender 
with purple bands.  The reproductive parts are 
interestingly arranged and add to the exotic beauty of 
the flower.  The unique appearance of the flowers 
was purported, by early Spanish explorers, to 
represent the sufferings of Christ (for a detailed 
description see Coffey 1993).  The plants bloom from 
June to September.  Sweet-smelling, yellowish fruits 
develop in two to three months after flowering and 
may be harvested from July to October.  The pulpy 
fruit, or “maypop”, is large and oval, about the size of 
a hen’s egg (4 to 10 cm  long).  The fruit contains 
many flattened, dark-colored seeds (4 to 6 mm long) 
that are covered with an arillate pulp, which is the 
edible portion of the fruit.

Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: Purple passionflower is common in open or 
cultivated fields, rocky slopes, thin woods, roadsides, 
fencerows and thickets.   
 
Establishment 
Purple passionflowers require direct sunlight for at 
least half of the day.  The  plants prefer fertile, well-
drained soils but will grow in heavier clay soils.  Pick 
a spot in the garden where the plants may either 
climb or spread freely.  The plants may be 
propagated from seed or by  cuttings.  Seeds should 
be collected in the fall after the fruit has begun to 
shrivel.  Mature seeds ar e brown in color with no 
traces of white.  Wash the gelatinous covering from 
the seeds if they are to be stored for any length of 
time.  It is best to plant the seeds directly into an 
outdoor seedbed.  The seedlings may be transplanted 
after they have three or four leaves or, once 
established, they can be used to provide cuttings or 
divisions.  Cuttings should be taken in the early 
spring.  Remove the lower leaves from a 15 to 20 cm 
cutting before placing it in the rooting medium.  
Removing the suckers that develop around the 
established plants provides materials for propagating 
by division.  With a shovel, separate and remove the 
suckers and roots.  Transplant the divisions and water 
them immediately.   
 
Management 
To control the spread of purple passionflower, 
remove the suckers regularly.  The vines may be 
trained onto a trellis, fence or tree trunk.   
 
Control 
This plant is listed as a invasive by several 
authoritative sources listed in the Plants Profile for 
this species at the PLANTS website.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county 
weed specialist to learn what  works best in your area 
and how to use it safely.   
 
Always read the label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural  Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.  
Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Coffey, T. 1993.   The history & folklore of North 
American wildflowers.   Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 
MA.  356 pp.   
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote 1975.  Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Floridata 2001.   Passiflora incarnata .  [Online]. 
Available:  
http://www.floridata.com /ref/p/passiflo.cfm. (19 June 
2001). 
 
Garrett, J.T. & M. T. Garrett 1996.  Medicine of the 
Cherokee: the way of right relationship.   Bear &  
Company Publishing, Santa Fe, New Mexico.  223 
pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and Exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Lewallen, C.S. 2001.   Oklahoma Wildflowers .  
Oklahoma Biological Survey, Norman, Oklahoma.  
<http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/okwild/toc.html>.  (04 
October 2001) 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.

Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001) 
 
Phillips, H.R. 1985.  Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.   University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina.  331 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana .  Primitive 
Man Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference 14(4): 49-75. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 04oct01 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.