Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HOTROCK 
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon deustus  Douglas ex 
Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = PEDE4  
 
Contributed by: Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and Idaho NRCS State Office 
 
 
Nancy Shaw, USDA Forest Service, Boise, ID 
 
Alternate Names 
Scabland penstemon 
 
Uses 
Hotrock penstemon is chiefly used as a forb 
component for wildlife habitat enhancement and 
restoration efforts. Its showy flowers attract 
numerous pollinators and other insects which provide 
a food source for birds and other vertebrates. This 
species is also commonly used in xeriscaping and 
other low-water-use landscaping. It is suited for 
roadside and other beautification plantings.  
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. st ate noxious status). 
 
Description 
General : Figwort Family (Scrophulariaceae).  
Hotrock penstemon is a short-lived perennial forb 20 
- 60 cm (8 - 24 inches) tall. Stems are glabrous, 
woody and much branched near the base.  The leaves 
are bright green, glabrous, coarsely dentate-serrate, 
linear lanceolate to elliptic, 2 - 5 cm long and 6 - 20  mm wide.  Flowers are nearly
 tubular, creamy white 
to tan, 8 - 15 mm long in loose whorls along the 
upper stem.  Flowering season is from May to July. 
Seeds are very small with approximately 2,900,000 
seeds per pound. 
 
Distribution : Hotrock penstemon is found in 
scattered populations in eastern Washington, 
southern Idaho, southwestern Montana and south 
through Oregon to the central Sierra Nevada in 
California, the northern 2/3 of Nevada, northwestern 
Utah and western Wyoming. 
 
Habitat: Hotrock penstemon inhabits dry rocky 
places, basalt flows, pressure ridges and cliffs and 
occasionally limestone outcrop s in sagebrush, juniper 
and pinyon-juniper plant communities. Plants 
typically occur at elevations  from 2600 to 8200 feet. 
 Hotrock penstemon in natural habitat. 
Nancy Shaw, USDA Forest Service, Boise, ID 
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to well-drained loam to fine 
sandy loam soils with a pH range of 5.0 to 8.0. For 
xeriscaping and low water gardening, the species is 
recommended for use in USDA hardiness zones 6-8 
in areas receiving 8 - 10 inches or more annual 
precipitation.

Management 
When planted in a native reclamation mix, hotrock 
penstemon should be a minor component of the 
establishing plant community; therefore management 
should be based on other key species in the mixture.  
Grazing on seeded lands should be deferred for at 
least two growing seasons to allow for establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Impact from insect pests on penstemon seed 
production can be significant. Penstemon borer larva 
can infect the crown and upper root area of all 
penstemon species resulting in the loss of individual 
plants to entire fields. Presently, penstemon borers 
are known only from  extreme southwestern 
Colorado.  Penstemon  clearwing (Penstemonia spp. ) 
attacks multiple Penstemon species. The larvae feed 
within the stems of the crown and lower above 
ground portions of the plant. A pheromone is 
available for monitoring of adults. Other potentially 
significant pests include Lygus bugs and raceme-
boring moths.  Hotrock penstemon is also susceptible 
to soil-borne fusarium and rhizoctonia root rot, which 
can be severe in poorly drained loam and clay-
textured soils. 
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Fields for seed production can be established by 
transplanting greenhouse grown containerized stock 
or from direct seeding. Di rect seeding should take 
place in the fall to allow fo r natural stratification of 
the seed. Greenhouse materials can be established by 
seeding into cones or flats in winter for natural 
stratification or by stratifying the seed for 8 - 12 
weeks in cold/moist conditions. Prechilling 
requirements can be reduced with a liquid smoke 
treatment. Germination can also be enhanced by 
watering with a weak solution of giberellic acid (250 
ppm) though treated seedlings appear to be less 
vigorous than non-treated. Seed should be planted to 
a depth of 0 - 6 mm (0 - 0.25 in). 
 
Chemical weed control in seed production fields of 
forbs is a challenge and preliminary work is only 
getting underway.  In herbicide tolerance screening 
trials conducted at the Malheur Experiment Station in 
Oregon, hotrock penstemon had good tolerance 
(based on seed yields) to post emergence applications 
of Select (Clethodim), Outlook (Dimethenamid-P), 
and Prowl (Pendimethalin).  Hotrock penstemon 
showed sensitivity to post emergence applications of 
Buctril (bromoxynil octanoat e), Goal (oxyfluorfen), 
Caparol (Prmetryn) and Lorox (Linuron). 
Considerable efforts to register herbicides for use on 
native forb seed production will be required.   
 Penstemon
 seedlings grown in weed barrier fabric for seed 
production. 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS PMC, Aberdeen, ID
 
 
Because of the limited number  of available herbicides 
that can be used on broadleaf forbs, planting into 
weed-barrier fabric (pictured above) is a viable 
alternative to control weeds in forb seed production 
fields. Holes should be three to four inches in 
diameter at 9 - 18 inch spacing. 
 
Successful pollination is essential for commercial 
seed production of hotrock penstemon.  Bees and 
wasps that have been observed pollinating hotrock 
penstemon include sweat bees, bumble bees, honey 
bees and leafcutter bees.  The flowers bloom from 
May to July.  The seed is mature when the capsule 
turns brown and begins to open.  This typically 
occurs 5 - 8 weeks after flowering.  The brown to 
black seed persists in the capsule for several weeks. 
 
Seed harvest can be accomplished by hand or by 
direct combining. Harves t should occur when the 
stems and capsules begin to dry and open. Seed can 
be cleaned with a small c lipper or air-screen cleaner. 
Seed yields range from 20 - 50 lb/ac (22 – 56 kg/ha).  
The seed capsules stay closed for some time after 
maturation, so it is not essential to harvest seed 
immediately. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no releases of hotrock penstemon. 
Wildland harvested seed is available through 
commercial sources.  
 
References 
Chicago Botanic Garden’s Restoration Research in 
the Great Basin Staff.   Penstemon Pollinators.  URL: 
http://cbscience.org/great_basin/pollinators_penstem
on.htm (accessed 17 Dec. 2008).

Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho.  WM. C. Brown 
Company. Dubuque, Iowa. 828 p. 
 
Debolt, A. and H. Parkinson. 2005.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container Penstemon 
deustus  plants. USDA FS – Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Boise,  Idaho.  In: Native Plant 
Network.  URL:  http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org
 
(accessed 16 Dec 2008). Mosc ow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 
 
Las Pilatas Nursery. 2008. 
www.laspilitas.com/plants/4 86.htm (accessed 16 Dec 
2008). San Margarita, CA. 
 
Shaw, N., Walker, S., Jensen, S., Thompson, T. and 
A. DeBolt. 2003. Native plant material development 
and seed and seeding technology for native Great 
Basin forbs and grasses. In : Great Basin Native Plant 
Selection and Increase Project  FY03 Progress Report.  
 
Shock, C., Ishida, J. and E. Feibert. 2008. 
Identification of herbicides for use in native forb seed 
production. In: Great Basin Native Plant Selection 
and Increase Project  FY07 Progress Report. 
 
UC/JEPS: Jepson Manual treatment for  Penstemon 
deustus .  URL:  http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu?cgi-
bin/get_JM_treatment.pl?Penstmon+deustus 
(accessed 16 Dec 2008) 
 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
2008. The PLANTS database, version 3.5. URL: 
http://plants.usda.g ov (accessed 15 Dec 2008). Baton 
Rouge, LA. National Plant Data Center. 
 
Western Colorado Extension: Native Plant Seed 
Production. 2008. http://wsprod.colostate. 
edu/cwis487/wci/seed_production.html. (accessed 16 
Dec 2008). 
 
Prepared By 
Loren St. John , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Nancy L. Shaw , USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Boise, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 121708LWS; 010709DGO; 010709NLS; 090112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.