Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
JEFFREY PINE 
Pinus  jeffreyi Grev. & Balf. 
Plant Symbol =PIJE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
      © Gary A. Monroe. Plumas Co., CA. July 24, 2002.
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic use. The turpentine obtained from the 
resin of all pine trees is antiseptic, diuretic, 
rubefacient and vermifuge.  It is a valuable remedy 
used internally in the treatment of kidney and bladder 
complaints and is used both internally and as a rub 
and steam bath in the treatment of rheumatic 
affections.  It is also very  beneficial to the respiratory 
system and so is useful in treating diseases of the 
mucous membranes and respiratory complaints such 
as coughs, colds, influenza and externally it is a very 
beneficial treatment for a va riety of skin complaints, 
wounds, sores, burns, boils etc and is used in the 
form of liniment plasters, poultices, herbal steam 
baths and inhalers.   
 
Commercial uses:  The primary use for Jeffrey pine is 
for lumber. The low-grade Jeffrey pine trees are 
processed into dimensional lumber, as well as other 
construction products. Some of the other construction 
products made from high-grade lumber, as a raw 
material are molding, mill work, cabinets, doors, and 
windows.  It is important to note that for commercial 
use, no distinction is made between the wood of 
Jeffrey pine and ponderosa pine. 
 
Pure n-heptane is distilled fro m Jeffrey Pine resin.  It 
was selected as the zero point on the petrol octane 
rating scale.  Jeffrey Pine resin cannot be used to  make turpentine, as n-heptane is explosive when 
ignited. 
 
Wildlife uses: 
The Jeffrey pine forests provide 
wildlife cover for birds, small mammals and big 
game.  Its’ seeds are both  disseminated and eaten by 
insects, birds, and sma ll mammals such as mice, 
chipmunks, and tree squirrels. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  The Jeffrey pine may live 400 to 500 years 
and can attain immense size. It typically grows to 4 to 
6 feet in diameter, and 170 to 200 feet in height. To 
date, the largest Jeffrey pine recorded in the western 
Sierra Nevada had a diameter of 7.5 feet, and a height 
of 175 feet. 
 
The Jeffrey pine needles are in bundles of three (3), 
and are 7 to 11 inches long.   Its’ cones are 6 to 10 
inches long, and oval lacking the spines, which make 
ponderosa pine cones prickly. 
 
The Jeffrey pine bark is deeply furrowed, and 
reddish-brown compared to orange of the ponderosa 
pine.  It also has a strong vanilla or pineapple odor.  
 
Distribution : Jeffrey pine is found primarily in 
California extending north through the Klamath 
Mountains into southwestern Oregon, across the 
Sierra Nevada into western Nevada, and south to the 
Transverse and Peninsular Ranges and into northern 
Baja California.  In the northeast, central, and 
southern portions of its range, climate and elevation 
determine its distribution, rather than soil type. 
 
Habitat:  The Jeffrey pine can occupy many sites 
from the edges of moist, high mountain meadows to 
arid slopes bordering desert s, and it will grow over a 
wide range of elevations. The Jeffrey pine also grows 
in a diverse range of climatic conditions.  It grows 
well on harsh and infertile sites. It is tolerant of 
drought, adapts to cold weather because it requires a 
shorter growing season than the ponderosa pine.  
Cold winters largely determine its presence in the 
Klamath, western Sierra Nevada, and southern 
California ranges.

Adaptation 
The Jeffrey pine grows on a wide variety of well-
drained soils. In the northwest portion of its range, 
the Jeffrey pine grows on infertile soils. However, it 
typically grows on infertile soils, mostly shallow and 
fine, fine loamy, and clay-textured gravelly surface 
soils. This pine grows at elevations as low as 200 
feet. 
 
In the Sierra Nevada, Jeffrey pine typically grows on 
volcanic soils with coarse soil texture, as gravelly 
sandy loams or loamy coar se sands. Jeffrey pine 
grows at elevations from 1,600 to over 9,000 feet.  
 
Jeffrey pine has exhibited potential for re-vegetation 
of acid mine waste sites in northeastern California. It 
was found to be well adapted to a sulfur mine spoil 
site that was high in acidity and low in nitrogen 
availability.
 
 
Establishment 
The Jeffrey pine regenerates sexually through seed 
production over a two-year  cycle. Trees flower in 
June and July of the first year, and cones mature in 
the summer of the second year. Most seeds are shed 
in September and October. Seeds typically fall only 
about 100 feet from the parent tree, although fall 
storms with high winds may carry seeds up to 1/2 
mile away. 
 
On the west side of the Sierra Nevada, seed crops are 
borne every 2 to 8 years. Trees may start to bear 
cones as early as eight y ears old, but typical seed 
bearers are 30+ years old and 60 to 180 feet tall. 
Seeds germinate quickly in the spring.  However, 
regeneration of Jeffrey pine by seed or replanting 
may fail due to poor seedbeds, sparse seed crops, 
poor seed dissemination, seed predators, cutworms, 
and diseases.  
 
Seedlings establish most successfully on bare mineral 
soil.  A major cause of regeneration failure is 
competition for moisture from other vegetation. 
Heavy competition from brush, grasses, and sedges 
for soil water can be lethal to Jeffrey pine seedlings 
in the dry summer period, while shade from shrubs 
can slow growth of surviving seedlings. 
 
Jeffrey pine can grow to impressive size on the best 
sites, however; by contrast, stand productivity is low 
for Jeffrey pine on infertile sites, sometimes growing 
sparse stands in which 300-year-old trees are less 
than 100 feet tall. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Squirrels, mice, moles, and birds consuming large 
amounts of Jeffrey pine seeds.  Some of the 
biological agents attacking Jeffrey pine are two (2) 
needle diseases, a limb canker, as well as at least five 
(5) different rusts, three (3 ) root diseases and various 
heart rots. The worst disease of Jeffrey pine is caused 
by western dwarf mistletoe. 
 
The Jeffrey pine beetle is common throughout its 
range, is the single worst enemy of the Jeffrey pine 
and has caused extensive mo rtality in mature trees. 
Other insects that damage Jeffrey pine include twig 
and needle scales, defoliators, stem and twig borers, 
tip moths, and cone and seed feeders.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Discovered in 1852 in the Shasta Valley of California 
by Scottish botanist, John Jeffrey, Jeffrey pine was 
first classified as a variety of ponderosa pine due to 
its physical resemblance and the similarity of its 
geographic range. It is closely related to ponderosa 
pine, producing wood of equal structure and quality. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Conifer Specialist Group. 1998.  Pinus jeffreyi. In: 
IUCN 2006.  2006 IUCN Red List of Threatened 
Species.  <
www.iucnredlist.org
 
Farjon, A. 2001.  World Checklist and Bibliography 
of Conifers. 2nd edition. The Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew. The Bath Press, Bath, England, UK. 
 
Jenkinson J. L.1990.  Pinus jeffrey . Jeffrey Pine. in: 
Burns, R. M. and Honkala, B. H., tech. coords. 
Silvics of North America. Volume 1, Conifers. 
Washington, DC: USDA Forest Service; 1990; pp. 
359-369. 
 
Moerman. D . 1998.  Native American Ethnobotan.y  
Timber Press. Oregon. 1998 ISBN 0-88192-453-9. 
 
Prepared By:  
Lincoln M. Moore ,  
USDA NRCS NATIONAL Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson ,

Earth Team Volunteer, USDA NRCS NATIONAL 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS NATIONAL Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 22june06 lmm; 060803 jsp  For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.