Plant Guide
CHICKASAW PLUM 
Prunus angustifolia Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = PRAN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State University, 
Forestry Research 
 
Figure  1.  Chisholm Germpla sm Chickasaw plum in fruit.  
Photo by John M. Row  
 
Alternate Names  
Sand plum , sandhill plum, sand hill plum, mountain 
cherry   
 
Uses  
Chickasaw  plum was first cultivated in 1874  
(Schopmeyer, 1974).   
Ornamental:   Its w hite flowers are attractive and fragrant  
in the spring,  produc ing a beautiful flower show .  It 
should be part of any native landscape planting. They are 
maintenance free and attract wildlife (source).  
 
Wildlife : Chickasaw  plum is a popular plant for use in 
developing wildlife habitat on sandy so ils. The thorny 
thicket is valuable for songbird and game bird nesting, 
loafing and roosting. Various other animals  also use it for 
loafing, bedding and escape cover. The fruit is consumed 
by numerous birds and  other animals (Kansas Forest 
Service, 2010) .  Northern bobwhites ( Colinus virginianus) 
nest in mixed shrub communities composed 
predominantly of Chickasaw plum in Texas (Guthery et 
al ., 2005).  There are anecdotal reports of plum providing 
nesting cover for northern bobwhites, brown thrashers 
( Toxost oma rufum ), northern mockingbirds ( Mimus 
polyglottos ) and gray catbirds ( Dumetella carolinensis
) in 
the southeastern U S ( Dunkin and Guthery, 2010 ).  Field 
sparrow (Spizella pusilla ), Bell’s vireo (Vireo bellii), and 
loggerhead shrike ( Lanius ludovicianus )
 also require 
woody plants including Chickasaw plum for nesting  (Sauer 
et al., 2008) as well as painted bunting ( Passerina 
ciris ) (Dunkin et  al.,  2008).  Plum is important to lesser 
prairie -chickens ( Tympanuchus pallidicinctus ) for resting, 
escape and ther mal cover (Donaldson, 1969).   
 
Livestock:  Cattle use plum thickets to escape the summer 
sun and actually gain weight faster when the thickets form 
a usable part of their range (Gardenguides.com, 2010).  
 
Windbreaks:  May be used in outside row for ground lev el 
protection.   
 
E ro sion control: It is very effective in stabilizing blowing 
soil. It is also used to stabilize stream banks and gullies 
(Kansas Forest Service,  2010).  
 
Food items:  The fruit is used for making wine, jam, and 
jelly.   The search for agricul tural diversification has 
rekindled an interest in the domestication and utilization 
of native plums as a high value, specialty crop (Reid and 
Gast, 1993).    
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans regularly consumed the 
fruit fresh or dried it for winter (Nature Hills.com, 2010).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Chickasaw plum is a  short, thickly branched 
shrub  1 to 3 m (3.3 to 9.8  ft) tall , often forming extensive 
thickets or colonies due to extensive suckering;
 or small 
tree, height at maturity 4.3 to 7.6 m (14 to 25 ft) .  Leaves 
are lanceolate to oblong lanceol ate, 0.3 to 6.1 cm ( 0.8-2.4 
in ),  0.16 to 0.3 cm ( 0.4-0.8 in ) wide, acute or short 
acuminate, cuneate or rounded at the base, slender, 
lustrous and glabrous above, strongly trough shaped with 
stalks that bear 2 red glands near the apex with leaf teeth 
finel y serrate, tipped with glands or scars of these.  Its 
numerous zigzag twigs are smooth, reddish brown and 
slender.  Younger branches have smooth reddish brown 
bark with large, horizontal lenticels.  Older trees have 
rough, scaly trunk bark.  There are shor t, side twigs that 
bear flowers and end in sharp points.  Open-  pollinated  
and  early bloom ing, March -April, t he numerous off -white 
or yellowish white flowers with little fragrance appear 
before the leaves and are less than 20 mm ( ½ in) across; 
sepals green , no glands on the calyx lobes.  The ripe  fruits 
small , 10- 20 mm  ( ¼ to 1/2in) in size , thin-skinned, red, 
orange -red, or yellow, not glaucous but with a slight 
bloom; stone small, rough, yellowish, and turgid, almost