Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
JACK PINE 
Pinus banksiana  Lamb. 
Plant Symbol =PIBA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
The Gooding Family’s
  
 
1st Annual  
Everybody Plays with Gooding
 
Week: 
We Just don’t want to be  Lonely Days! 
 
Celebrity Golf & 
Basketball 
Tournaments 
  
 Herman, D.E. et al. 1996. North Dakota tree handbook. USDA 
NRCS ND State Soil Conservation Committee; NDSU Extension 
and Western Area Power Admin., Bismarck, ND
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic use . Canadian Indians used jack pine 
wood as frames in their canoes.  
Commercial uses: Jack pine is important timber 
species in the Lake States of the United States and 
Canada.  These trees produce pulpwood, lumber for 
construction, telephone poles, fence posts, mine 
timbers, and railroad ties.  Jack pine is used as 
Christmas trees and for stabilization of watersheds.  
 
Wildlife uses:  Serves as habitat and breeding area for 
the endangered Kirtland's warbler ( Dendroica 
kirtlandii ), federally endangered bird.  These small 
birds utilize jack pine stands ranging from 1.5 and 6 
m (5 to 20 ft) tall larger than 32 ha (80 acres) as 
nesting grounds. White-tailed deer ( Odocoileus 
virginianus ) browse saplings and young trees and  snowshoe hares (
Lepus americanus ) feed on young 
seedlings.  Porcupines (Erethizon dorsatum ) feed on 
bark that often leads to deformed trees.  Red squirrels 
( Tamiasciurus hudsonicus ), chipmunks (Eutamias 
spp.), mice ( Peromyscus leucopus ), goldfinches 
( Carduelis tristis ), and robins (Turdus migratorius ) 
consume seeds.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
states noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Jack pine is a small to medium-sized, 
native, evergreen tree averaging 17 - 20 m (55 - 65 ft) 
high.  Crown small, irregularly rounded or spreading 
and flattened irregular.  Branches descending to 
spreading-ascending, poorly self-pruning; twigs 
slender, orange-red to red-brown, aging gray-brown, 
rough.  Cones are retained for several years, resulting 
in a coarse appearance.  Trunk straight to crooked; 
bark at first dark and scaly, later develops scaly 
ridges.  Branchlets are yellow to greenish-brown 
when young, then turning gray-brown with age; very 
resinous buds.  The leaves are evergreen, 2 - 3.75 cm 
(.75 - 1.5 in) long, and two twisted, divergent needles 
per fascicle, yellow-green in color all surfaces with 
fine stomatal lines, margin s finely serrulate, apex 
acute to short-subulate.  Fascicle sheath is short 0.3-
0.6 cm, semipersistent.  Seeds are compressed-
obovoid, oblique; body 4-5 mm, brown to near black; 
wing 10-12 mm. 2 n=24 
 
The minimum seed-bearing  age of open-grown jack 
pine is 3 to 5 years old. Some seed is produced every 
year and serotinous cones accumulate in the crown.  
A mature stand of jack pine may have as many as 2 
million seeds per acre (5 million/ha) stored in 
unopened cones.  Because of abundant seed 
production, few mature  trees are necessary to 
regenerate a stand.  The serotinous cones are sealed 
close with a resinous bond that requires high 
temperatures to open and liberate the seeds.  This 
heat is usually provided by fire, but hot, dry weather 
(temperatures of at 49 to 60 degrees C) also opens 
some cones.  Because temperatures required to open 
cones typically occur in the warmest part of the 
summer, survival of new germinant may be poor 
because of drough t conditions or lack of time to 
become established before winter.

The winged seeds are the smallest of the native North 
American pines and are dispersed by gravity and 
wind.  The effective dispersal range is about 110 to 
130 feet (34-40 m) or two tree heights. 
 
Seeds usually germinate rapidly after release when 
the 10-day mean maximum air temperature is 65 
degrees Fahrenheit (18 deg C) or higher.  Jack pine 
seeds occasionally exhibit partial dormancy, which is 
probably broken naturally by heat from fire.  Seeds 
remain viable in closed cones for years, but viability 
decreases over time 
 
Distribution : Jack pine occurs in Canada from British 
Columbia to Nova Scotia; and in the United States 
from Illinois eastward to New Hampshire, and 
Maine .  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat: Widespread throughout Northwestern 
Ontario, jack pine is usually found on sandy soils of 
the Spodosol and Entisol soil orders. It also grows on 
loamy soils, on thin soils over the granites and 
metamorphosed rocks of the Canadian Shield, over 
limestone, on peat, and on soil over permafrost. 
Grows in mono-specific stands or in association with 
black spruce; less common in mixed woods with 
trembling aspen and other species. 
 
Adaptation 
Jack pine is the best adapted of all boreal conifers to 
fire.  With medium thick bark, mature individuals 
have only moderate fire tolerance, but populations 
survive because of dela yed seed release from 
serotinous cones, early reproductive maturity, fast 
growth in full sun, and preference for mineral soil 
seedbeds.  Jack pine invades areas where mineral soil 
has been exposed by major disturbance such as fire .  
Jack pine is fire adapted and becomes a dominate 
species in areas that are exposed to frequently 
burned. 
 
Establishment 
Jack pine is regenerated by planting, direct seeding, 
scattering cone-bearing  slash on mechanically 
scarified ground, or using the seed tree silviculture 
method combined with prescribed fire.  Usually 
grows in dry, acidic sandy  soils with a lower pH limit 
of 4.0, but also loamy soil, thin soil over bedrock, 
peat, and soil over permafrost.  Does not usually 
grow in moderately alkaline soil, but can grow in 
calcareous soils up to pH 8.2 if normal mycorrhizal 
fungi are present.  
Jack pine occurs on level to gently rolling sand plains 
of glacial outwash, fluvial,  or lacustrine origin, on 
eskers, sand dunes, rock outcrops, bald rock ridges, 
and lakeshores.  At elevations between 300 to 700 m 
(1,000 to 2300 feet). 
 
Jack pine seeds germinate best on mineral soil or soil 
with less than 0.2 inch or organic matter.  The 
organic material level can be reduced by fire or 
mechanical raking and disking.  The slash on seedbed 
left by harvesting must be reduced because it will 
provide too much shade.   Some shade might be good 
for germination but young  Jack pine seedlings 
require full sunlight to become established.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The jack pine budworm (Choristoneura pinus ) 
defoliates mature jack pine.  The jack pine budworm, 
native to North America, has a range that coincides 
almost exactly with jack  pine, its preferred host.  
Root borers, root feeders,  shoot and stem borers, leaf 
feeders, needle miners, and sucking insects affect the 
survival and growth of seedlings.  Many other insects 
feed on jack pine cones.  Young stands of jack pine 
are susceptible to defoliation by the redheaded pine 
sawfly ( Neodiprion lecontei ).  Jack pine is 
susceptible to many fungi, diseases and rust. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information. Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Argus, G.W. 1966. Botanical investigations in 
northeastern Saskatchewan: the subarctic Patterson-
Hasbala Lakes Region . Canadian Field-Naturalist 
80:119-143.  
 
Benzie, J.W. 1977.  Manager’s Handbook for Jack 
Pine in the North Central States.  USDA For. Serv., 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-32. North Central Forest 
Experiment Station, St. Paul, Minnesota 18 pp.  
 
Braun, E.L. 1950.  Deciduous Forest of Eastern North 
America.  Hafner Publishing, New York, New York. 
596 pp.

Cayford, J.H. and A. Bickerstaff. 1968. Man-made 
Forests in Canada. Forest ry Branch Publication 
1240.  Canadian Department Fisheries and Forestry, 
Ottawa, ON. 68 pp.  
 
Cayford, J.H., Z. Chrosciewicz, and H.P. Sims. 1967. 
A Review of Silvicultural Research in Jack Pine. 
Forestry Branch  Publication 1173. Canadian 
Department Forestry and Rural Development, 
Canadian Forestry Service, Ottawa, Ontario. 209 pp.  
 
Chrosciewicz, Z.. 1963.  The Effects of Site on Jack 
Pine Growth in Northern Ontario. Canadian 
Department Forestry, Research Branch Publication 
1015. Ottawa, Ontario. 28 pp.  
 
Critchfield, W.B.,and E.L. Little, Jr. 1966. 
Geographic Distributions of the Pines of the World. 
U.S.D.A. For. Serv. Misc. Public. 991, Washington, 
D.C. 97 pp.  
 
Eyre, F.H., ed. 1980.  Forest Cover Types of the 
United States and Canada . Society of American 
Foresters, Washington, D.C. 148 pp.  
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin and F.M. 
White 1996.  Textbook of Dendrology , 8th ed., 
McGraw Hill Book., New Yo rk; New York 534 pp.  
 
Little, E.L. Jr. 1971. Atlas of United States Trees . 
Vol. 1. Conifers and important hardwoods. U.S.D.A. 
For. Serv. Misc. Public. 1146, Washington, D.C.  
 
Little, E.L. Jr. 1979.  Checklist of United States Trees 
(native and naturalized). U.S.D.A. For. Serv. Misc. 
Public. 541, Washington, D.C. 375 pp.  
 
Little, E.L. Jr., and W.B. Critchfield. 19 69. 
Subdivisions of the Genus  Pinus (Pines). U.S.D.A. 
For. Serv. Misc. Public. 1144, Washington, D.C.  
Mayfield, HF. 1953.  A census of the Kirtland’s 
warbler.  Auk 70:17-20.  
 
Righter, F.I., and P. Stockwell. 1949. The Fertile 
Species Hybrid (Pinus murraybanksiana) . Madrono 
10:65-69.  
 
Rudolf, P.O. 1965. Jack pine ( Pinus banksiana 
Lamb.). In Silvics of Forest Trees of the United 
States . P. 338-354. H.A. Fowells, comp. U.S.D.A., 
Ag. Hndbk. 271. Washington, D.C.  
 
Rudolph, T.D. and P.R. Laidly. 1990.  Pinus 
banksiana (Lamb.), Jack Pine, pp. 280-293. In  R.M. 
Burns and B.H. Honkala (eds.), Silvics of North 
America, Vol. 1, Conifers, U.S.D.A. For. Serv. 
Agric. Handbk. 654, Washington, D.C.  
 
Rudolf, T.D. and C.W. Yeatman. 1982.  Genetics of 
Jack Pine,  U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Research Paper 
WO-38. Washington, D.C. 60 pp. 
 
Scotter, F.W. 1974.  Distribution of Pine (Pinus spp.) 
in the South Nahanni and Flat Rivers Region, 
Northwest Territories.  Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 4:555-557.  
 
Prepared By:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson ,  
Earth Team Volunteer, USDA NRCS National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 27june06lmm; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.