Plant Guide
TAPER-LEAVED  
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon attenuatus Douglas ex 
Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = PEAT3  
Contributed by:  NRCS  Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA  
 
Penstemon attenuatus.  Pamela Pavek  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  taper -leaf  penstemon,  sulphur 
penstemon,  sulphur beardtongue ( P. attenuatus var. 
palustris ), south Idaho penstemon ( P. attenuatus var. 
militaris ), small penstemon ( P. attenuatus var. 
pseudoprocerus ) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  None  
 
  Uses
 
Pollinator habitat: Penstemon attenuatus  is a source of 
pollen and nectar for a variety of bees, including honey 
bees and native bumble bees , as well as butterflies and 
moths.  
 
Bumble bee visiting a Penstemon attenuatus flower. Pamela 
Pavek  
Rangeland diversification:  This plant can be included in 
seeding mixtures  to  improve the diversi ty of rangeland s. 
 
Ornamental:  Penstemon attenuatus  is very attractive and 
easy to manage as an orname ntal in urban, water-saving 
landscapes.  Rugged Country Plants (2012) recommends 
placing  P. attenuatus in the back row of a perennial bed, 
in rock gardens and on embankments.   It is hardy to 
USDA Plant Hardiness  Zone 4 (Rugged Country Plants 
2012) .   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Figwort family ( Scrophulariaceae).  Penstemon 
attenuatus  is a native, perennial forb that grows from a 
dense  crown to a height of 10 to 90 cm (4 to 35 in) .  
Leaves are dark green, opposite and entire , however the 
margins of P. attenuatus var.  attenuatus leaves are often, 
at least in part, finely toothed  (Strickler  1997).  Basal 
leaves are petiolate, up to 4 cm (1.5 in) wide and 17 cm (7 
in) long.   Stem leaves are smaller and mostly clas ping.  
Flowers bloom in May and June , and can be blue to 
purple and pink, or pale yellow  to nearly white.  The 
inflorescence consists of two whorls of flowers around the 
stem  at each leaf axis .  Flower s have  five lanceolate to 
ovate or obov ate petals with translucent margins , and are 
1 to 2 cm (3/8 to 3/4  in) long.  The petals are  fused to 
fo rm  a tube that is expanded toward the mouth and has