Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FREMONT’S 
COTTONWOOD  
Populus fremontii S. Wats. 
Plant Symbol = POFR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & New Mexico Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Poplar, Alamo cottonwood 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The sweet and starchy sap can be 
consumed raw or cooked.  The bark is bitter, but 
edible.  It can be scraped off and eaten, cooked in 
strips like soup noodles, or dried and powdered as a 
flour substitute.  The inner bark of cottonwoods and 
aspens were used for man and horse in hard times.  
Some Indians preferred it because of its sweetness. 
  
The active biochemical constituents are salicin and 
populin, the precursors of aspirin that are useful  wherever a fever needs reducing or an anti-
inflammatory is appropriate 
(Moore 1979).  The bark 
is the most effective part for tea but is rather bitter; 
for this reason the leaves  are often preferred.  Leaf 
buds make an excellent ointment for burns and skin 
irritations.  A wash of the bark is applied externally 
for cuts, bruises, abrasions, burns and fetid 
perspiration, as well as healing chafing sores on 
horses.  A poultice can be used for sprains, muscle 
pain, and swollen joints.   A salve can be made that 
cleanses and conditions the skin when used regularly.  
Taken internally, it is an anti-inflammatory agent, 
reduces fever, indigestion, aids coughs from colds, 
expels worms and intestinal parasites, is effective 
against scurvy, heart troubles, back pain, excessive 
menses, urinary tract infections, is a diuretic, and is 
used to prevent premature birth. 
Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences 
@ CalPhotos 
 
The Hopi Indians of Arizona consider the 
cottonwood tree sacred and carve Kachina dolls from 
the roots of the tree. They  believe the rustle of the 
wind through the quaking leaves to be the gods 
speaking to people (Strike 1994). 
 
Several California tribes used  Populus roots to make 
loosely twined baskets.  The Hupa, from Northern 
California, use cottonwood roots to begin making 
twined baskets.  The Maidu and Yokuts Indians use 
cottonwood twigs in their basketry (Strike 1994). 
 
Chumash skirts were made of fibers of  Populus inner 
bark.  Cordage, made from the inner bark of 
cottonwood or milkweed, held the rest of the fibers 
hanging freely. Sometimes small teardrop-shaped 
pieces of asphaltum, shell beads or Pinus seeds were 
used as weights to make the fibers hang properly.  
Wintun also used  Populus fibers for skirts and for 
padding baby cradles.  
 
Other Uses: Ecological diversity, bank and sediment 
stabilization, maintenance of channel morphology, 
water quality improvement, ground-water recharge, 
flood abatement, fish and wildlife habitat. 
 
Riparian Ecosystem Services and Functions : The 
riparian zone essentially  encompasses those alluvial 
sediment deposits where river and alluvial ground 
water supplement that available from local 
precipitation.  High-to-low elevations, north-south 
and east-west gradients, and steep-to-shallow terrain 
all influence the relationship between geomorphic 
and fluvial processes and vegetation community

structure.  Riparian ecosystem functions include the 
following: 
• Ecological diversity. 
•  Riparian vegetation stabilizes sediment, thus preventing excessive soil erosion. 
•  Water quality is improved through filtration and trapping of sediment, nutrients and pollutants. 
•  Riparian vegetation tends to prevent the river from down-cutting or cutting a straight path 
(channeling), thus promoting a sinuous course, 
ground-water recharge, and maintenance of an 
elevated water table. 
•  Structurally complex riparian vegetation communities provide many different habitats and 
support a diverse array of animal species.  
Different groups of animals occupy or use the 
different layers of vegetation, and this multi-
story arrangement is often present nowhere else 
in the arid landscapes. 
•  Canopies of plants growing on streambanks 
provide shade, cooling stream water, while roots 
stabilize and create overhanging banks, 
providing habitat for fish and other aquatic 
organisms 
 
Riparian habitat provides living conditions for a 
greater variety of wildlife than any other habitat type 
found in California.  Use of riparian areas by wildlife 
species is affected by diversity and volume of foliage, 
presence of water, availab ility of "edge" habitat, and 
high levels of insect populations.  Valley-foothill 
riparian habitats provide food, water migration and 
dispersal corridors, and escape, nesting and thermal 
cover for an abundance of wildlife.  About 25 percent 
of the 502 California native land mammal species 
and subspecies are largel y dependent on riparian 
ecosystems.  Additionally, 55 species of mammals 
are known to use California's Central Valley riparian 
communities (Trapp et al. 1985).  At least 21 
mammal species or subspecies have been identified 
as being particularly vulnerable to loss of riparian 
habitat (Williams and Kilburn 1984).  At least 50 
amphibians and reptiles occur in lowland riparian 
systems (Brode and Bury 1985). 
 
Wildlife : California's riparian forests support a high 
diversity of breeding birds (Miller 1951).  In one 
study conducted on the Sacramento River, 147 bird 
species were recorded as nesters or winter visitants 
(Laymon 1985).  The percentage of breeding 
individuals, which are migratory, is very high in the 
cottonwood-willow habitat.  Humid conditions in the 
cottonwood-willow forest may promote more lush 
plant growth, higher invertebrate populations and; 
therefore, more availabl e food for flycatchers, 
warblers and other migratory, insectivorous birds.   Riparian areas support up to 10.6 times the density of 
migrant birds per hectare as
 adjacent non-riparian 
areas (Stevens et al. 1977).   Most of these migratory 
birds belong to the foliage insect (47%) or air insect 
(34%) foraging guilds.  
 
Grouse, quail, and other birds eat cottonwood buds 
and catkins (Martin et al.  1951).  Bark, twigs, and 
leaves are eaten by ungulates and rabbits, while 
beavers and porcupines relish the bark and wood. 
 
Since European settlement, the nesting riparian forest 
avifauna has changed significantly. Double-crested 
cormorants, great blue heron, great egret, Cooper's 
hawk, bald eagle, yellow-billed cuckoo, willow 
flycatcher, bell's vireo, warbling vireo, yellow 
warbler, and common yellow throat have been 
severely negatively impacted.  Parasitism by brown-
headed cowbirds has significantly negatively 
impacted willow flycatcher, Bell's vireo, warbling 
vireo, yellow warbler and common yellow throat.  
They burden other species with the task of incubating 
their eggs and raising their young. 
 
Fremont's cottonwood is one of several species which 
constitutes the majority of  the diet of beavers (Castor 
canadensis) (Stromberg 1993).  Beavers, once a 
dominant aquatic mammal in riparian systems, have 
been significantly reduced in many riparian areas 
through trapping, shooting, in-stream flow 
reductions, and other factors.  
 
Recreation : Recreational use of the riparian zone is 
many times that of other habitats.  People are drawn 
to the cool, shady environment along flowing streams 
for camping, picnicking, hiking, birding, 
photography, hunting, and fishing.  These areas 
contain water, interesting plants and animals, shade, 
and numerous other enjoyable features in the 
otherwise arid and semiarid environments.  
 
The impact of recreational us e on wildlife varies with 
the season and with the type, intensity and duration 
of use.  Construction of trails, picnic tables, and 
docks encourages recreational use and increases 
conflict with wildlife.  Recreational use may also 
reduce water quality because  of proliferation of 
human wastes. 
 
Livestock : Riparian ecosystems offer water, shade, 
and food for domestic livestock.  Cattle and sheep 
congregate in riparian areas , particularly during hot 
or dry periods.  Overgrazing of domestic livestock in 
riparian areas destroys riparian ground cover, disrupts 
the reproductive cycle of cottonwood trees, 
destabilizes streambanks, and thus increases sediment

loads to streams.  At periods in the year when the soil 
is not too wet, the leafage, twigs and shoots of 
Fremont cottonwood are browsed by all domestic 
grazing animals and deer.  The twigs are cropped 
especially close by sheep, goats, and deer.  The 
browse rating for cottonwood is good to fair for 
goats; fair to poor for sheep and deer; poor for cattle; 
and useless for horses (Sampson et al. 1981). 
 
Restoration Concerns : Many land uses in arid 
watersheds significantly decrease or destroy 
cottonwood riparian forests.  Timber harvest often 
adversely affects flood flows, which often become 
larger and flashier and car ry increased sediment.  
Buffer strips can help reduce sedimentation rates and 
flood velocities.  
 
Stream diversion for irrigation may reduce surface 
flows to a level insufficient to maintain cottonwood 
vegetation.  Ground water pumping lowers local and 
regional water tables and reduces stream flow, which 
can eliminate or weaken riparian vegetation. 
 
Runoff from hardened urban watersheds is immediate 
and intense, and sometimes actually lowers nearby 
riparian water tables as it causes rapid erosion and 
down-cutting in stream channels. 
 
Two introduced weedy ripari an species that continue 
to be recommended and distributed by commercial 
plant nurseries are Russian olive ( Eleagnus 
angustifolia ) and tamarisk or salt cedar ( Tamarix 
chinensis ).  Intensive or poorly timed livestock 
grazing and dam-induced changes in flood timing and 
magnitude often favor the survival of these 
introduced species and allow them to displace native 
species.  These species are very difficult to remove 
from human-impacted landscapes and are more 
competitive than cottonwood. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Willow Family (Salicaceae).  Fremont’s cottonwood 
is a native tree growing in riparian areas near 
streams, rivers and we tlands in the American 
Southwest.  Fremont's cottonwood trees range from 
12 to 35 meters in height, and trunk diameter ranges 
from 0.30 to 1.5 meters.  The bark is smooth in 
younger trees, becoming deeply furrowed with 
whitish cracked bark with age.  The leaves are 
cordate (heart-shaped) with  white veins and coarse  crenate-serrate teeth on the 
margins. The leaves have 
petioles 1/2 to equal the blade length, laterally 
compressed near the blade which causes the leaves to 
flutter in the wind.  These trees are dioecious, with 
flowers in drooping catkins, which are 4 to 14 cm 
long.  Cottonwoods bloom from March-April.  The 
fruit is an achene, which is attached to a silky hair, en 
masse looking like patches of cotton hanging from 
the limbs, thus the name cottonwood.  The seeds are 
wind dispersed. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Populus fremontii is  distributed throughout the 
Southwest, extending from California eastward to 
Nevada, Colorado, Arizona, Texas, New Mexico, and 
southward into Mexico.  This species occurs 
throughout California and is most abundant in the 
San Joaquin and Sacramento Valleys. According to 
Hickman (1993), cottonwood occurs in alluvial 
bottomlands and streamsides at elevations less than 
2000 m.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Cottonwoods dominate the riparian 
forests of lower terrace depo sits and stabilized gravel 
bars. Cottonwoods are found near water.  They 
require a bare gravel or sa nd substrate with adequate 
moisture for germination and development.  
Cottonwoods grow very rapidly when their roots are 
in contact with the perman ent water table; they can 
grow as much as 12 to 18 feet in 3 years. 
 
In California, common associates are valley oak 
( Quercus lobata ), interior live oak ( Quercus 
wislizenii ), California walnut ( Juglans hindsii), and 
California sycamore ( Platanus racemosa). Box elder 
( Acer negundo ),  Oregon ash ( Fraxinus latifolia), 
alder (Alnus rhombifolia ), and willow (Salix 
gooddingii, S. exigua, S. lasiandra, and S. laevigata ) 
are particularly prevalen t in the subcanopy.  
Understory species are mostly shrubs, including 
elderberry ( Sambucus mexicana) , buttonbush 
( Cephalanthus occidentalis) , blackberry (Rubus spp), 
and California rose (Rosa californica ).  Lianas such 
as poison oak (Rhus diversiloba  ) and California 
grape ( Vitis californica  are) are a dominant feature.  
Herbaceous vegetation is 1% cover except in 
openings where tall forbs may occur. 
 
Typically, in California, cottonwoods and willows 
predominate on the immediate stream banks, whereas 
valley oaks are spread irregularly over the natural 
levees farther away from the river.  In other parts of 
the American west, temporal gradients occur within a

location in the riparian zone.  Early pioneer 
communities such as cottonwood/willow give way to 
late successional communities such as mesquite or 
sagebrush, often a consequence of sediment 
accumulation (Patten 1998).  Many similarities 
among western riparian ecosystems exist because 
several dominant genera (e.g. Populus and Salix  spp.) 
are common throughout the West, and many 
geomorphic and hydrologic processes that influence 
riparian establishment are similar.  
 
Western riparian ecosystems have been greatly 
altered by human activity.  Riparian forests have been 
reduced to fragmented, discontinuous patches 
because of human interv ention.  For example, 
estimates are that 70 - 90  percent of the natural 
riparian ecosystems in the U.S. have been lost to 
human activities (Warner 1979).  Regional losses in 
these ecosystems have been estimated to exceed 98% 
in the Sacramento Valley in California (Smith 1977) 
and 95% in Arizona (Warner 1979).  Many factors 
have contributed to these resource losses, including 
the following: natural resource use; urbanization; 
alteration of stream flows through dam construction 
and ground-water withdrawal; modification of biotic 
conditions through grazing, agriculture, and 
introduction of non-native species; and alteration 
within watersheds (Patten 1998).  
 
Restoration: Use of an ecosystem model of riparian 
restoration has been used to create a functioning and 
self-sustaining habitat.  The long term objective is to 
create a framework within which natural selective 
forces can operate to cr eate a self-sustaining, 
functioning riparian habitat that not only provides 
habitat for a complete assemblage of riparian species, 
but which is also capable of long-term regeneration 
and recovery following natural disturbances (Baird 
1989).  Careful design, monitoring, and adaptive 
management are key components to successful 
restoration.  The structure  and dynamics of the plant 
community as well as species composition are 
designed and monitored, as well as landscape 
position. 
 
Live Plant Collections : Fremont's cottonwood is a 
pioneer or colonizing speci es and a prolific seed 
producer (Stromberg 1993).  Fremont's cottonwood 
propagates primarily from seed  rather than asexually.  
Cottonwood can also sprout shoots from lateral buds 
when the apical meristem is prostrated by 
floodwaters, snapped off in high winds, or pruned by 
beaver, deer, or other wildlife. 
 
Flooding is the primary disturbance in Fremont's 
cottonwood forests.  Seed germination and tree  establishment coincides with flood events.  Fremont's 
cottonwood seed germinates only during spring and 
early summer.  This seasonal restriction is due to: 1) 
early spring seed dispersal; 
2) short periods (1 to 5 
weeks) of seed viability; and 3) rapid seed 
germination (Shafroth et al. 1998).  These traits help 
synchronize germination with high stream flows in 
spring.  Moist soil is necessary for both germination 
and establishment of  Fremont's cottonwood. 
 
During this century most of the major rivers in the 
West were dammed.  The presence of these dams 
changed riparian habits in ways unfavorable to 
cottonwood regeneration.  In particular, the dams 
altered the timing and volume of water flowing 
through riparian areas.  The dams reduce floodplain 
inundation during spring, and spring flooding is 
necessary for cottonwood regeneration. 
 
Spring over-bank flows or capillary wetting of the 
soil surface in areas with shallow water tables, 
moistens the soil which is necessary for Fremont's 
cottonwood establishment.  A number of studies have 
related components of the reproductive cycle of 
Populus species to floodplain site conditions 
produced by stream flow and associated fluvial 
processes.  In particular, components of the annual 
pattern of stream flow, or annual hydrograph, are 
associated with specific stages of  Populus seedling 
emergence and growth.  Th ese include the following: 
1) flood flows that precede  Populus seed dispersal 
produce suitable germination sites; 2) flow recessions 
following a peak expose germination sites and 
promote seedling root elongation; and 3) base flows 
supply soil moisture to meet summer and winter 
seedling water demand (Shafroth et al. 1998; 
Mahoney et al. 1998).  The combination of root 
growth and capillary fringe defines the successful 
recruitment band for seedling establishment, which is 
usually from about 0.6 to 2 m in elevation above the 
late summer stream stage (M ahoney et al. 1998).  The 
rate of stream stage decl ine is also critical for 
seedling survival and should not exceed 2.5 cm per 
day .  
 
Cottonwoods grow rapidly and can reach 
medium/large tree height in about 20 to 25 years.  
Cottonwood forests could occur as rapidly as 25 - 30 
year (Grenfell 1988). Shrubby riparian willow 
thickets may last 15 to 20 years before being 
overtopped and shaded out by cottonwoods.  
Cottonwood or willow tree habitats close to river 
channels that receive a go od silt infusion, without 
major disruptive flows, tend to be self- perpetuating.

Cottonwood is susceptible to mistletoe.  In certain 
instances cottonwood can be invasive. Its shallow 
root system can disrupt sidewalks or pavement.  
 
Artificial Establishment: Fremont's cottonwood 
establishment from seed is difficult and seldom used.  
Fremont's cottonwood propagation is possible from 
hardwood, root cuttings and through tissue culture 
(Pope et al. 1990).  Fremont's cottonwood 
establishment from transplanted containerized 
saplings is costly and risky unless the saplings are 
irrigated.  The NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials 
Center, in cooperation with the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, developed a pole planting technique 
for establishing Fremont's cottonwood (USDA, 
NRCSa).  We reprint this procedure below. 
 
“Trial planting on well adapted sites indicate more 
that 80% survival of cottonwood and willow poles 
when dormant poles are cut and planted between 
November and February. 
 
It is essential to monitor the water tables at proposed 
planting sites for at least one year before planting.  
Poles planted where the water table fluctuates widely 
will have lower survival rates than those planted 
where water table is relatively stable.  If groundwater 
monitoring shows the water level will drop more than 
3 feet during the growin g season (May-October), 
another site should be selected.  Monitoring of 
observation wells for at least one calendar year 
before planting will allow better planting depth to 
ensure establishment.  
 
Salt cedar ( Tamarix chinensis ) and Arundo donax  
will need to be controlled before poles are planted.  
However, young cottonwoods and willows can grow 
successfully in quite small op enings in stands of salt 
cedar.  Study of natural stands suggest they will 
eventually shade out the salt cedar." 
 
In six riparian restoratio n projects carried out in 
California, competition from exotic weed species was 
a key factor in mortality and  site failure (Baird 1989).  
With the addition of water, weeds grew so vigorously 
that plants smaller than a 5-gallon pot was out-
competed.  One way to avoid this was to remove the 
surface soil, although this  has the disadvantage of 
removing nutrients, mycorrhizal fungi, bacteria, and 
insect and invertebrate populations critical to a 
healthy habitat.  They also used a cover crop of 
native wildflowers, hand-br oadcast over the site to 
aid in weed control.  On wetter, heavier soils this 
does not seem to provide effective weed control. 
 
There is considerable evidence that fertilizing a 
restoration site in southern California favors exotic 
weeds over native plants (Grime and Hunt 1975; 
Grime 1978; t. John 1987 and 1988).  Inoculation 
with mycorrhizal fungi enabled seedlings of some 
species to better utilize limited supplies of both water 
and nutrients.  Baird (1989) achieved inoculation 
through large (1.2 m deep by 2.8 m wide) root balls 
of mature trees brought in from riparian sites.  
Smaller, more economical soil plugs scattered 
throughout the site serve the same purpose.  The 
number of soil plugs needed to ensure the 
establishment of soil flora is directly related to the 
distance of the restoration site from a similar, mature 
community. 
 
Management 
Howe and Knopf (1991) conclude that to ensure the 
survival of cottonwood riparian communities along 
the Rio Grande, resource managers need to 
implement strategies to enhance cottonwood 
regeneration and survival, and control the spread of 
exotic species. 
 
Decadent age structures in  cottonwood forest consist 
of stands composed of large old trees but few 
saplings or small trees.  Several studies have 
implicated unregulated livestock grazing as an 
important cause of decadent age structures in 
cottonwood forests (Brotherson et al. 1983; Fenner et 
al. 1984; Rucks 1984; Shanfield 1984). Glinski 
(1977) showed a negative correlation between 
grazing levels and Fremont's cottonwood recruitment.  
Several studies showed fewer cottonwood seedlings 
in grazed than in non-grazed areas (Crouch 1979; 
Reichenbacher 1984).  
 
Livestock grazing has widely been identified as a 
leading factor causing or  contributing to degradation 
of riparian habitats in the western United States (U.S. 
General Accounting Office 1988; Chaney et al. 1990, 
Fleischner 1994, Ohmart 1996).  Livestock grazing 
can alter vegetative structure and composition of 
riparian habitat.  Overgrazing, especially by livestock 
and big game, frequently changes plant species 
composition and growth form, density of stands, 
vigor, seed production of plants, and insect 
production.  Bull and Slovlin (1982) attributed to 
livestock grazing the pauc ity of deciduous woody 
vegetation that was required by some bird species 
along Oregon streams. 
 
Schulz and Leininger (1991) found that bird species 
are differentially affected by cattle grazing in riparian 
areas.  Livestock grazing  causes the replacement of 
bird and mammal species  requiring the vertical

vegetation structure of riparian habitat to species, 
which are ubiquitous in their habitat preferences.  
Previous heavy cattle grazing changed the bird and 
small mammal community composition through 
reduction of shrub and herbaceous cover. 
 
Riparian zones can be managed for non-game species 
richness by maintaining high structural diversity of 
vegetation.  Species that are sensitive to grazing 
pressure should be monitored as indicators of habitat 
change.  Johnson (1985) pointed out the need to 
coordinate range and wildlife habitat management to 
ensure the existence of sensitive wildlife species that 
are negatively impacted by livestock grazing. Woody 
plant species increase rapidly when riparian areas are 
protected from livestock grazing.  The woody 
structural component of the vegetation is essential for 
wildlife species that are obligate inhabitants of 
riparian habitat, and in providing hiding cover and 
stabilizing streambanks for fish habitat. 
 
Slovlin (1984) recommended a 5-year rest from cattle 
grazing to re-establish healthy stands of riparian 
vegetation such as cottonwood and willows.  Siekert 
et al. (1985) reported that  spring grazing showed no 
significant changes in channel morphology, whereas 
summer and fall grazing did.  However, even with 
limited seasonal grazing, all tree seedling would be 
eliminated.  Marlow and Pogacnik (1985) 
recommended fencing riparian habitat, rest-rotation, 
light grazing (<20% forage removal), and grazing 
after streambanks have dried to 10% moisture. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Containerized Fremont's cottonwood samplings are 
available from most nurseries in the areas where 
adapted.  We recommend using plants from the same 
region, elevation, climate, soil type, moisture or 
hydrologic regime as you are replanting. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Auble, G.T. & M.L. Scott 1998.   Fluvial disturbance 
patches and cottonwood recruitment along the upper 
Missouri River, Montana .  Wetland 18(4):546-556. 
 
Baird, Kathryn 1989.  High quality restoration of 
riparian ecosystems .  Restoration and Management 
Notes 7(2):60-64. 
 
Beier, P., & R.H. Barret 1987.   Beaver habitat use 
and impact in the Truckee  River Basin, California 
USA .  J. Wildlife Management 51:794-799. 
 
Brode, J. & R.B. Bury 1984.   The importance of 
riparian systems to amphibians and reptiles .  Pages 
30 – 35, IN  R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, eds. 
California riparian systems; ecology, conservation, 
and productive management.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Brotherson, J.D., S.R. Rushford, W.E. Evenson, & C. 
Morden 1983.   Population dynamics and age 
relationships of eight trees in Navajo National 
Monument, Arizona.  J. Range Management 36: 250-
256. 
 
Bull, E.L. & J.N. Slovlen 1982.  Relationships 
between avifauna and streamside vegetation .  Trans. 
North. Am. Wildl. Nat. Resour. Conf. 47: 496-506. 
 
Cemments, C. 1991.   Beavers and riparian systems .  
Rangelands 13:277-279. 
 
Chaney, E., W. Elmore, & W.S. Platts 1990.  
Livestock grazing on western riparian areas .  U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8, Denver, 
Colorado. 
 
Conard, S.G., R.L. MacDonald & R.F. Holland. 
1977.   Riparian begetation and flora of the 
Sacramento Valley .  pp. 47-56 IN: Anne Sand (ed.).  
Riparian Forests in California. Their Ecology and 
Conservation. 
 
Crouch, G.L. 1979.   Long-term changes in 
cottonwoods on a grazed and ungrazed plains 
bottomland in Northeastern Colorado .  USDA,  
Forest Service Research Note RM 370: 1-4. 
 
Ellis, L.M. 1994.   Bird use of salt cedar and 
cottonwoods on a grazed and ungrazed plains 
bottomland in northeastern Colorado .  USDA,  
Forest Service Research Note RM-370:1-4. 
 
Farley, G.H., L.M. Ellis, J.N. Stuart, & N.J. Scott, Jr. 
1994.   Avian species richness in different-aged stands 
of riparian forest along the middle Rio Grande, New 
Mexico . Conservation Biology 8:1098-1108. 
 
Fenner, P.W., W.W. Brady, & D.R. Patton 1984. 
Observations on seed and seedlings of Fremont's 
cottonwood .  Desert Plants 6:55-58.

Fleishner, T.L. 1994.  Ecological costs of livestock 
grazing in western North America.  Conservation 
Biology 8:629-644. 
 
Gaines, D. 1977 .  The valley riparian forests of 
California: Their importance to bird populations .  
pp. 57-86 IN: Anne Sand (ed.).  Riparian Forests in 
California. Their Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Glinski, R.L. 1977.   Regeneration and distribution of 
sycamore and cottonwood trees along Sonoita Creek, 
Santa Cruz County, Arizona.  USDA, Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-43:116-123. 
 
Grenfell, W.E., Jr. 1988.   Valley foothill riparian.  
IN: Kenneth A. Mayer and William F. Laudenslayer, 
Jr.,  A guide To wildlife  habitats of California. USDA, 
Pacific SW Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
California Dept. of Fish and Game, PG and E, and 
USDA Forest Service Region 5. Page 86 - 87. 
 
Grime, J.P. 1978.   Interpretation of small-scale 
patterns in the distribution of plant species in space 
and time .  IN: A.J.H. Freysen  and J.W. Woldendorp 
(eds.) Structure and Functioning of Plant Populations.  
Elsevier, North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York.  pp. 
101-104. 
 
Grime, J.P. and R. Hunt 1975.   Relative growth rate: 
its range and adaptive significance in a local flora .  
J. Ecology 63: 393-422. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California . University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Howe, W.H. & R.L. Knopf 1991.   On the imminent 
decline of Rio Grande  
cottonwoods in central New Mexico .  The 
Southwestern Naturalist 36:28-224. 
 
Johnson, R.R. & C.W. Lowe 1985.   On the 
development of riparian ecology .  Pp 112-116 IN: 
R.R. Johnson, C.D. Ziebell,  D.R. Patten, P.F. Folliot, 
and R.H. Hamre, technical  coordinators.  Riparian 
ecosystems and their management: Reconciling 
conflicting uses. General Technical Report RM-120. 
U.S. Forest Service, Fort Collins, Colorado.  
 
Knopf, F.I. and F.B. Samson 1994.   Scale 
perspectives on avian diversity in western riparian 
ecosystems.  Conservation Biology 8(3):669-676. 
 
Laymon, S.A. 1984.   Riparian bird community 
structure and dynamics: Dog Island, Red Bluff, 
California .  Pages 587-597 IN:  R.E. Warner and K.  Hendrix, eds.  
California riparian systems; ecology, 
conservation, and productive management .  Univ. of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Mahoney, J.M. & S.B. Rood 1998.   Streamflow 
requirements for cottonwood seedling recruitment - 
an integrative model .  Wetlands 18(4): 634-645. 
 
Marlow, C.B. & T.M. Pogacnik 1985.   Time of 
grazing and cattle-induced damage to streambanks . 
Pages 279-284.  IN: Johnson, R.R., C.D. Ziebell, 
D.R. Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, and R.H. Hamre (Tech. 
Coords.)   Riparian ecosystems and their 
management: Reconciling conflicting uses .  Proc. 
First North Am. Riparian Conf.  U.S. Dep. Agric., 
For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120.  523 pp.. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc. New York. 500 pp. 
 
McGinley, M.A. & T.G. Whitham 1985.   Central 
place foraging by beavers (Castor canadensis): A test 
of foraging predictions and the impact of selective 
feeding on the growth form of cottonwoods (Populus 
fremontii) .  Oecologia 66: 558-562. 
 
Michny, F.J., D. Boos & F. Wernette 1974.   Riparian 
habitats and avian densities along the Sacramento 
River, California .  State of California Dept. of Fish 
and Game.  23 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the Mountain 
West .  Museum of New Mexico Press. 200 pp. 
 
Ohmart, R.D. 1996.   Historical and present impacts 
of livestock grazing on fish and wildlife resources in 
western riparian habitats .  pp. 245-279. IN:  P.R. 
Karausman (ed.) Rangeland Wildlife.  Society for 
Range Management, Denver, Colorado. 
 
Ohmart, R.D. & B.W. Anderson 1986 .  Riparian 
habitat. In inventory and monitoring of wildlife 
habitat .  Bureau of Land Management.  pp 169-199. 
 
Patten, D.T. 1998.   Riparian ecosystems of semi-arid 
North America: diversity and human impacts .  
Wetland 18(4): 498-512. 
 
Pope, D.P., J.H. Brock, and R.A. Backhaus 1990 .  
Vegetative propagation of key Southwestern woody 
riparian species .  Desert Plants 10: 91-95. 
 
Reichenbacher, F.W. 1984 .  Ecology and evolution of 
Southwestern riparian plant communities .  Desert 
Plants 6:15-22.

Roberts, W.G, J.G. Howe & J. Major 1977.  A survey 
of riparian forest flora and fauna in California .  
Pages 3-20.  IN: Anne Sand (ed.).   Riparian forests in 
California . Their Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Robichaux, Robert 1977.   Geologic history of the 
riparian forests of California .  Pages 21-34.  IN: 
Anne Sand (ed.).  Riparian Forests in California.  
Their Ecology and Conservation.. 
 
Rucks, M.G. 1984.   Composition and trend of 
riparian vegetation on five perennial streams in 
southeastern Arizona.  pp 97-107. IN:  R.E. Warner 
and K.M. Hendrix (eds.).   California riparian 
systems: Ecology, conservation, andpProductive 
management .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California 
 
St. John, T.V. 1987.   Mineral acquisition in native 
plants .  Pages 529-536.  IN: Elias, Thomas S. (ed.) 
Conservation and management of rare and 
endangered plants .  California Native Plant Society, 
Sacramento, California. 
 
St. John, T.V. 1988.   Soil disturbance and the 
mineral nutrient of native plants .  Pages 34-39.  IN: 
Rieger J.P. and B.K. Williams (eds.)   Proceedings of 
the second native plant revegetation symposium . San 
Diego, California. 
 
Sampson, A.W. & B.S. Jespersen 1981 .  California 
range brushlands and browse plants .  Division of 
Agricultural Sciences, University of California. 
 
Schulz, T.T. & W.C. Leininger 1991 .  Nongame 
wildlife communities in grazed and ungrazed 
montane riparian sites .  Great Basin Naturalist 
51(3):286-292. 
 
Schulz, T.T. & W.C. Leininger 1990 .  Differences in 
riparian vegetation structure between grazed areas 
and exclosures .  Journal of Range Management 
43(4): 295-299. 
 
Shafroth, P.B., G.T. Auble, J.C. Stromberg, & D.T. 
Patten 1998 .  Establishment of woody riparian 
vegetation in relation to annual patterns of 
streamflow, Bill  Williams River, Arizona .  Wetlands 
(18)4: 577-590. 
 
Shanefield, A.N. 1984.   Alder, cottonwood, and 
sycamore distribution and regeneration along the 
Nacimiento River, California .  pp 196-201. IN: R.E. 
Warner and K.M. Hendrix (eds.).   California riparian 
systems: Ecology, conservation, and productive  management
.  University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 
 
Siekert, R.E., Q.D. Skinner, M.A. Skinner, M.A. 
Smith, J.L. Dodd, & J.D. Rodgers 1985.   Channel 
response of an ephemeral stream in Wyoming to 
selected grazing treatments .  Pages 276-278.  IN: 
Johnson, R.R., C.D. Ziebell, D.R. Patton, P.F. 
Folliott, and R.H. Hamre (Tech. coords.).   Riparian 
ecosystems and their management: Reconciling 
conflicting uses .  Proc. First North Am. Riparian 
Conf.  USDA, For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. 
523 pp. 
 
Slovlin, J.M. 1984 .  Impact of grazing on wetlands 
and riparian habitat: a review of our knowledge .  pp. 
1001-1104. IN:  Developing strategies for rangeland 
management .  Nat. Res. Counc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
 
Stromberg, J.C. 1998.   Functional equivalency of 
saltcedar (Tamarix chinensis) and Fremont 
cottonwood (Populus fremontii) along a free-flowing 
river .  Wetlands 18(4): 675-686. 
 
Smith, F. 1977.   A short review of the status of 
riparian forests in California .  Pp. 1-2.  IN:  Anne 
Sand (ed.).  Riparian Forests in California.  Their 
Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Stevens, L.E., B.T. Brown,  J.M. Simpson, & R.R. 
Johnson 1977 .  The importance of riparian habitat to 
migrating birds .  pp. 156-164.  IN: Johnson, R.R. and 
D.A. Jones (tech. coords.).  Importance, preservation 
and management of riparian habitat: a symposium.  
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Report RM-43.  
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 217 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2.  Aboriginal Uses of California's 
Indigenous Plants .  Koelz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Stromberg, J.C. 1993.   Fremont cottonwood-
goodding willow riparian forest: a review of their 
ecology, threats, and recovery potential .  J. Arizona-
Nevada Acad. Sci. 27:97-110. 
 
Thompson, K. 1977.   Riparian forests of the 
Sacramento Valley, California .  Pp. 35-38.  IN: Anne 
Sand (ed.).   Riparian forests in California .  Their 
Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Trapp, G.R., G.L. Linc k & E.D. Whisler 1984.  The 
status of ecological research on the mammal fauna of

California's central valley riparian communities.  
Pages 942-949.  IN:   R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, 
eds. California ripari an systems; ecology, 
conservation, and productive management.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 05APR1999. 
 
U. S. General Accounting Office 1988.   Public 
rangelands: some riparian areas restored but 
widespread improvement will be slow .  GAO/RCED-
88-01, Washington, D.C. 
 
Warner, R.E. & K.M. Hendrix 1979.   California 
riparian systems: Ecology, conservation, and 
productive management .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Williams, D.F. & K.S. Kilburn 1984.   Sensitive, 
threatened, and endangered mammals of riparian 
and other wetland communities in California .  pp. 
950-956.  IN: Warner, R.E., and K.E. Hendrix (eds.), 
California riparian systems: ecology, conservation, 
and productive management .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 1035 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
James Henson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Michelle Stevens 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Greg Fenchel 
USDA, NRCS Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, 
New Mexico 
 
Species Coordinator 
James Henson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.