Plant Guide
WHIPLASH 
PAPPUSGRASS
 
Pappophorum vaginatum  Buckley  
Plant Symbol = PAVA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 
Alternate Names  
Pappophorum mucronulatum  
 
Uses  
Whiplash pappusgrass  is  useful for upland wildlife 
plantings, highway right -of -ways and ecosystem 
restoration.  It provides fair  forage for livestock.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General:   Whiplash pappusgrass  is  a native, 
warm -season, perennial bunch grass  with a height of 2  to 
3  1/2  feet.  The leaf blade is flat, narrow  up to 10 inches 
long with edges that may roll inward.   The seedhead is 4 
to 8 inches long, narrow, tightly contracted, with a whitish 
or tawny appe arance only rarely with a slight purple tinge 
(Gould,  1975).      Distribution
:  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   It i s  found in Texas, New Mexico  and  Arizona.  
 
Habitat :   Whiplash  pappusgrass  is found in  dry 
rangelands of Texas to  Arizona with annual rainfall of 10 
to  20  inches.  In the west it occurs at elevations of 2,500 
to  4,000  feet.  It is located on  a wide variety of range sites 
including  gray sandy loam, clay pan prairie, and saline  
clay .  It is associated with  Arizona cottontop, false 
Rhodes  grass, alkali sacaton , plains bristlegrass, and vine 
mesquite.  
 
Adaptation  
Whiplash pappusgrass  grows  well on most soil types, 
including sandy loam, clay, clay loam and saline clay 
soils  
 
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting ca n be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weeds, whiplash 
pappusgrass  can be planted in the late summer .  In 
Arizona and New Mexico planting s hould be timed to 
catch the summer monsoons.  Establish a clean, weed -free 
seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, 
the site should be firm and have accumulated soil 
moisture.   
 
Whiplash pappusgrass  is best seeded using a native -grass 
drill with picker wheels to ensure a good planting of the 
fluffy seed.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not 
easily planted with a drill, but some type of additional 
coverage  such as culti -packing or light dragging  will be 
beneficial to ensure good seed to soil contact.   Seed 
coatings (talc based) can also be used to increase the 
flowability of the fluffy seed through standard seed drills.  
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to 
plant too shallow than too deep.  For calibratio n purposes, 
Webb  Germplasm  whiplash pappusgrass  contains 
approximately  436,250 uncoated seeds per bulk pound.  A 
seeding rate of 3 pounds  of pure live seed (PLS) per acre 
is recommended.  In planting mixtures reduce the rate 
according to the percent of  whiplash pappusgrass  in the 
mixture.   
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be applied until the 
stand is established.  If 1 to 2 plants per square foot have 
become established , t he plan ting has been successful.