Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
Plant Guide  
SHARPLEAF 
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon acuminatus  
Douglas ex Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = PEAC  
 
Contributed by: Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
and Idaho NRCS State Office 
Nancy Shaw, USDA Forest Service, Boise, ID 
 
Alternate Names 
Sand penstemon; sand-dune penstemon 
 
Uses 
Sharpleaf penstemon is primarily used as a forb 
component for wildlife habitat enhancement and 
restoration efforts. Its showy flowers attract 
numerous pollinators and other insects that provide a 
food source for birds and other vertebrates. This 
species is used in xeriscaping and other low-water-
use landscaping. It is suited for roadside and other 
beautification plantings.  
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Website and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. state noxious status).  Description 
General
: Figwort Family (Scrophulariaceae).  
Sharpleaf penstemon is a short-lived perennial forb 
20 - 60 cm (8 - 24 inches ) tall. One to several erect 
stems arise from a thick crown.  Stems and leaves can 
be both glabrous and glaucous.  The fleshy leaves are 
entire with the basal leave oblanceolate and tapering 
to a petioled base.  The basal leaves are 4 - 10 cm 
long and 7 - 15 mm wide.  The upper leaves are 2 - 7 
cm long and 10 - 35 mm wide, often sessile and 
clasping, and ranging from lanceolate to ovate with 
acute to acuminate tips.  Flower clusters are compact 
and subtended by bracts that are usually wider than 
long with overlapping, heart-shaped bases.  The calyx 
is 4.5 - 9 mm long during flowering and elongates as 
it matures.  The individual sepals are narrowly 
lanceolate in shape.  The blue to lavender or pink 
corolla ranges from 11 - 20 mm long with the tube 
narrow at the base, tapering gradually to a wide 
throat.  The corolla lobes flare broadly.  The anthers 
are glabrous and black outside, the sacs splitting 
completely to become opposite and boat-shaped.  The 
stamen is glabrous or often with a short, yellow beard 
at the tips.  Flowering season is from May to July. 
There are 400,000 – 500,000 seeds per pound. 
 
 Cassondra Skinner, USDI BLM, Idaho 
 
Distribution 
Sharpleaf penstemon is found in low elevations east 
of the Cascade Mountains in Washington and 
Oregon, northern Nevada, northern Utah and 
southern Idaho, throughout the Snake River Plains.

Habitat 
Sharpleaf penstemon inhabits loam to fine sandy 
loam to sandy soils of dunes and other dry locations 
at elevations from 2,150 to 6,000 feet (640 to 830 m). 
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to well-drained soils with a 
pH range of 5.0 to 8.0. For xeriscaping and low 
water-use gardening, the species is recommended for 
use in USDA hardiness zones 6-8 in areas receiving 8 
to 10 inches or more annual precipitation.  
 
Management  
When planted in a native reclamation mix, sharpleaf 
penstemon should be a minor component of the 
mixture and establishing plant community.  
Therefore, management should be based on other key 
species in the established plant community.  Grazing 
on seeded lands should be deferred for at least two 
growing seasons to allow for establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Impact from insect pests on penstemon seed 
production can be significant. Penstemon borer larva 
can infect the crown and upper root area of all 
penstemon species, resulting in the loss of individual 
plants and entire fields. Presently, penstemon borers 
are known only from  extreme southwestern 
Colorado.  Penstemon  clearwing (Penstemonia spp. ) 
attacks multiple penstemon species. The larvae feed 
within the stems of the crown and lower above-
ground portions of the plant. A pheromone is 
available for monitoring  these adult pests. Other 
potentially significant pests include Lygus bugs and 
raceme-boring moths. Sharpleaf penstemon is also 
susceptible to soil-borne fusarium and rhizoctonia 
root rot, which can be severe in poorly drained loam 
and clay-textured soils. 
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Fields for seed production can be established by 
transplanting greenhouse-grown containerized stock 
or from direct seeding. Di rect seeding should take 
place in the fall to allow fo r natural stratification of 
the seed. Greenhouse materials can be established by 
seeding into cones or flats in winter for natural 
stratification or by stratifying the seed for 8 - 12 
weeks in cold/moist conditions. Prechilling 
requirements can be reduced with a liquid smoke 
treatment. Germination can also be enhanced by 
watering with a weak solution of giberellic acid (250 
ppm) though treated seedlings appear to be less 
vigorous than non-treated. Seed should be planted to 
a depth of 0 - 6 mm (0 - 0.25 in). 
  Chemical weed control in seed production fields of 
forbs is a challenge and preliminary work is only 
getting underway.  In herbicide tolerance screening 
trials conducted at the Malheur Experiment Station in 
Oregon, sharpleaf penstemon had good tolerance 
(based on seed yields) to 
post-emergence applications 
of Outlook (Dimethenamid-P), and Prowl 
(Pendimethalin).  Sharpleaf penstemon showed 
sensitivity to post-emergence applications of Buctril 
(bromoxynil octanoate), Caparol (Prmetryn) and 
Select (Clethodim). Considerable efforts to register 
herbicides for use on native forb seed production will 
be required. 
 
 Penstemon seedlings grown in weed barrier fabric for seed 
production. (Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS PMC, Aberdeen, ID) 
 
Because of the limited number  of available herbicides 
that can be used on broadleaf forbs, planting into 
weed-barrier fabric (pictured above) is a viable 
alternative to control weeds in forb seed production 
fields. Planting holes should be 3 - 4 inches in 
diameter at 9 - 18 inch spacing. 
 
Successful pollination is essential for commercial 
seed production of sharpleaf penstemon.  Bees and 
wasps that have been observed pollinating sharpleaf 
penstemon include sweat bees, bumble bees, honey 
bees and leafcutter bees.  The flowers bloom from 
May to July.  The seed is mature when the capsule 
turns brown and begins to open.  This typically 
occurs 5 - 8 weeks after flowering.  Seeds are rapidly 
dispersed. 
 
Seed harvest can be accomplished by hand or by 
direct combining. Harves t should occur when the 
stems and capsules begin to dry and open. Seed 
capsules open and seed is dispersed rapidly at 
maturity.  Seed can be clea ned with a small clipper or 
air-screen cleaner. Seed yields range from 150 - 250 
lb/ac (165 – 280 kg/ha).

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no releases of sharpleaf 
penstemon. Wildland harvested seed is available 
through commercial sources.  
 
References 
Barner, Jim. 2008. Propagation protocol for 
production of  Penstemon acuminatus  seeds. USDA 
FS – R6 Bend Seed Extractory, Bend, Oregon. In: 
Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org
 
(accessed 12 Jan 2009). Univ ersity of Idaho, College 
of Natural Resources, Fore st Research Nursery. 
 
Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho.  WM. C. Brown 
Company. Dubuque, Iowa. 828 p. 
 
Debolt, A. and H. Parkinson. 2005.  Propagation 
protocol for production of container  Penstemon 
accuminatus  plants. USDA FS – Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Boise,  Idaho.  In: Native Plant 
Network.  URL:  http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org
 
(accessed 12 Jan 2009). Mosc ow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 
 
Shaw, N., Walker, S., Jensen, S., Thompson, T. and 
A. DeBolt. 2003. Native plant material development 
and seed and seeding technology for native Great 
Basin forbs and grasses. In : Great Basin Native Plant 
Selection and Increase Project  FY03 Progress Report.  
 
Shock, C., Ishida, J. and E. Feibert. 2008. 
Identification of herbicides for use in native forb seed 
production. In: Great Basin Native Plant Selection 
and Increase Project  FY07 Progress Report. 
 
Slichter, P. 2007.  Penstemon acuminatus  var. 
acuminatus . 
http://ghs.greshan.k12.or.us/science/ps/nature/basin/5
petal/figwort/penstemon/yellow.htm 
(accessed 12 Jan 2009). 
 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
2008. The PLANTS database, version 3.5. URL: 
http://plants.usda.g ov (accessed 12 Jan 2009). Baton 
Rouge, LA. National Plant Data Center. 
 
Western Colorado Extension: Native Plant Seed 
Production. 2008. http://wsprod.colostate. 
edu/cwis487/wci/seed_production.html. (accessed 12 
Jan 2009). 
  Prepared By 
Loren St. John
, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Nancy L. Shaw , USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Boise, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 011209LWS; 011209DGO; 011509NLS; 090121 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.