Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KOLEAGRASS 
Phalaris aquatica  L. 
Plant Symbol = PHAQ  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 
Alternative Names 
Bulbous canarygrass, hardinggrass,  Phalaris 
tuberosa  var. hirtiglumis  (koleagrass), Phalaris 
tuberosa  var. stenoptera  (Harding grass), Towoomba 
canary grass, alpiste bulb eaux, phalaris tubereux, 
herbe de Harding, knolliges Glanzgras, capim-doce, 
rabillode cordero 
 
Uses 
Koleagrass was developed for improvement of 
annual grass range.  Its forage production is typically 
no greater than can be expected from native range.  
However, this perennial produces forage earlier in the 
season and stays green longer.  Fertilized Koleagrass 
can extend the green feed period two months or more 
in the winter compared to unfertilized native grasses, 
and can add about one month to the green feed period 
in spring when moisture is not limiting.    NOTE: This 
species has been known to have toxic effects on 
sheep and cattle.    
 
Koleagrass is now considered the standard perennial 
grass for improvement of  annual grass range in 
California.  Please consult the Related Web Sites on  the Plant Profile for further information on this 
species. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 ©  Brianna M. Richardson CalPhotos 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Koleagrass is an 
introduced, tall, robust, rapid-developing bunchgrass 
with short rhizomes.  This species includes both 
Phalaris tuberosa  var. stenoptera  (previously known 
as Harding grass) and  Phalaris tuberosa var. 
hirtiglumis  (previously known as koleagrass).  P.t. 
var.  hirtiglumis was recognized to have bigger seeds, 
more vigorous seedlings, yellow-green leaves, and 
hairy glumes.  Both of these varieties have been 
submerged taxonomically into  Phalaris aquatica.   
 
Distribution: Koleagrass was introduced from 
Morocco.  Used for pasture and erosion control in 
California and sparingly in other parts of the 
southwestern U.S.  Consult the PLANTS Web site 
for its U.S. distribution. 
 
Adaptation 
Koleagrass is adapted in California below 2,000 feet 
to the Mediterranean-like  climatic zone or where 
frost heaving is not a problem.  It will grow where 
there is 12 inches of annual rainfall and there is soil 
profile development (clay layer).  Moisture holding 
capacity of the soil becomes less critical as rainfall 
increases.  It establishes itself early, grows well 
during cold winter months, and reseeds readily. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed Preparation: Good  stands require a spring-
summer fallow to reduce competition from annuals in

fall.  Fall seeding is done on a firm, weed-free 
seedbed prepared after the first effective rains (1.5-
2.0 inches).  This ensures adequate moisture to 
support seedling growth and destroys the first crop of 
volunteer annuals.  If fallow is prepared before weed 
species produce seed, the fall weed competition is 
reduced, but not eliminated.  Fall seeding can follow 
a summer clean-up crop of Sudangrass  (Sorghum 
bicolor  ssp. drummondii ).  Planting is accomplished 
directly in the Sudangrass stubble.  
 
Method of Seeding: Best results are obtained by 
drilling the seed.  Use of a common grain drill is 
possible if the seed is first mixed with rice hulls as a 
dilutor and the drill is properly calibrated.  If seed is 
broadcast and covered by harrowing or dragging, the 
seeding rate is increased 1.5 times.  Seeding depth 
should be ¼-1/2 inch in all cases.  
 
Weed Control: During the establishment season, 
mowing may be necessary to reduce competition 
from annuals.  Set the mower at a height compatible 
with regrowth of the koleagrass and other perennials.  
Remove as little leaf area of the koleagrass and other 
perennials as possible so that development will not be 
retarded.  
 
Fertilization: Do not apply fertilizer in the 
establishment year.  In the second and subsequent 
years, 200 pounds per acre 16-20-0 (ammonium-
phosphate-sulfate) is recommended in the fall.  
 
Management  
Koleagrass should not be grazed until completion of 
growth the first season.  At  the end of the green feed 
period, dry forage can be grazed if the plants are 
large enough to resist pulling by livestock.  An 
average stubble height of three to four inches should 
be maintained.  
 
Established Stands: Koleagrass starts growth in fall 
coincident with the first rains.  Mature stands of 
koleagrass should be ready for grazing (6-8 inches 
high) by early January.  The amount of growth 
depends on the amount of rain, its distribution, 
temperature and soil fertility.  Cold tolerance is 
improved by the inclusion of phosphorus with 
nitrogen during fall fertilization.  Grass can be grazed 
at range readiness without harm to the plant so long 
as the ground is firm and not so wet that damage 
from trampling might occur.  Grazing should stop 
when fertilized annual range is ready for use or when 
there is a three-inch average stubble height.  Grazing 
will normally end in late February.  However, lack of 
moisture or poor growing conditions may require 
earlier termination.  Infrequently, when abundant  rainfall occurs in late winter, grazing can continue 
through mid-March.  Following winter grazing, the 
perennials, including koleagrass, must be rested to 
allow recovery and re-growth.  This deferment period 
should continue until the annual range grasses begin 
to dry up and lose their high
 feed value.  By the time 
the annual range is dry, koleagrass will have 
produced seed and stored food reserves in the roots.  
The leaves will still be green and will remain green 
for about one month after the annuals are dry.  This 
palatable forage can be grazed heavily until the 
average stubble height is three inches.  When grazing 
ends, many plants will be heavily used, others 
partially grazed, and there will be numerous seed 
stalks left.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Koleagrass can be grown as an annual for purposes of 
seed production.  At the Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, irrigated rows spaced 30 inches apart yield 
400-600 pounds per acre of seed when harvested with 
a binder in late spring following fall seeding.  
Koleagrass seed averages 267,000 seeds per pound.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Perla’ Cultivar- This cultivar was introduced from 
Morocco.  It is easy to establish, grows well during 
cold winter months, and produces good seed crops.  
Stands frequently improve through natural reseeding.  
Also, it’s adapted to soils with restricting layer in 
Mediterranean climatic zone wherever average 
annual rainfall is 400mm or more.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Alderson, James and Sharp, Curtis. November 1994. 
Grass Varieties in the United States. USDA NRCS, 
Washington, DC. 
 
USDA NRCS. 1974.  Management and uses of Perla 
Koleagrass.  USDA NRCS, Davis, CA. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dyer, Dave, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA and Reina  O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, CA. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Lockef ord Plant Materials 
Center, California. 
 Edited: 14sep2005 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.