Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MUTTONGRASS 
Poa fendleriana (Steud.) Vasey
Plant Symbol = POFE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 Photo by Derek J. Tilley 
 
Alternate Names 
Early bluegrass, mutton bluegrass,  Eragrostis 
fendleriana , Poa eatoni , P. montana, P. longiligula 
 
Uses 
Forage : Muttongrass is a good source of forage and 
has been rated as excellent forage for cattle and 
horses, and good for sheep, elk and deer (USDA 
1937). During the winter , seedheads are eaten by 
pronghorn antelope. Seeds and leaves are also 
utilized by birds. 
 
Erosion control : The fibrous root system of this 
species reaches a depth of  approximately 10 inches 
providing good surface erosion control in arid sites. 
 
Native species restoration : Muttongrass has been 
used sparingly to improve diversity in sagebrush and  piñon-juniper communities. It can be used to restore 
areas where juniper encroa
chment has depleted the 
herbaceous understory following juniper removal. 
The species is drought tolerant and has potential for 
use in restoration and native diversification projects 
throughout the West. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Muttongrass is a perennial bunchgrass 
growing 0.7 to 2.5 feet tall with narrow leaves (1 to 
3mm wide). The species is generally considered 
apomictic (not requiring fertilization for seed 
production). The flowers are typically pistillate (only 
female), but occasional staminate (male) flowers 
arise giving the species the ability to hybridize with 
other bluegrasses (Welsh and others 2003). Some 
plants may also reproduce sexually from pollen 
received from male plants of other bluegrass species 
(Cronquist and others 1977). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. Historic records show muttongrass ranges 
from southern Canada to Texas and east to the 
Dakotas. 
 
Habitat: Muttongrass is an important late 
successional understory component in juniper and 
piñon-juniper communities. Plants can also be found 
throughout ponderosa pine and into aspen forests and 
Engelmann spruce-lodgepole pine zones. 
 
Adaptation 
Muttongrass is among the most drought tolerant 
bluegrasses and should be considered for restoration 
and native diversification proj ects in western states. It 
is limited in its use however due to its low seed 
viability. 
 
This species performs best on well-drained clay 
loams but is also found in drier, less fertile, gravelley 
and sandy soils (USDA 1937). Muttongrass is 
adapted to sites receiving 10 to 22 inches annual 
precipitation. In the northern extent of its range, 
muttongrass occupies lower elevation plant

communities while it is found at higher elevations to 
the south. 
 
Muttongrass has shown limited tolerance to fire. 
Some evidence indicates that muttongrass stands 
have responded well following fires (Gartner and 
others 1978) while others have observed stands being 
damaged. 
 
Establishment 
Plant in late fall (dormant) with a pure seeding rate of 
2 lb PLS/acre. If seeding as part of a mix, adjust 
seeding rate to the desired percentage of the mixture. 
Seed should be planted with a drill ¼ inch deep, into 
a firm, weed-free seedbed or seed can be broadcast 
followed with a cultipacker or harrow operation to 
provide a shallow covering of soil.  
 
Management 
Weed control in seed production fields can be 
achieved by between-row cultivation but may require 
some hand weeding during the first growing season 
because seedlings are very small.  After plants reach 
the 3 to 5 leaf stage, broadleaf herbicides can be 
applied at low rates. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests of muttongrass; however, 
plants may, like other bluegrass species, be 
susceptible to stem rust. 
  
Environmental Concerns 
Muttongrass is a species native to the western United 
States and is not considered a weedy or invasive 
species, but it can spread to adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal environmental conditions. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Plant in early spring into a firm, weed-free seedbed at 
24 to 36” spacing. Plants require 30 lb/ac available 
nitrogen during the establishment year and 45 lb/ac 
available nitrogen on established fields. Apply 
phosphorus according to soil test recommendations. 
For establishment, irrigate to maintain a moist soil 
surface and to avoid soil crusting. On established 
fields irrigate in early spring through boot stage. Do 
not irrigate during pollination or seed ripening. 
Irrigate after harvest to promote growth. 
 
Harvest by direct combining in late May through 
mid-June. Muttongrass is very susceptible to seed 
shatter and timing of harvest is critical. Seed should 
be dried to approximately 10% moisture before 
cleaning and storage. Seed can be cleaned by lightly 
hammer milling followed with a clipper or air screen 
cleaner. 
Yields for irrigated production fields average about 
35 lb/acre but vary widely from year to year. Stands 
produce seed for up to 8 years. Low viability in seed 
prevents muttongrass from being more widely used. 
There are approximately 890,000 seeds/pound. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no releases curre ntly available. Wildland 
collected seed can be obtained through commercial 
vendors.  
 
The Aberdeen, Idaho Plan t Materials Center is 
currently evaluating accessions for potential release.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977. Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West , U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
 
Gartner, F.R., Butterfield, R.I., Thompson, W.W., 
and Roath, L.R. 1978. Prescribed burning of range 
ecosystems in South Dakota. In: Hyder, D.N., ed. 
Proceedings, 1
st International Rangeland Congress; 
Denver, CO. Society for Range Management. 687 p. 
 
Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. 
Grasses. In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 295-424. 
 
Smith. S.R. and S. Smith, eds. 1997. Native grass 
seed production manual (including selected forbs). 
Cooperative project of U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Plant Materials Program, Ducks 
Unlimited Canada, Manitoba Forage Seed 
Association, and University of Manitoba. Oak 
Hammock Marsh, Manitoba, Canada: Ducks 
Unlimited Canada. 155 p. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
1937. Range Plant Handbook. Washington DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service, Variously 
paginated.  
 
Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003.  A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press. Provo, Utah. 912 p.

Prepared By 
Derek J. Tilley, Range Conservationist (Plants) 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John , Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 Edited: djt101906; lstj102006; dgo111706; 061116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.