Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HONEY MESQUITE 
Prosopis glandulosa Torr. 
Plant Symbol = PRGL2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
mesquite, glandular mesquite, algaroba 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Apache and Isleta applied the 
juice from the leaves of hon ey mesquite to eyelids as 
a treatment for irritation.   The Comanche chewed the 
leaves and swallowed the ju ice for an antacid.  The 
Acoma ground the beans into flour and prepared the 
flour as a mush.  They would also cook and eat the 
beans whole.  The Navajo used the wood from honey 
mesquite to construct bows. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or  agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General: Legume Family (Leguminosae).  Honey 
mesquite can be a shrub or tree ranging from 4 to 6 m 
tall.  One or two stout spines are found at the nodes.  
The leaves are alternate, bipinnate, and have petioles.  
There are usually one paired division (pinnae) per 
leaf and 6 to 15 leaflets per pinna.  The leaflets are 15 
to 62 mm long and smooth.  The flowers are in 
axillary spikes that are 7 to 9 cm long.  The flowers 
are yellow in color.  The calyx has a shallow, cup-
like shape.  Each flower  has 10 stamens and white 
woolly ovaries.  The legumes are straight and nearly 
as thick as they are broa d (7-20 cm long).  The 
legumes are reddish-brown in color and constricted 
between seeds.  The seeds are 6 to 6.5 mm long and 
brownish in color.   
 from Native Trees of Texas 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Honey mesquite is found on plains and dry 
ranges. 
 
Adaptation 
Honey mesquite is tolerant of high intensity fires.  
Following top-kill by fire, sprouts arise from 
underground buds that are dormant on an 
underground stem. 
 
Establishment 
Honey mesquite pods should be harvested when the 
seeds rattle inside the pod and stored in a dry place.  
Prior to planting the seed co ats should be scarified by 
chipping, cutting, or exposing to boiling water.  
Seeds germinate best between temperatures of 20 to 
40  °C.  Germination usually occurs within six hours 
of seed wetting.  Scarified or sprouted seeds should 
be planted in well-drained soils.  The best growth 
occurs where roots can reac h ground water.  Honey 
mesquite prefers full sun. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Honey mesquite may suffer from stem fungal 
diseases in southern Texas.  However, generally 
when grown in its native habitat and using local seed 
stock, honey mesquite should not be prone to 
debilitating pests.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Bainbridge, D.A. & R.A. Virginia 1989.   Mesquite, 
species notes 1.  Systems Ecology Research Group, 
San Diego State University, San Diego, California.  
14 pp. 
 
Basehart, H.W. 1974.   Apache Indians XII. 
Mescalero Apache subsistence patterns and socio-
political organization.  Garland Publishing Inc.  New 
York, New York.  480 pp. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1940.   Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Papers of 
the Michigan Acad emy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
 
Castetter, E.F. 1935.   Ethnobiological studies in the 
American Southwest I. Uncultivated native plants 
used as sources of food .  University of New Mexico 
Bulletin 4:1-44. 
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston 1970.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas . Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  1881 pp. 
 
Elmore, F.H. 1944.   Ethnobotany of the Navajo . 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico.  136 pp.  
 
Gilman, E.F. & D.G. Watson 1994.  Prosopis 
glandulosa .  Fact Sheet ST-502.  University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida.   
http://hort.ifas.ufl.e du/trees/PROGLAA.pdf
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of the 
Great Plains . University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas. 1392 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber press, Portland, Oregon. 927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn. 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
 
Mooney, H.A., B.B. Simpson, & O.T. Solbrig 1977. 
Phenology, morphology, physiology .  IN B.B. 
Simpson (ed),  Mesquite: its biology in two desert 
scrub ecosystems . Dowden, Hutchinson, and Ross, 
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania.  Pages 26-43. 
 
Texas A&M University 2002.  Native trees of Texas .  
Department of Horticulture, College Station, Texas.  
<http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/ornamentals/natives/prosopisgl
andulosavargland.htm>.  Accessed: 30May2002. 
 
United States Department  of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2001.   Fire effects information system .  
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Boise, Idaho.   
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/ feis/plants/tree/progla/i
ndex.html
 
Prepared By:  
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 30May2002 jsp ; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.