Plant Guide
CANADA BLUEGRASS 
Poa compressa L. 
Plant Symbol = POCO  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Montana  PM 
Program s 
 Canada bluegrass.   Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA SCS. 1989. 
Midwest wetland flora: Field office illustrated guide to plant species . 
Midwest National Technical Center, Lincoln. Courtesy of
  USDA NRCS Wetland Science Institute. 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  English bluegrass, wiregrass, 
flat stem bluegrass  
Uses  
Canada bluegrass is a pioneer species on  moderately 
acid ic soils and on  soils with poor fertility.  Its pri mary 
use is for controlling  erosion on disturbed sites such as 
roadsides, mine reclamation  sites, heavy use recreation 
areas , and  for low maintenance landscaping.  It is 
palatable to livestock and big game but does not produce 
  abundant forage.  It stays green well into the fall and early 
winter
 (w ith adequate soil moisture)  and withstands close 
grazing and heavy trampling.  Small mammals and song 
birds consume leaves and seed .  Prairie chickens , wild 
turkey, and cottontail rabbits  eat small amounts of seed 
and leaves (Majerus and Holzwor th, 2003; Uchytil, 1993).  
Mule deer browse Canada bluegrass in the winter. 
Status 
Canada bluegrass is listed as potentially invasive and 
banned in Connecticut (PLANTS Database).  In Alaska, it 
does not appear to change species composition or 
structure in native plant communities (Klein, 2008).   The 
spread of Canada bluegrass throughout North America is 
thought to have been caused by the contamination of 
Kentucky bluegrass  (Poa pratensis ) seed with Canada 
bluegrass .  However, it was also found along the upper 
Saskatc hewan River in  Canada in 1823 and at other 
isolated locations unfrequented by European explorers  in 
the early 1800’s (Oakley, 1910).   Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agr iculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile  for this species for further 
information.  
Description  
General :  Grass Family (Poaceae).  Canada bluegrass is 
an introduced, perennial , rhizomatous grass.  Culms are 
15- 20 cm  (5.9 -7.9 in)  tall, hollow, flattened and glabrous 
to scaberulous.  S heaths are open, glaberous, smooth, or 
faintly scaberulous , flattened, and keeled.  Leaves are 1 -4 
mm  (0.04- 0.16 in)  wide and 2 -10 cm  (0.79- 3.94 in)  long, 
flat, folded or loosely involute, boat tipped, glabrous to 
scabrous  and have two  grooves down middle of upper 
bl ade surface.  Collars are yellow, auricles absent and 
ligules are membranous, 0.5 -1.5 mm  (0.02- 0.06 in)  long, 
obtuse, ciliolate, and puberulent abaxially.  The 
inflorescence is a narrow panicle 3 -8 cm  (1.18- 3.15 in)  
long.  Spikelets are 3to 8 flowered, 4 -6 mm  (0.16- 0.24 in) 
long and crowded at the end of the branches.  The first 
glume is 2 -3 mm  (0.08-0.12 in)  long, acute and second 
glume is slightly longer and broader than the first.

Lemmas are 2-3 mm  (0.08-0.12 in) long, compressed -
keeled, web sca nt or ab sent and keel and marginal nerves 
are slightly pubescent and glabrous between (Skinner, 
2010; Majerus, 2009).   Canada bluegrass is considered to 
be apomictic (producing seed asexually) and the 
chromosome number is 2 n =  42.  It is often confused with 
Kentuc ky bluegrass but has a distinct blue -green foliage, 
flattened wiry stems and short compact panicles.  It does 
not form a tight sod and regrowth following clipping or 
grazing is slow compared to Kentucky bluegrass (Majerus 
and Holzworth, 2003).  
Distribution :  Canada bluegrass is an introduced species 
native to Europe.  It is currently found throughout North 
America with the exception of the state of Florida.   For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web s ite. 
Habitat :  Canada bluegrass  has naturalized throughout 
much of North America since its introduction into Canada 
in the late 1700’s .  It is found on wet sites, open 
meadows, and in open deciduous and coniferous forests 
as well as waste areas (Majerus and Holzworth, 2003).  
Adaptation  
Canada bluegrass is adapted to wet sites but thrives on 
moderately acidic, and droughty soils with poor fertility.   
It is found most common ly on clay textured soils and 
grows poorly  on sandy textured soils (Oakley, 1910).   It is 
best adapted to areas receiving at least 18 inches annual 
precipitation . 
 
 Canada bluegrass low maintenance landscape planting at Bridger , 
MT  Plant Materials Center.  (Bridger,  MT PMC)  
Establishment  
Seed should be planted into a clean, firm seedbed to a 
depth of ¼ inch.   Drilling is preferred to ensure uniform 
seeding depth but broadcast seeding followed by 
harrowing and packing can be utilized where soil 
moisture is not lacking.   Canada bluegrass can be slower 
to establish when broadcast seeded.  Ea rly spring seeding 
is preferred .  L ate summer  (if soil moisture is adequate)  
and dormant fall seeding can be successful.  The  single species
 seeding rate is 2 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre (Ogle, et al., 2011).   For erosion control plantings, 
double  the seeding rate to 4 pounds PLS per acre and for 
low maintenance turf plantings , sow  6 pounds PLS per 
acre.   If planted in a mixture, adjust the seeding rate to the 
percent of mix desired.  Seed weights reported range from 
1,600,000 (Majerus and Holzworth 2003) to 2,393,000 
(PLANTS Database) seeds per pound.  Because seed is 
small, it is often seeded with a carrier such as rice hulls to 
facilitate more uniform distribution  and metering  of the 
seed . 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but applications of broadleaf herbicides 
should not be made until plants have reached t he four to 
six leaf stage.  Mow above grass seedlings when weeds 
begin to bloom to reduce weed seed production.  Insects 
may damage new stands and the use  of  insecticides  may 
be required.  Be sure to read and follow pesticide label 
directions.  
Management  
Canada bluegrass greens up early in the spring and if fall 
rains are adequate will make fall growth.  Growth during 
summer is dependent on precipitation or  irrigation.  It 
stays green into late fall and early winter and is tolerant of 
close grazing and heavy trampling.   Grazing should be 
deferred on seeded lands for at least two growing seasons 
to allow for full stand establishment.    
Pests and Potential Pro blems 
Grasshoppers, plant  bugs , stink bugs, skipper caterpillars, 
moth caterpillars, be etles,  and  bluegrass billbugs  feed on 
Canada bluegrass  (Illinois Wildflowers, online) .  The only 
documented disease found in Canada bluegrass is oat 
necrotic mottle viru s (ONMV) which causes a mosaic of 
oat and a mild or symptomless disease in Canada 
bluegrass and other grasses  which might be transmitted by 
a mite  (Gill, 1976).  
Environmental Concerns  
Canada bluegrass spreads primarily by rhizomes.  It is 
considered  “weedy ” by some and not so by others .  
Canada bluegrass  may  spread into adjoining plant 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions.  For  alternatives to control Canada bluegrass  
contact your  local agricultural extension specialist or 
county  weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seed and Plant Production  
Canada bluegrass plugs are easy to propagate in a 
greenhouse.  Seed is surface -grown into containers 
containing sta ndard potting mix.  Seeds germinate at 
temperatures between 20 and 30° C (68 -86°F) .  Pre-

chilling at 10°C (50°F)  or alternating temperatures 
increases germination rates (Klein 2008).  Approximat ely 
60- 90 days of growth are required before transplanting.  
Ro ots should fill containers but not be root -bound.  
 
Seed production fields can be established as a solid stand 
or  in rows spaced 18 -24 inches apart.  Solid stands can be 
difficult to manage and should be attempted only with 
clean fields and confidence in  chemical weed control.  If 
planted in rows, the field can be allowed to go solid 
following two years of cultivation for weed control.  
 
Canada bluegrass seed matures uniformly and does not 
shatter readily making this species easy to harvest.  It is 
ready to  harvest when the field has reached a uniform 
golden color.   Seed production fields may be swathed and 
combined out of a cured windrow or it may be direct 
harvested.  Seed yields range from 250- 500 pounds per 
acre on irrigated sites.  Seed harvest occurs f rom mid July 
to mid August depending on location .  Dryland seed 
production should not be attempted on sites receiving less 
than 18 inches annual precipitation  (Majerus and 
Holzworth, 2003).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
 
‘Canon’ was selected at Ontario Agricultural College, 
University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario in 1944 from 
collections made in the United States and Canada.  It was 
bred for leafiness  and  disease resistance.   The intended 
use is for turf applications.  Breed er seed is maintained by 
Ontario Agricultural College.  Certified seed is apparently 
not available (USDA, 1994) . 
 
Foothills  Selected Class Germplasm was selected and 
released by the USDA -NRCS  Bridger, Montana Plant 
Materials Center in 2001 .  It is a composite of eight 
collections from Europe (Denmark, Romania, 
Netherlands, and Czechoslovakia), Asia (former USSR) , 
and the United States.  It was selected for seedling vigor, 
rate of spread, forage production, seed production, and 
uniform  ripening .  It was tested with comparison to 
‘Reubens’ and found to have superior seedling vigor, rate 
of spread, and seed production.  Bridger Plant Materials 
Center maintains Generation 1 (G1) seed which is made 
available to seed growers for production of Certified G2 
and  G3 seed (Majerus and Holzworth, 2003).  
 
‘R eubens’  was released by the Jacklin Seed Company, 
Post Falls, Idaho in 1976.  It was a phenotypic selection 
of plants from an established field of common Canada 
bluegrass near Reubens, Idaho.  Phenotypic selection  was 
repeated in subsequent generations to improve trueness to 
type prior to release.  Under a low maintenance mowing 
schedule, it becomes a denser turf than common Canada 
bluegrass.  Breeder Seed is maintained by the Jacklin 
Seed Company and Certified seed  is available (USDA, 
1994).  
 
‘T
 alon
’ was developed by Cascade International Seed 
Company at its breeding facility located in Aumsville, 
Oregon.  It originated as a single, apomictic plant selected 
from a controlled hybridization.  The maternal parent was 
f rom a naturalized selection collected near Spokane, 
Washington in 1991.  Paternal sources were also 
naturalized selections collected in 1991 near Spokane, 
Enterprise, Oregon and East Lansing, Michigan.  Talon is 
unique from its maternal parent by its apomixi s, taller and 
more erect growth habit, darker color and thicker stems.  
It is recommended for use in western Oregon and similar 
climates.  The first Breeder seed was produced in 1995 .  
Breeder and Certified Seed are  maintained by L&H 
Seeds, Connell, Wash ington (AOSCA, 2010).  
References  
Association of Official Seed Certifying Agencies 
(AOSCA). 2010.  A report of the National Grass 
Variety Review Board.  May, 2010. [Online]. 
http://www.aosca.org/VarietyReviewBoards/Grass/2
010GrassReport_final.pdf  (accessed  January 12, 
2012)  
Gill, C.  Oat necrotic mottle virus.  [Online].  Descriptions 
of Plant Viruses.  
http://www.dpvweb.net/dpv/showadpv.php?dvno=16
9 (accessed January 9, 2012)  
Illinois Wildflowers.  Canada bluegrass.   [Online].  
http://www.illinoiswildfloweres.info/grasses/cn_blue
grass.htm   (accessed January 9, 2012).  
Klein, H. 2008.  Canada Bluegrass ( Poa compressa).  
[Online].  Alaska Natural Heritage Program, 
University of Alaska .  http://aknhp.uaa.alaska.edu  
(accessed January 4, 2012).  
Majerus , M. 2009.  Forage and Reclamation Grasses of 
the Northern Plains and Rocky Mountains.  Valley 
Printers, Bridger, MT 161 p.  
Majerus, M, Holzworth, L. 2003.   Foothills Selected 
Class Germplasm Canada Bluegrass  A Conservation 
Plant for Montana and Wyoming.  F act Sheet.  
USDA  
-Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
Bozeman, MT. 2p  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 2011.  
Conservation Plant Materials for the Intermountain 
West.  Technical Note 24.  USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Boise, ID. 57 p.  
Oakley, R. 1910.  Canada Bluegrass: Its Culture and  Uses.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of 
Plant Industry.  Farmers Bulletin No. 402.  19 p.  
PLANTS Database. Poa compressa .  [Online].  
http://plants.usda.gov   U.S. Department of 
Agricu lture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(accessed January 4, 2012)  
Skinner, Q. 2010.  A Field Guide to Wyoming Grasses.  
Education Resources Publishing, Cumming GA.  595 
p. 
Uchytil, R. 1993. Poa compressa .  In Fire Effects 
Information System, [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, R ocky Mountain

Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  (accessed January 
4, 2012) . 
USDA. 1994.  Grass Varieties in the United States.  
Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  United States 
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation 
Service.  296p.  
  Prepared By :   
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Susan Winslow, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, MT  
Citation 
St. John, L., D. Tilley , and S. Winslow. 2012.  Plant guide 
for Canada bluegrass ( Poa compressa) USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberde en, Idaho 83210 .  Published
 January, 2012 
Edited:  12Jan2012ls;  12Jan2012djt; 12Jan2012sw;  
17Janjab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER