Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED PINE 
Pinus resinosa  Soland. 
Plant Symbol = PIRE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Norway pine, eastern red pine, pin rouge 
 
Uses 
Economic: Red pine wood is moderately hard and 
straight grained.  It is grown primarily for the 
production of wood used for poles, lumber, cabin 
logs, railway ties, post, pulpwood, and fuel.  The bark 
is occasionally used for  tanning leather (Sargent 
1961).  This species is also planted and used as 
Christmas trees.   
 
Ethnobotanic : The inner bark of  Pinus resinosa was 
pounded as a poultice for any kind of inflamed  wound, sore, or ulcer when white pine bark was not 
available (Fielder 1975).   
 
Landscaping & Wildlife
: Red pine is an attractive tree 
that is used in recreational areas because of its 
colorful bark.  This species provides cover for many 
species of mammals and bird s.  Deer, cottontails, and 
snowshoe hares browse songbirds, mice and 
chipmunks feed on the seed while seedlings.   
 © Joseph O’Brien USDA, Forest Service, St. Paul Field Office 
 
Agroforestry : Pinus resinosa  is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance crop production, and 
control soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help 
communities with harsh winter conditions better 
handle the impact of winter storms and reduce home 
heating costs during the winter months and cooling 
cost in the summer.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Red pine ( Pinus resinosa ) is a medium 
sized tree, up to twenty-five meters high and seventy-
five centimeters in diameter  (Farar 1995).  The leaves 
are soft and flexible evergree n needles, in clusters of 
two, slender, 4”-6” long, dark green borne in dense 
tufts at the ends of branchlets.  The fruit is ovoid-
conic, with thin scales, becoming light chestnut-
brown at maturity.  The bark is thick and slightly 
divided by shallow fissures into broad flat ridges 
covered by thin loose red-brown scales (Sargent 
1961).  The root system is moderately deep, wide 
spreading, and very wind firm.   
 
Distribution : Red pine is native to northeastern 
United States.  This species ranges from 
Newfoundland and Manitoba, south to the mountains 
of Pennsylvania, west to Minnesota (Dirr 1990).  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Red pine occurs most often on well drained, dry, 
highly acid, sandy soils of outwash plains, and 
gravelly ridges (Barnes & Wagner 1981).  It is 
frequently found where the soil fertility is low, in 
pure stands or mixed with species such as jack pine,

white pine, aspens, oaks, and white birch.  This 
species prefers full sun and is shade intolerant and 
extremely cold tolerant.   Pinus resinosa is easily 
cultivated in nurseries and easily raised in plantations 
(Ibid.).   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Cones ripen from August to 
October with natural seed dispersal occurring 
between October and November.  However, seeds 
can be artificially harvested by kiln drying ripe cones 
for nine hours at 130ºF (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  Fresh 
seed has no dormancy and will germinate 
immediately upon sowing.  Stored seed requires two 
months cold stratification.  Optimum temperature for 
germination is 77ºF (Ibid.).   
 
Management 
Most red pine natural stands originate after a forest 
fire.  Fire is necessary for regeneration because it 
prepares a seedbed by reducing much of the humus, 
and competition from other trees and shrubs, 
decreases the number of c one-destroying insects, and 
thins out the overstory (Farrar 1995).  Once 
established, red pine requires little care.  Tip and 
shoot moths sometime attack it.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Materials are available through nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981.   Michigan 
trees .  The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation, and uses .  4
th 
ed.  Stipes Publishing Co., Champaigne, Illinois. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Graves, A.H. 1956.   Illustrated guide to trees and 
shrubs .  Harper & Brothers, Publishers, New York, 
New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1967.   Familiar trees of America .  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
O’Brien, J. 2002 .  Images of Northern Forests-red 
pine .  USDA, Forest Service,  St. Paul Field Office, 
St. Paul, Minnesota.  Accessed: 10jan02.  
<http://www.na.fs.fed.us/sp fo/for_images/miscimage.
htm> 
 
Peattie, D.C. 1950.  A natural history of trees of 
eastern and central North America .  Houghton 
Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Dept., Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.