Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NUTTALL’S PRAIRIE PARSLEY  
Polytaenia nuttallii  DC. 
Plant Symbol = PONU4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Texas parsley, prairie parsley 
 
Uses 
This species is used in w ildflower gardens and prairie 
restoration. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Celery Family (Apiaceae). Texas parsley is  a biennial (lives two years, only flowers the 2
nd year).  
Sometimes it is recognized as a perennial.  It is most 
conspicuous in the months of April and May of the 
second year during its rapid growth and flowering 
period.  This herb (forb) is very common along road 
rights-of-way and prairies in the southern, central and 
eastern portions of the state, but is uncommon in the 
“true” piney woods of deep east Texas.   Polytaenia is 
normally from 2-4 feet in height.  During spring and 
early summer, the vegetative portion of the plant 
appears to be yellowish in color.  The flowers are 
compound umbels and are yellow.  The seeds are flat, 
somewhat resembling rolled oats. 
 Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M University 
 
Other umbels with similar growth habits are Queen 
Anne’s lace/wild carrot/rattlesnake-weed ( Daucus 
spp.), Bishop’s weed ( Ammi majus), water-hemlock 
( Cicuta  spp.), and golden Alexanders ( Zizia aurea).   
Daucus, Ammi and  Cicuta all have white flowers. 
Although  Zizia flowers are yellow, its leaflets are 
sharply serrated (saw toothed)  rather than incised (cut 
deeply) or deeply lobed and its fruit is not flat.   Zizia 
is not a common plant in Texas, while  Polytaenia is 
one of the most common umbels found along 
roadsides in Texas. 
 
Distribution 
This species is known from North Dakota and 
Michigan to Texas and Alabama.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Polytaenia  appears to prefer well 
drained, loamy sites in full sun.  The plant is fairly 
uncommon in grazed areas. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Davis, L. 2000.   Texas plant fact sheet: Polytaenia 
nuttallii .  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical 
Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas.

Texas A&M University 2001.  Vascular plant image 
gallery.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas.  Accessed 21May2001.  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/imaxxapi.htm> 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator  
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited 09jan01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.