Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KENTUCKY 
BLUEGRASS  
Poa pratensis L. 
Plant Symbol = POPR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plants Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
June grass, Paneion pratense, Poa anceps, 
Poa angustifolia  var. pratensis, Poa angustifolia  var. 
angustiglumis , Poa pratensis  var. macounii, Poa 
pratensis  var. pinegensis, Poa pratensis  var. stricta, 
Poa pratensis  var. transnominata, Poa pratensis  var. 
urjandhaica, Poa pubescens, Poa urjanchaica, Poa 
viridis, smooth meadow grass, spear grass.  
 
Uses 
Landscape:  Kentucky bluegrass is a popular sod-
forming grass that is used on golf courses, ski slopes, 
and campsites. 
 
Livestock:  Kentucky bluegrass is an important forage 
species for sheep and cattle.  In the west, it is very 
abundant and frequently used  as a forage crop.  In the 
east, it is planted as a pasture grass.  It is not usually 
used for hay, but it has been found as an invader of 
hay mixes. 
 
Rehabilitation:  Kentucky bluegrass is included in 
seed mixes that are used to revegetate roadbanks.  It 
is a slow-growing plant, establishes in 2 to 3 years 
and forms a dense sod.  It is not as good at stabilizing 
soil as its native counterparts. 
 
Wildlife:  Elk, mule deer, and bighorn sheep eat 
Kentucky bluegrass.  It is an important winter forage 
grass for these animals in the west.  Cottontail rabbit, 
wild turkey, and prairie chickens consume the leaves 
and seeds of Kentucky bluegrass.  In the mountain 
meadows of Oregon, the northern pocket gopher, 
mice, and Columbian ground squirrel feed off of the 
dominating Kentucky bluegrass.  Therefore this is an 
important habitat for foraging raptors.  Kentucky 
bluegrass also provides cover for small mammals and 
nongame birds. 
 J.M. Randall @ TNC. 2003.  
 
Legal Status 
Kentucky bluegrass is listed as an invasive weed in 
the Great Plains States and Wisconsin.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web (http://plants.usda.gov) 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Kentucky 
bluegrass is a cool-season perennial sod-forming 
grass.  The roots are shallow, often within the upper 8 
cm of the soil surface.  Stems are 30 to 90 cm tall.  
Leaves are attached to the base of the stem, folded 
and sometimes hairy at the point of attachment, have 
flat blades, are 2 to 5 mm wide and 10 to 40 cm long.  
The inflorescence is an open panicle consisting of 
two to six flowers.  The lemmas have a tuft of 
cobwebby hairs.  Flowering starts in May and fruit is 
mature by mid-June. 
 
Kentucky bluegrass is distinguished from Canada 
bluegrass ( Poa compressus ) by its darker green

foliage, longer leaves, and pubescence at the bases of 
the leaves. 
 
Distribution: Kentucky bluegrass is native to portions 
of North America, including areas within the United 
States.  Exact delineation of native status has not 
been determined, but data seems to indicate that it is 
native in parts of the southeast, northeast, and upper 
Midwest regions and introduced or naturalized 
elsewhere.  It occurs throughout the United States 
although it is most prevalent in the northern half.  It 
is not common in the Gulf States or in the desert 
regions of the southwest.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat:  Kentucky bluegrass is promoted on sites 
that have cool and humid climates.  It is found in 
uplands and lowlands of the tallgrass prairie and in 
the lowlands of mixed-grass prairies where adequate 
precipitation falls.  In the west, it is found on 
northern exposures at mid to high elevations.  In the 
southwest and California, it is found in cool 
mountainous regions. 
 
It frequently occurs as an understory dominant in 
aspen habitats throughout the Intermountain Region, 
ponderosa pine, sagebrush/bunchgrass, and 
bunchgrass habitats throughout the U.S., and riparian 
habitats in the Mountain West.  It is also a common 
dominant of Midwestern prairies. 
 
Adaptation 
Kentucky bluegrass is found most abundantly on sites 
that are cool and humid.  It has become naturalized 
across North America and often occurs as a dominant 
species in the herbaceous layer. 
 
Kentucky bluegrass grows best on well-drained 
loams or clay loams rich in humus and on soils with 
limestone parent material.  It needs large amounts of 
nitrogen during active grow th stages.  The optimal 
soil pH is between 5.8 and 8.2. 
 
In the Blue Mountains of eastern Oregon and 
southeastern Washington, Kentucky bluegrass 
dominance is an indicator of dry to moist meadow 
conditions and of soils that are dark brown to black 
and clayey. 
 
Kentucky bluegrass plants that have shorter leaves 
are more likely to produce tillers.  Plants that occur in 
full sun have shorter leaves while those in shade have 
leaves longer than the stem s.  Therefore plants that 
are in full sun will produce more tillers and spread 
more quickly than those in the shade. 
 
Kentucky bluegrass is intolerant of drought, 
excessive flooding, high water tables, and poorly 
drained soils. 
 
Establishment 
For lawn establishment, plant 2 to 3 pounds of seed 
per 1,000 square feet.  Seeding rates are reduced 
when seed is drilled into the top 1 inch of soil.   
Kentucky bluegrass can be seeded year-round, but 
the best results are obtained in the spring and fall. 
Seeds require light and frequent watering (2 to 3 
times per day for the first 2 weeks) for germination to 
occur. After seedling emerge nce, watering frequency 
can be reduced. 
 
Management  
The active growth stage of Kentucky bluegrass 
begins in late winter/early spring.  By midsummer, it 
is nearly dominant on its sites.  Cool temperatures in 
fall promote growth when other species are dying 
back.  It spreads by rhizomes, produces abundant 
seed, and can become established on disturbed sites 
faster than other plant speci es.  It is an aggressive 
competitor with native species.   
 
Total replacement of Kentucky bluegrass by natives 
is labor-intensive and impractical. It is best to 
manage for warm season native grasses rather than 
against Kentucky bluegrass.  In grasslands, atrazine 
and glyphosphate are effective herbicides for 
decreasing Kentucky bluegrass abundance when 
applied prior to seeding warm-season native grasses 
like big bluestem.  Also, irregular spring and fall 
burns can help to control or maintain co-dominance 
of Kentucky bluegrass (as opposed to complete 
dominance). 
 
Kentucky bluegrass pastures are best managed under 
a grazing system other than season-long use.  At the 
end of the growing season, it becomes less palatable 
and protein and fiber contents decline.    
   
Pests and Potential Problems 
White grubs, billbugs and sod webworms can destroy 
plantings of bluegrass.  Insect populations should be 
monitored so that timely insecticide applications can 
be made.  Pest management in this manner is much 
more cost effective than routine insecticide 
applications or replanting large areas. 
 
Kentucky bluegrass is sometimes vulnerable to 
fungal infections including  Fusarium, 
Helminthosporium , leaf spot, rust and powdery

mildew.  Mixing bluegrass seed with ryegrass will 
prevent Fusarium  blight. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are sown in spri ngtime in a cold frame 
containing moist compost.  Seedlings are thinned to 
individual pots and moved into a greenhouse where 
they will remain for the first winter.  After the last 
spring frost, plant the seed lings into their permanent 
positions.  Plant divisions can be directly planted into 
their permanent positions in late spring or early 
summer. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are over one hundred Kentucky bluegrass 
cultivars readily available by commercial sources.  
Many of these cultivars have been developed for 
disease resistance, and nutritional content for 
livestock. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  The USDA NRCS does not guarantee 
or warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 26 
July 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Dubel, R.L. 2004.  Kentucky bluegrass (http://aggie-
horticulture.tamu.edu/plantanswers/turf/publications/
bluegrass.html, 23 July 2004). Texas Cooperative 
Extension, Texas A&M University, College Station. 
 
Morris, R. 2002. Plants for a future database 
(http://www.scs.leeds.ac.uk/pfaf/index.html, 23 July 
2004). Plants for a Future, Devon, England.  
Randall, J.M. 2003.  Image of Poa pratensis. 
(http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/esadocs/poa_prat.html, 
23 July 2004). University  of California, Davis. 
 
Rayburn, E. and J. Hall. 2004.  The identification of 
grasses 
(http://www.caf.wvu.edu/~fo rage/library/cangrass/co
ntent.htm, 23 July 2004). Department of Agriculture 
and Forestry, West Virginia University, Morgantown. 
 
Sather, N. 1996.  Element stewardship abstract (ESA) 
for Poa pratensis and Poa compressa.  
(http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/esadocs/poa_prat.html, 
23 July 2004). University  of California, Davis. 
 
Uchytil, Ronald J. 1993. Poa pratensis. 
(http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/, 23 June 2004). 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Missoula. 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2003.  Atlas of 
Florida vascular plants 
(http://www.plantatlas.usf.edu, 23 July 2004). 
Institute of Systematic Botany, University of South 
Florida, Tampa. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center  
Baton Rouge, Louisiana  
 
Edited: 4Aug2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.