Plant Guide
SILER’S PINCUSHION 
CACTUS  
Pediocactus sileri  (L.D. Benson) 
K.D. Heil & J.M. Porter  
Plant Symbol = PESI4 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho  and Utah Plant 
Materials Program  
Figure 1. Siler pincushion ( Pediocactus sileri). Photo from Jane 
Villa -Lobos @ USDA- NRCS PLANTS Database 
Alternate Names  
Gypsum cactus  
Echinocactus sileri  
Utahia sileri  
Uses  
There are no known human uses associated with 
Siler’s pincushion cactus.   
Status  
Siler’s pincushion cactus was listed as an endangered 
species in 1979 (USDI FWS 1979) and later 
reclassified as threatened in 1993 (USDI FWS 1993) 
when it was no longer considered to be in imminent 
danger of extinction throughout significant portions 
of its range . Critical habitat was not designated with 
either ruling.  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e. g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). Description  
General : Cactus family (Cactaceae). Siler’s 
pincushion is a small, globose cactus which grows 
solitary or in clusters. Individuals grow about 25 cm 
(9.8 in) tall and 12 cm (4.7 in) wide. Central spines  are blackish brown, 15 to 30 mm (0.6 to 1.2 in) long, 
and rad
ial spines are 10 to 20 mm (0.4 to 0.8 in) long 
and white. Flowers are about 20 mm (0.8 in) in 
diameter with yellow petals which may have purplish 
veins. Flowering occurs in the spring (Welsh et al 
2003).   
 
Distribution : All known populations of this speci es 
occur in Kane and Washington counties, Utah and in 
Mohave and Coconino counties, Arizona. The 
majority of the habitat occurs on USDI BLM land. 
Small portions of the species range occur on lands 
managed by the Kaibab -Paiute Indian Tribe, Arizona 
and Utah  State trust lands and private holdings.  
   
Habitat : This species inhabits a variety of plant 
communities including Great Basin desert shrub, 
Mohave Desert scrub, pinyon -juniper forestlands and 
grasslands (USDI FWS 1993). Plants occur from 850 
to 1,650 mete rs (5400 feet).  
 
Adaptation  
Siler’s pincushion is found on gypsiferous clay and 
sandy soils derived from the Moenkopi Formation. 
Most of the populations are found on the Shnabkaib 
Member of the formation, while others occur on the 
Middle Red member.  
Management  
Threats to the species include  offroad vehicle use, 
trampling by cattle, soil erosion and mineral 
exploration. Many plants in plots monitored by the 
BLM died of natural causes including drought, insect 
and small mammal herbivory. A relatively ne w 
potential threat to Siler’s pincushion is the proposed 
development of a pipeline from Lake Powell to St. 
George , Utah. 
 
A Siler’s pincushion Cactus recovery plan was 
developed in 1986. Management goals include 
continued monitoring, providing conservation 
assistance to the Kaibab -Paiute Indian Tribe, closing 
areas with dense Siler’s pincushion to ORV use, and 
conducting research on insect predators (USDI FWS 
1986).   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Cactus borer beetles ( Moneilema spp) are known to 
parasitize close relatives of Siler’s pincushion, but 
they have not yet been documented on this species 
(USDI FWS 2008).

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with this species.  
Seed and Plant Production  
This species is difficult to grow under cultivation. 
Seed germinates readily, but plants quickly die due to 
the species’ restricted soil adaptation. Transplanting 
and grafting have not been successful (USDI FWS 
1993).  
References  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1986. Siler 
pincush ion cactus ( Pediocactus sileri) recovery 
plan. 57 p.  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1993. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; 
reclassification of the plant Pediocactus sileri 
(Siler pincushion cactus) from endangered to 
threatened status). Federal Register. 58 (246): 
68476- 68480. 
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2008.   Siler 
pincushion cactus ( Pediocactus sileri) 5 -year 
review: summary and evaluation. Phoenix, AZ.  
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich , and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah  Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
 
Prepared By:   
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Dan Ogle;  Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho.  
 
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
Citation
 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for Siler’s pincushion cactus ( Pediocactus sileri ). 
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID   83210. 
Published  August, 2010 
Edited:  20Aug2010djt; 20August 2010ls; 
25Aug2010dgo 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Progr am 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER