Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE SPRUCE 
Picea pungens Engelm. 
Plant Symbol = PIPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate names  
Colorado blue spruce, white  spruce, silver spruce, 
Parry spruce, water spruce,  Picea parryana Sargent   
 
Uses 
Blue spruce has been little used for lumber or wood 
products because it is rarely abundant in nature and 
the wood is brittle and often full of knots.  It 
sometimes is cut with Enge lmann spruce.  Because of 
its cold hardiness, symmetrical pyramidal form, and 
waxy, blue-hued foliage, blue spruce is widely 
planted in ornamental and general landscape settings.  
Numerous horticultural cultivars have been 
developed, based on needle color and crown form.  It 
is used considerably for Christmas trees and blue  spruce plantations have been established in the 
northeastern US – these 
probably the source of  
 
escapes reported for several states far from its native 
range (Maine, Massachusetts, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Maryland).  Blue spruce is the state 
tree of Colorado and of Utah.   
 
Status 
 © J. Scott Peterson USDA, NRCS, NPDC @ PLANTS 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 50 meters tall, the crown long-conic; 
branches whorled, ascending to slightly to strongly 
drooping; twigs not pendent, stout, yellow-brown, 
usually without hair; many small twigs produced on 
the main trunk and between the main whorls of 
branches; bark relatively thick, gray-brown, breaking 
into furrows and rounded ridges, only slightly scaly.  
Needles are evergreen, borne singly and at right 
angles from all sides of the twig, 1.6-3 cm long, 4-
angled, stiff and sharply spine-tipped, silvery to blue-
green.  Seed cones are green or violet, ripening pale 
buff, (5) 6-11 (12) cm long, ellipsoid, pendent, the 
scales elliptic to diamond-shaped, widest below 
middle, stiff at the base, the tip flexible, unevenly 
toothed, and extending 8-10 mm beyond seed-wing 
impression.  The common name is based upon the 
blue foliage color of some races.   
 
Variation within the species : trees with similar color 
tend to occur in small, local populations, suggesting 
that color traits are under genetic control.  The color 
variation does not conform to a clinal pattern.  Most 
other variable features in blue spruce (e.g., 
physiology, early survival, growth rate) similarly do 
not follow geographical parameters; date of bud set 
follows a local altitudinal pattern.    
 
Besides features of habit, leaf color, and habitat, blue 
spruce is distinguished from Engelmann spruce by its 
cones and cone scales that average larger in size, but 
these characteristics are ofte n partially or completely 
overlapping.  Blue spruce also differs in its glabrous 
twigs.

Distribution 
The native range of blue spruce is the central and 
southern Rocky Mountains of the USA – in Idaho, 
Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and 
Arizona.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Blue spruce commonly occurs on stream banks in 
moist canyon bottoms (hence one of its common 
names, water spruce) but may grow on gentle to steep 
mountain slopes in Douglas fir or spruce-fir woods 
up to timberline; at 1800-3000 meters elevation in 
mid-montane forests.  It often grows with subalpine 
fir, white fir, and Engelmann spruce.  It is cultivated 
on a wide variety of soils, except those that are very 
moist.   
 
Establishment 
Blue spruce begins to produce seed at about 20 years; 
maximum seed production  occurs between 50-150 
years.  Good cone years  occur at intervals of 2-3 
years.  Seed germination is mostly confined to 
exposed mineral soil with side shade and overhead 
light, but natural reproduction is scanty, probably 
because the light seeds are prevented from coming 
into contact with mineral soil by the dense herbage, 
grass, or other ground-cover vegetation that is usually 
abundant in the habitat of the species.  Seedling 
establishment is probably benefited by moisture 
availability and shading, which prolong snow and 
soil moisture in late spring.   
 
Blue spruce is a slow-growing tree and some 
individuals have been reported to live for more than 
600 years.  Reproduction by layering has not been 
reported for this species.   
 
Management 
Western spruce budworm larvae feed on old needles 
in late April, then mine developing buds and defoliate 
new tree growth.  Heavy repeated attacks kill the tree. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Daubenmire, R. 1972.   On the relation between Picea 
pungens and Picea engelmannii in the Rocky 
Mountains .  Canad. J. Bot. 50:733-742.   
 
Fechner, G.H. 1990.   Picea pungens.  Pp. 238-249, 
IN R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North 
America . Volume 1.   Conifers .  USDA Forest Service 
Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Taylor, R.J. 1993.   Picea.  Pp. 369-373, IN  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
  
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.