Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PONDEROSA PINE 
Pinus ponderosa P. & C. 
Lawson 
Plant Symbol = PIPO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plants Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Big heavy, black jack, bull pine, ponderosa white 
pine, Sierra brown bark pine, silver pine, western 
pitch pine, western red pine, western yellow pine, 
yellow pine, Yosemite pine. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Ponderosa pine is a rapid growing 
tree with the ability to firmly anchor into most soil 
types.  For this reason, it is suitable for use as a 
windbreak species.  It can also be used with other 
natives to provide cover and erosion control on 
rehabilitated sites. 
 
Ethnobotanic: Native Americans used various parts 
of ponderosa pine for medicinal, building and  
household, food, and ceremonial purposes.  Needles 
were used as dermatological  and gynecological aids.   
 
They were also used to reduce coughs and fevers.  
The pitch was used as an ointment for sores and 
scabby skin, backaches, rheumatism, earaches, 
inflamed eyes, and as a sleeping agent for infants.   The boughs of the plant were used in sweat lodges 
for muscular pain, as decoctions for internal 
hemorrhaging, and as infusions for pediatric 
treatments. 
 
The roots of ponderosa pine were used to make blue 
dye and needles were used as insulation for 
underground storage pits.  The wood was used 
extensively for fence posts, boards for general 
construction, and to fabricate snowshoes.  Single logs 
were used to make dugout canoes.  Bark was used to 
cover houses. 
Banner, R. 2002.  UtahStateUniversityExtension.
 
Most parts of the plant were used for food, including 
the pitch, seeds, cones, bark, buds, and cambium.  
The pollen and needles were used in healing 
ceremonies. 
 
Ornamental value: 
Ponderosa pine has a lush green 
color and pleasant odor that makes it popular for 
ornamental plantings.  It has been planted, sometimes 
out of its natural range, because of its aesthetic 
qualities.  Ponderosa pine is used as borders of 
forested highways, but is not planted within the right-
of-way.  The large stature of the tree limits its use to 
open spaces.   
 
Wildlife:  Red-winged blackbirds, chickadees, 
mourning doves, finches, evening grosbeak, jays, 
Clark's nutcracker, nuthatches, rufous-sided towhee, 
turkeys, chipmunks and sq uirrels consume the seeds 
of ponderosa pine.  Blue and spruce grouse use 
ponderosa pine needles for nesting material.  Mice, 
porcupines, and other rodents use the bark for nesting 
material.  The trees are also important to various 
birds for cover, roosting and nesting sites. 
 
Wood production: Ponderosa pine is one of the most 
important timber species in the western United 
States.  The annual production of ponderosa pine is 
ranked third behind Douglas fir and hem-fir.  
Approximately 1.3 billion board feet of ponderosa 
pine lumber is produced annually out of Oregon, the 
largest supplier in the United States.  It is popularly 
used for the construction of buildings. 
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  Ponderosa pine is 
a large tree that lives 300  to 600 years and reaches 
heights of 30 to 50 m tall and 0.6 to 1.3 m in 
diameter.  The oldest trees can exceed 70 m in height 
and 2 m in diameter.  The bottom one-half of the

straight trunk is typically without branches.  The 
crown of ponderosa pine is broadly conical to round-
shaped.  The bark is characteristically orange-brown 
with a scaly plate-like appearance.  Twigs are stout, 
up to 2 cm think, orange-brown, and rough.  Needles 
are 12 to 28 cm long, thin and pointed with toothed 
edges, occur in bundles of three, and give a tufted 
appearance to the twig.  Buds are up to 2 cm long, 1 
cm wide, red-brown with white-fringed scale 
margins.  Male cones are orange or yellow and are 
located in small clusters n ear the tips of the branches. 
The female cone is oval, woody, 8 to 15 cm long, 
with a small prickle at the tip of each scale.  
Flowering occurs from April to June of the first year, 
and cones mature and shed winged seeds in August 
and September of the second year.  
 
Distribution : Ponderosa pine is distributed from 
southern British Columbia through Washington, 
Oregon, and California, and east to the western 
portions of Texas, Oklahoma, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, and South Dakota.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov). 
 
Habitat: Ponderosa pine trees occur as pure stands or 
in mixed conifer forests in the mountains.  It is an 
important component of the Interior Ponderosa Pine, 
Pacific Ponderosa Pine-Do uglas fir, and Pacific 
Ponderosa Pine forest cover types.   
 
In the northwest, it is typically associated with Rocky 
Mountain Douglas fir, lodgepole pine, grand fir, and 
western larch.  In California it is associated with 
California white fir, incense cedar, Jeffrey pine, sugar 
pine, coast Douglas fir, California black oak, and 
western juniper.  In the Rocky Mountains and Utah, it 
is associated with Rocky Mountain Douglas fir, blue 
spruce, lodgepole pine, limber pine, and quaking 
aspen.  In the Black Hills, it is associated with 
quaking aspen, white spruce, and paper birch.  In 
Arizona and New Mexico, it is associated with white 
fir, Rocky Mountain Douglas fir, blue spruce, 
quaking aspen, gamble oak, and southwestern white 
pine at higher elevations and Rocky Mountain 
juniper, alligator juniper, and Utah juniper at lower 
elevations (Oliver & Riker 1990). 
 
Shrubs and grasses typically associated with 
ponderosa pine within its  range include ceanothus, 
sagebrush, oak, snowberry, bluestem, fescue, and 
polargrass. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for ponderosa pine range 
from 3 to 7.  It grows on a variety of soils from  shallow to deep, and from gravelly sands to sandy 
clay loam. It is found growing on bare rock with its 
roots in the cracks and crevices. It has a low tolerance 
to alkalinity, preferring soils with a pH of 6.0 to 7.0. 
It grows best in zones with 30 to 60 cm average 
annual precipitation on well-drained soils. Once 
established it also survives hot and dry conditions, 
exhibiting medium to good drought tolerance.  Fifty 
percent shade reduces the gr
owth rate significantly.  
It withstands very cold winters. 
 
Ponderosa pine is a climax species at the lower 
elevations of the coniferous forest and a mid-
successional species at higher elevations where more 
competitive conifers are capable of growing. It 
generally grows at elevations between sea level and 
3,000 m.  The populations at higher elevations 
usually occur within the southern part of its range 
(Oliver & Riker 1990). 
 
Establishment 
Site preparation is needed to control competition, 
which compromises seedling survival and growth.  
Seeds are sown in late March to early April.  The 
seed is sown for an initial density of 237 seedlings/m
2 
(22 seedlings/ft2). Transplant stock should be one or 
two years old, with less than 2 prior transplantings, 
and 15 to 30 cm in height.  Space the plants 1 to 3 m 
apart depending on the site.   
 
Initial seedling survival is reduced under moisture 
stress.  Older seedlings can tolerate limited moisture.  
Competition from other vegetation should be 
controlled for the first three to six years until the trees 
become well established.  
 
Management  
Ponderosa pine can be over-irrigated in poorly 
drained soils, or drowned out on high water table 
sites. 
 
It responds well to thinning, which should be done as 
stands become older to develop larger crowns, 
resulting in heavier seed crops for wildlife.  More 
forage for deer and elk become available from 
associated plants by opening the canopy.  The use of 
repellents or other control measures may be 
necessary to prevent overuse  of the trees by rodents. 
 
Ponderosa pine is resistant to fire due to its thick 
bark.  Low intensity surface fires control competitive 
species like scrub oak and shade-tolerant conifers.  
Ponderosa pine seedlings can also survive low 
intensity burns.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Approximately 200 insect species affect ponderosa 
pine from its cone stage to maturity. Pine cone 
beetles cause tree death by transmitting blue stain 
fungus to the tree.  Their larvae also consume the 
phloem, restricting the flow of nutrients to the top of 
the tree.   
 
Western pine beetle is a common cause of death for 
older trees, drought stressed trees, and even healthy, 
vigorous trees during epidemics.   
 
Bark beetles are naturally present in all stands. 
Harvesting methods that leave large amounts of 
logging slash can allow bark beetle populations to 
explode and kill vigorous trees up to 0.5 m in 
diameter.   
 
The ponderosa pine budworm, also known as the 
sugar-pine tortrix, eats new needles on trees in New 
Mexico and Colorado.  Several years’ worth of 
damage will affect the health of the tree.  Early 
research suggests that some insecticides may help to 
control infestations.     
 
Dwarf mistletoe is the most  widespread parasite that 
causes branch and stem defo rmation.  It germinates 
on ponderosa pine branches and forces its roots into 
the phloem of the host branch, creating stem cankers 
that leave the wood weak and unsuitable for use as 
lumber.  This weakens the tree and leaves it 
susceptible to fungal infections and insect attacks. 
Root diseases, rusts, trunk decays, and needle and 
twig blights also cause significant damage. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Ponderosa pine is propagated by seed.  Cones are 
ready for collection in October and November when 
they turn reddish brown.  Mature seed is firm and 
brown in color.  Cones should be dried on canvas tarp 
in a well-ventilated area immediately after they have 
been collected.  The seeds will drop from the cones 
as they dry. 
 
Several germination methods for ponderosa pine 
have been utilized, each with their own variations.  In 
general, seeds undergo an imbibation treatment 
before stratification.  Seeds are placed in mesh bags 
and soaked in cold running water for 48 hours.  One 
variation is to soak the seeds in a 40% bleach 
solution for 10 minutes with hand agitation prior to 
placing them under running water.  The mesh bags 
are place in plastic bags and stored at 1
oC for 2 to 8 
weeks.  They should be checked daily for mold.  
Seeds are sown into containers and covered with 
media.  The media should be kept moist throughout  germination.  Germination will occur at an average 
greenhouse temperature of 20
oC.  Alternating 
greenhouse temperatures of 21-25oC during the day 
and 16-18oC at night is an appropriate environment 
for germinating seeds.  Germination will occur in 
approximately 15 days. 
 
Seedlings are thinned and watered daily throughout 
the establishment phase.  They should not be moved 
outdoors until after the last frost of the year. 
 
Seeds can be dried to between 5 and 8% moisture and 
placed in airtight plastic ba gs, then stored for long 
periods of time in freezers set at –15
oC.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Research Center. 2004.  GRIN taxonomy 
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/index, 27 
May 2004). USDA, Beltsville. 
 
Banner, R. 2002.  Ponderosa pine 
(http://extension.usu.edu/rangeplants/Woody/pondero
sapine.htm, 29 July, 2004). Utah State University 
Extension, Logan.   
 
Forest Research Nursery. 2004.  Native plant network 
(http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org, 27 May 2004). 
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, 
Moscow. 
 
Frankis, M.P. 1998.  Pinus ponderosa. Earle, C.J., 
Gymnosperm database  (http://www.conifers.org/, 27 
May 2004). Bonn University, Bonn, Germany. 
 
Miller, A. 1997.  Ponderosa pine species facts 
(http://www.wwpa.org/ppine.htm, 16 June 2004). 
Western Wood Products Association, Portland. 
 
Moerman, D. 2003. Native American ethnobotany 
database  (http://herb.umd.umich.edu/, 27 May 2004). 
University of Mi chigan, Dearborn. 
 
Oliver, W.W. and R.A. Ryker. 1990.  Ponderosa pine. 
Burns, R.M. and B.H. Honkala, Silvics of North 
America. Agriculture Handbook 654 . USDA Forest 
Service, Washington, D.C.

Rewerts, M.S. 2004. Ponderosa pine budworm 
(http://www.ext.colostate.edu/pubs/insect/05567.html
, 29 July, 2004). Colorado State University 
Extension, Fort Collins. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 29Jul2004 sbw; 20Oct2004 rln; 060802 jsp; 060830 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.