KLEINGRASS 
Panicum coloratum  L.  
Plant Symbol = PACO2  
 USDA -NRCS  James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center  (PMC) -
Knox City, Texas  
Alternate Names  
Common Names:  Blue Panicgrass, Klein Grass, 
Klinegrass  
Description  
General :  Kleingrass is a 
warm -season, perennial 
bunchgrass native to Africa 
(USDA NRCS, 2003). It 
begins green up in late 
winter or early spring and 
continues to grow until late 
fall (Alderson and Sharp, 
1994). Plants grow 3 to 4 
feet tall with erect stems 
rangi ng from 20 to 47 inches 
from a knotty base (Hatch et 
al., 1993). The seed head is a 
fan -shaped, fine -branched 
panicle similar to 
switchgrass. Kleingrass 
reproduces by seed and rhizomes (Gould, 1975). Breeding 
and selection programs have utilized the variab ility in 
kleingrass germplasm to expand the area of adaptation 
and use in the southern plains (Holt and Conrad, 1966).  
Kleingrass has an average of 500,000 seeds per pound 
(USDA NRCS, 2012b).  
Distribution :  For current distribution, please consult the 
Pla nt Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Adaptation
 
Kleingrass is adapted to a variety of soils and 
environments. It will thrive on heavy soils, under dry or 
wet conditions, shallow sandy soils, and river bottom 
clays. It is also successful  on sites with deep sands and 
medium textured soils (Holt  et al., 1968). Kleingrass is 
also drought hardy and tolerates moderate salinity 
(Alderson  and Sharp , 1994). It will produce optimum 
forage in areas  recei ving  18-30 inches of annual 
precipitation  or  under irrigation management.  
Uses  
Livestock:  
Kleingrass  provides excellent forage for livestock. It is 
commonly used  as a forage or hay  for cattle. The plant 
produces  an abundance of  high quality forage. Forage  
quality r esearch conducted at the James E. “B ud” Smith 
P lant Materials Center found kleingrass produced  a crude 
protein level  which ranged from 17% in April to 7% in 
November , while digestibility ( in vitro dry matter 
digestibility) ranged from near 70% to 53% for the same 
time period . Kleingrass  forage yields ranged from 1,500 
lb/acre to approximately 12,500 lb/ acre at the end of the 
growing season (USDA  NRCS,  2012a). 
Wild life:  
Kleingrass provides fair grazing for wildlife as well as 
seed for birds and small mammals (Texas A&M, 2014). 
The dense fo liage also provides excellent cover for 
nesting birds and small mammals (Alderson  and Sharp , 
1994).  
Conservation:  
Kleingrass has many other conservation benefits 
including:  soil stabilization and re -vegetation on depleted 
soils or  range conditions . It can also be used to prevent 
soil erosion on embankments, ditches, and other  highly 
erodible sites (USDA NRCS,  2012b).  
Status  
T his  plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Pl ease consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use . 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
The full seeding rate for kleingrass is 1.5 pure live seed 
per acre. When planting this as a component of a seed 
Natural Resources Conservation Service   Plant Guide 
USDA-NRCS/James E. "Bud" Smith PMC Knox City, TX