Plant Guide
WOOLY GROUNDSEL 
Packera cana W.A. Weber & Á. 
Löve  
Plant Symbol = PACA15  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen  Plant Materials 
Center   
Wooly groundsel. Photo  from  Wildaboutflowers.com . 
Alternate Names 
Senecio cana, S. convallium, S. halii, S. harbourii, S. 
howelii, S. purshianus  
Gray ragwort, Silvery ragwort, wooly ragwort, wooly 
butterweed  
Uses  
Wooly groundsel  has value as a food source for insects. 
Nymphalis  and  Pontia  butterflies have been observed 
foraging nectar from wooly groundsel (Ezzeddine and 
Matter 2008).   
 
Wooly groundsel is browsed by pronghorn antelope 
(Kessler et al 1981). It  is r ated  as having  medium 
palatability for sheep and low to medium palatability  for 
cattle and horses (Hermann 1966).  However it is 
considered to have moderate levels of toxicity and may be 
harmful in sufficient quantities (USDA NRCS 2012).  
  Status
 
Wooly groundsel t is listed as an endangered species in 
Minnesota. Gravel mining and overgra zing in wooly 
groundsel  t habitat are cited as major threats (Minnesota 
DNR 2012).  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Wooly 
groundsel is a low growing perennial forb with short 
rhizomes. Mature plants reach 8 to 30 cm ( 3 to 12 in) in 
h eight. The stems and leaves are densely wooly giving it a 
grayish appearance. The basal leaves are lanceolate to 
oblanceolate, 1 to 5 cm ( 0.4 to 2 in) long and 0.3 to 3 cm 
(0.12 to 1.2 in)  wide. The margins are entire to minutely 
toothed. The stem leaves  reduce in size going upward  
along the stem . In late spring the plants bear 2 to 10 
flower heads with orange disk flowers and 8 to 13 yellow 
ray flowers approximately 5 to 10 mm (0.2 to 0.4 in) in 
length  (Welsh et al 2003).  The fruit is an achene with a 
pa ppus of capillary bristles. The seed is  wind dispersed 
(Andersen 1993).  There are approximately 600,000 seeds 
per pound  (USDA NRCS 2012).   
Distribution :  Wooly groundsel is found from Kansas, 
Minnesota and  Manitoba westward to the Pacific states 
and south to California, Nevada and Colorado. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Wooly groundsel occupies rocky sites in 
mountain shrub, pinyon -juniper, Douglas fir, spruce -fir 
and alpin e tundra communities. It can often be found in 
talus slopes and high ridges.  
Adaptation  
Wooly groundsel is adapted to a broad range of soils from 
coarse to fine, but is typically found in sandy to rocky 
areas with a soil pH  of 6.5 to 8.5. It can be found in areas 
receiving as little as 200 mm ( 8 in) annual precipitation  
(USDA NRCS 2012).  
Establishment  
No seed or plant establishment information could be 
located.  
 
Management  
Wooly groundsel  can be  used as a minor component of 
seed mixtures.   Management strat egies should be based 
on  the  key species in the established plant community.