Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD QUININE 
Parthenium integrifolium  L. 
Plant Symbol = PAIN3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
American feverfew, eastern feverfew, eastern 
parthenium 
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic :  The Catawba and other tribes in the 
southeastern United States used wild quinine for 
medicinal and veterinary purposes.  The leaves 
contain tannin, which is thought to be beneficial for 
treating burns.  The leaves  were mashed into a moist, 
thick paste, which was then applied as a poultice to 
burns. Burns were also treat ed by placing the whole, 
fresh leaves over the wounded area.  Tea from the 
boiled roots was used to treat dysentery.  Ashes from  burned leaves were used to rub the skin of horses 
suffering from sore backs.  
  
Other
: The flowers make long-lasting additions to cut 
bouquets. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 ©William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agricultural department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Wild 
quinine is a perennial, herbaceous forb.  Stiff, 
upright, sometimes hairy stems are single, or 
branched near the top.  Stems (4-12 dm in height) 
grow from a swollen tuberous root.  The leaves are 
ovate to lanceolate with wavy, toothed margins.  
Basal leaves are 38 cm long.  Stem leaves are 
alternate, smaller, and spar sely distributed along the 
stems.  The long-lastin g, somewhat-yarrow-like 
flower heads are composed of grayish-white, 
globular, compound flowers that are 4-6 mm wide.  
Five, unusually short, ray flowers (1-2mm long) 
surround the central disk flower corollas, which are 
2.5-3 mm long.  Only the ray flowers are fertile.  The 
heads are grouped together into an inflorescent spray 
up to 20 cm in diameter.  Flowers have a pleasant but 
mild medicinal fragrance.   The plant flowers from 
summer through the autumn months. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Wild quinine occurs in dry, somewhat 
heavy soils in prairies, fields, open wooded areas, 
rocky woods, and hillsides.

Establishment 
Wild quinine is a very hardy addition to the garden as 
it is tolerant of both hot and cold weather.  The plants 
make a nice addition to native plant gardens because 
of their wild growth form.  Wild quinine plants are 
easily propagated by seed.  Plant seeds in the fall or 
early winter or pre-treat them with 4 to 6 weeks of 
cold moist stratification to improve germination.  
Wild quinine will grow best in fertile, well-drained 
soils in full-sun to light shade.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant has no known serious disease or insect 
problems. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)   
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Chapman, A.W.  1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering plants and ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Clinton, J. 2001.   Easy living native perennial 
wildflowers. Native wildflower seed. Parthenium 
integrifolium. Wild quinine.   
http://www.easywildflowers. com/quality/par.inte.htm 
(13 June 2001).   
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote  1975.   Wildflowers of 
the southeastern United States. University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Greene, W.F. &  H.L. Blomquist  1953.  Flowers of 
the south: native and exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Missouri Botanical Garden 2000 .  Parthenium 
integrifolium.   Kemper Center for Home Gardening .  
http://www.mobot.org/hort/plantfinder/Code/A/G58.
htm.  (13 June 2001). 
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples .  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.  http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-
bin/herb. 
(13 June 2001) 
 
Ottensen, C. 1995.   The native plant primer.  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Shemluck, M. 1982.    Medicinal and other uses of the 
Compositae by Indians in the United States and 
Canada . Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5: 303-358. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.    Manual of southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G.  1937.   Catawba medicines and curative 
practices.  Publications of the Philadelphia 
Anthropological Society 1:179-197. 
 
Taylor, L.A.  1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes . Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
88 pp. 
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o  
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Department, University 
of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 21May2001 jsp; 29may03 ahv;  060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.