Plant Guide       
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ANTELOPE 
BITTERBRUSH  
Purshia tridentate (Pursh)  DC. 
Plant Symbol = PUTR2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center, 
Colorado 
 Steve Parr, UCEPC, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Alternate Names 
Antelopebrush, buckbrush, quininebrush, bitterbrush, 
antelope-brush, quinine brush, deer-brush, black sage 
 
Uses 
Antelope bitterbrush is one of the most important 
palatable native shrubs in  the western United States. 
It provides high quality, important spring and winter 
browse for domestic livestock, antelope, deer, and 
elk. Its seed is an important source of food for small 
animals and the plant provides cover for small 
animals and birds.  It is considered medium quality 
coverage for sage-grouse.  The shrub is also used for 
reclamation and erosion control of mined areas and  has the potential for use as a living snow fence, 
roadside beautification, and xeriscape plantings. 
 
Historic Native American Uses: 
Western Indian 
groups used leaf poultice or wash for itches, rashes, 
insect bites, chickenpox, and measles.  Leaf tea was 
used as a general tonic and for colds, pneumonia, 
liver disease, to expel worms, and as an emetic and 
laxative for stomach ache and constipation.  Twigs, 
leaves, and berries were used as a laxative.  Root teas 
were used for coughs, lung and bronchial infections, 
fever, and to facilitate delivery of placenta. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Antelope bitterbrush is a slow growing 
shrub that is moderate to very deep rooted with wide 
ecotypic variations. It is normally 2 to 6 feet in height 
and up to 8 feet in width with wedge shaped, three 
lobed leaves (some are persistent in winter). Leaves 
can vary in color from grey green to bright green.  
Some plants have branches near the soil that layer 
(branches that touch the soil develop roots) providing 
additional rooting for the plant.  
 
Flowering occurs in late spring to early summer. The 
spindle-shaped seed shatte rs easily at maturity.  
Flowers are small, varying from white to yellow, and 
produced profusely along each leader.  The seeds are 
large for the species—15,500 per pound.  They are 
about one-fourth inch long and obovate.  Seeds, 
stems, and leaves are nontoxic. 
 
Individual bitterbrush plants exhibit considerable 
variation for growth form.  Bitterbrush’s growth 
forms vary from a uniform, erect growth habit to 
more decumbent, layeri ng forms.  Users are 
encouraged to consider  the various forms of 
bitterbrush in choosing a strain best suited to their 
needs.  
 
Distribution : Antelope bitterbrush is an important 
native browse shrub in the intermountain Western 
United States.  It occurs from New Mexico north to 
Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and British 
Columbia, west to Idaho, and Washington, south to 
Oregon, California, and Nevada.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for

this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Antelope bitterbrush occurs most often as  
part of a mixed shrub community, but occasionally is 
found in nearly pure stands. It is associated with a 
variety of understory grasses and forbs. It can also be 
an understory plant in association with taller growing 
trees. 
 
Adaptation 
Antelope bitterbrush is adapted to a wide range of 
soils with 8 to 34 inches of annual precipitation. It is 
normally found at elevations of 4000 to 8500 feet, 
but has been noted at 11,000 feet in California. The 
shrub has good tolerance to drought and cold.   
 
In California, bitterbrush is associated with big 
sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata ) and rabbitbrush 
( Chrysothamnus  sp.).  It occurs naturally on dry lake 
beds, alluvial fans or terr aces, and low foothills.  It 
occurs in soils that are de ep, gravelly, loamy coarse 
sands derived from granite, with pH ranging from 6.0 
to 7.0.  Tests have shown that bitterbrush has high 
potential for use on deep, coarse, well-drained, 
neutral to slightly acidic soils in areas that have 12-24 
inches of annual precipitation.   
 
Establishment 
Natural establishment of antelope bitterbrush occurs 
in years with good seed production when rodents 
cache seed and do not use all of the caches.  Moisture 
is necessary the first few years of seedling growth for 
establishment. Late fall or winter seeding is 
recommended and competition can be a problem for 
establishment. Seeds should  be drilled about 1 inch 
deep at a rate of 1/2 to 2 (3) pounds per acre. Rates 
are doubled if broadcasting and seeds do need to be 
covered.   In California, pretreatment with hydrogen 
peroxide is required to break dormancy for spring 
seeding and seedlings are susceptible to late frosts.   
 
Bitterbrush seedlings are  often transplanted on 
critical sites.  In such castes, moisture must be 
adequate to ensure survival  in the first year.  One-
year-old bare-root or containerized seedling stock, 6 
to 24 inches tall, is recommended.  
 
Plants should not be used for the first four years and 
seedlings need protection until they are 8 to 10 inches 
tall. Rodents normally cache  seeds within 50 to 75 
feet of an existing seed source. Suitable 
environmental conditions may allow natural 
revegetation in only one out of 20 years. Antelope 
bitterbrush can also be established with tubling 
plants. These should be planted in the spring or early  summer. Establishment can 
be slow; however, stands 
tend to be long-lived.  
 
Several insects and diseases are known to damage the 
foliage, seed, and seedlings of bitterbrush, and are 
more or less susceptible than other species.  High-
density populations of grasshoppers can destroy 
seedlings.  
 
Management 
Since antelope bitterbrush is a very palatable shrub 
for big game and livestock, its use should be 
controlled or it can be easily eliminated by overuse. 
The shrub is most often used by big game in the fall, 
winter, or early spring when other plants are still 
covered by snow. Livestock tend to use the shrub 
during the growing season when use is more 
detrimental to vigor.  Stands of bitterbrush can 
become decadent with no use and mature plants 
should be browsed for good forage production and 
vigor. However, no more that 50 to 60 percent of 
current annual growth should be removed. The 
literature indicates that bitterbrush is not a fire 
resistant shrub, but is fire dependent and light to 
moderate fires may enhance stands.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Many species of insects and mites inhabit antelope 
bitterbrush, several of these are beneficial. It should 
be noted that bitterbrush is insect pollinated. Insects 
that cause problems include  defoliators such as 
mountain mahogany loper and Western tussock moth. 
Some of the noted seed insects are bitterbrush seed 
midge, Say’s stinkbug, dark bitterbrush leaf tier, and 
flower thrips. Large numbers of seedlings and small 
plants have been destroyed by cutworms and false 
wireworms. Diseases associated with bitterbrush 
include root rot, root and stem wilt, and root-stem 
canker.  Seedlings have been damaged by damping 
off (a disease caused by fungi).  A beneficial 
organism associated with antelope bitterbrush is the 
nitrogen-fixing endophyte Frankia purshiae .  
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with antelope bitterbrush. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
In Colorado, seed may not be produced in wildland 
stands for 8 to 20 years depending on existing 
conditions. Browsing should be reduced to 30 percent 
or less to obtain good seed production. Seed may not 
be produced from mature plants when stressed from 
drought or late freezes.  S eed can be collected by 
hand by shaking branches and allowing the seed to 
fall in hand held collectors. Seeds vary in size from

15,000 to 33,000 per pound and germination 
normally ranges from 85 to 95 percent. A cold moist 
stratification period of up to six weeks may be 
required to obtain good germination. Tublings can be 
grown in a greenhouse for planting in a period of six 
months to one year.  
 
In California, mature seed must be harvested with 3 
to 10 days of ripening because it shatters quickly 
after reaching maturity.  Seed may be harvested into 
canvas hoppers or aluminum seed collection trays 
positioned under the shrubs prior to seed fall.  Seed 
collection and orchard maintenance are simplified by 
the upright growth form.  
 
A 3.6 to 3.6 m to 4.9 x 4.9 m (12 x12 ft to 16 x 16 ft) 
spacing is recommended for antelope bitterbrush seed 
orchards.  Plants in wildland stands reach full seed 
production in 8 to 20 years.  With appropriate 
cultural practices, this period may be reduced to 
about 5 years for seed orchards.  Nine-year old 
shrubs grown at 2.4 m (8 ft) spacings without 
irrigation or other cultural treatments at the Boise 
Shrub Garden, produced 118 g (0.26 lbs) of seed per 
shrub or 199 kg/ha (177 lbs/acre).  
 
Seed is easily cleaned to a purity of 95 percent using 
a two-screen fanning mill and a barley debearder.  
Shriveled black seed is nonviable and should be 
separated with the chaff.   Seeds of bitterbrush are 
relatively large, averaging 34,507 seeds/kg (15,685 
seeds/lb) for cleaned seed, with  germination 
averaging about 84 percent.  Seeds of bitterbrush 
remain viable for 15 years  or more in open storage. 
 
On rangeland sites antelope bitterbrush is normally 
seeded in late fall or winter to permit field 
stratification of the seed.  Pretreatment with hydrogen 
peroxide is required to break dormancy for spring 
seeding.  Seedlings are susceptible to late frosts.  
Plants develop very slowly and must be protected 
from competition during the first two seasons.  
Recommended seeding rates are 1.2 to 3.3 kg/ha (1 to 
3 lbs/acre).  Bitterbrush may be established on critical 
sites by transplanting.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Lassen’ is a cultivar of antelope bitterbrush released 
in 1984 by USDA Forest  Service, Shrub Sciences 
Laboratory, Provo, Utah, Soil Conservation Service, 
and Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Ephraim 
Utah. Seven other agencies in California, Idaho, 
Nevada, and Oregon cooperated. Its origin is near 
Janesville in Lassen County, California. 
  Fountain Green germplasm is a source identified 
release of antelope bitterbrush. It was released in 
1990 by the USDA Forest 
Service, Shrub Sciences 
Laboratory, Provo, Utah, and the Utah Division of 
Wildlife Resources, Ephraim, Utah. Its origin is 
North of Fountain Green, Utah.  
 
Maybell germplasm was released in 1997 as a 
selected class release by Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center. Five other agencies 
participated in the release.  Maybell’s origin is Moffat 
County in Northwest Colorado, near the town of 
Maybell. 
 
References 
Block, Neil D.  Purshia tridentata  
http://www.usask.ca/agricult ure/plantsci/classes/rang
e/purshia.html. Accessed: May 2005. 
 
Foster, Steven and Christopher Hobbs. 2002 . Western 
medicinal plants and herbs. Houghton Mifflin 
Company, New York, New York. 296-7 p. 
 
Giunta, Bruce C., Richard Stevens, Kent R. 
Jorgensen, and A. Perry Plummer 1978.  Antelope 
Bitterbrush  – An Important Wildland Shrub.  Utah 
State Div. of Wildlife Resources. 48 pp. 
 
Plummer, A. Perry 1968.  Restoring big –game Range 
in Utah.  Utah Div. of Fish and Game. 183 pp. 
 
Shaw, Nancy and Stephen B. Monsen. No date. 
Notice of release of ‘Lassen’ antelope bitterbrush. 
USDA NRCS. 
 
Wasser, Clinton H. 1982.  Ecology and culture of 
selected species useful in revegetating disturbed 
lands in the West.  U.S. Dept. Int., Fish Wildl. Serv. 
FWS/OBS-82/56. 347 pp. 
 
USDA NRCS. September 1986. ‘ Lassen Antelope 
Bitterbrush’  brochure.  Davis, California 
 
USDA- Soil Conservation Service 1991. Conservation 
tree and shrub cultivars in the United States.  Ag. 
Handbook 692. U.S. Govt. Printing Office.50 pp. 
 
Release information for ‘Lassen’ and Maybell Select 
Class. 
 
Prepared By 
Dyer, Dave , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, CA and  Gary L. Noller, Ph.D., Plant 
Materials Consultant,  Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado

Species Coordinator 
Dyer, Dave, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA. 
 
Edited: 070814 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of 
discrimination write to USDA, Di rector, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 
or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is 
an equal opportunity provider and employer.. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.