Plant Guide

VELVET MESQUITE 
Prosopis velutina Woot. 
Plant Symbol = PRVE 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & UC Davis Arboretum 
George & Audrey DeLange www.delange.org 
Alternative Names: 
mesquite 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The pods of this mesquite provided an 
important food to the Maricopa, Pima, Haulapais, and 
other tribes of the Southwest and are still very 
important today.  The pods or the seeds alone are 
ground in a mortar or the seeds are sometimes 
parched and afterwards ground into a meal that is 
very nourishing.  This meal is eaten as is, used to 
sweeten other seed mixtures, or made into bread. 
Traditionally a drink was prepared from the beans by 
pounding them in a stone mortar, mixing cold water 
with the flour, and the product was strained and 
drank.  The black gum from the mesquite was an 
important medicine to the Pima.  It was boiled with a 
little water and applied to sore lips and gums, 
chapped fingers, and taken internally to cleanse the 
system.  Mesquite leaves were pounded and boiled 
and placed on the eyes of Pima individuals as a 
treatment for pink eye.  The Pima used black gum in 
a concoction to dye gray hair black. 
Industrial: The wood is used for fence posts and the 
heartwood takes a fine polish.  The flowers are used 
as a source of bee food in the honey industry. 
Wildlife: Mesquite is an important tree to wildlife. 
The seeds are eaten by jackrabbits, Gambel quail,  
songbirds, various small mammals, and domestic 
livestock.  Western chipmunks, ground squirrels, 
pocket mice, and various species of kangaroo and 
wood rats consume the foliage.  Different birds also 
nest in the tree&#39;s canopy. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.  This species is a valuable 
native of the southwest US.  A synonym, Prosopis 
articulata, referring to a South American plant, is 
listed as noxious Federally and in the States of 
Florida and North Carolina (two states that include 
all names on the Federal list). 
Description 
This deciduous shrub or tree is less than 15 m in 
height with a spreading, rounded crown.  Every part 
of the plant has short, dense hairs.  The branches are 
crooked with spines 1-2 cm.  The fern-like compound 
leaves are divided into many tiny leaflets.  The trunk 
has a shaggy bark.  The inflorescence is a spike-like 
raceme and the yellow corolla has free petals.  The 
fruits are 8-15 cm linear and flat and are tan-colored 
or sometimes streaked with red. 
Distribution 
This mesquite is found below 1700 m in desert 
washes and plains in Yavapai County, Arizona east 
and south to western Texas and northern Mexico. It 
is common in Sonora at least as far south as Guaymas 
and uncommon in California, being found in the San 
Joaquin Valley, and the central and south coasts.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Establishment 
Gather the seed pods and take the seeds out of the 
pods.  Put the seeds in scalding water and let the 
water cool.  Plant seeds in a well-drained soil in deep 
pots or tree tubes in autumn.  Sprinkle soil on top of 
the seeds and place one-quarter inch gravel on top of 
the dirt.  The seeds should be spaced one-half inch 
apart and the tree tubes placed in partial shade with 
morning sun and afternoon shade.  Water the 
containers right away and keep them moist.  As soon 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

as the plants form one true leaf, transplant one plant 
per container and water.  Keep the containers watered 
but allows the surface of the soil to dry out in 
between watering.  Plant each dormant seedling in 
the ground the following fall or winter in partial sun 
and well-drained soil.  Plants will tolerate cold to 5 
degrees F.  Protect the plants from wildlife. Water 
the plants and keep them damp if the rains are 
insufficient.  Also in areas without summer rainfall 
do some watering in summer, about every 2 to 3 
weeks.  Continue to water deeply throughout the life 
of the plant once in awhile. Mesquite should be 
lightly damp all summer long. 
Management 
Mesquite can tolerate pruning of the lower branches 
and it can be shaped into a small tree with an exposed 
trunk or let grown naturally with the branches 
touching the ground. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available from native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information. 
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Arid Zone Trees 2000.  Prosopis velutina. Version:

000323.  <http://wwwaridzonetrees.com>.  Queen 

Creek, Arizona .

Barney, R.C. 1989.  Prosopis.  Pages 4-6 IN: Fabales,

Vol. 3, Part B in Intermountain Flora: Vascular 

Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A.  A .

Cronquist, A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J. L.

Reveal, and P.K. Holmgren (authors). New Yo rk

Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 

Curtin, L.S.M. 1984.  By the prophet of the earth

ethnobotany of the Pima. University of Arizona

Press, Tucson, Arizona . 

Dobyns, H.F. 1956. Pre-conquest Hualapai plant 

food gathering. Unpublished report to Marks and

Marks, Phoenix, Arizona and Strasser, Spiegelber g, 

Fried and Frank, Washington, D.C .

Kearney, T.H. & R.H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora. 

University of California Press, Berkeley, Ca lifornia. 

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951. 
American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food 
habits. Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
McClintock, E. 1993.  Prosopis. Pages 641-642 IN: 
The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California.  J. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
Shreve, F. & I.L. Wiggins 1964.  Vegetation and 
flora of the Sonoran Desert.  Stanford University 
Press, Stanford, California. 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database. 
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 000301.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
USDI, GS 2000.  The USGS-NPS vegetation mapping 
program.  Version: 000323.  Photo: Aerial 
Information Systems, Redlands, California. 
<http://biology.usgs.gov/npsveg/TUZI/proshrub.html 
>. Tuzigoot National Monument.  Center for 
Biological Informatics, Lakewood, Colorado. 
Prepared By and Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
Warren Roberts 
Superintendent, UC Davis Arboretum 
Edited 04dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.