Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEAKED 
PANICGRASS  
Panicum anceps  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = PAAN  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Louisiana State 
Office, National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing 
Land Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Beaked panicum and spreading panicum.  Synonyms 
of the scientific name of beaked panicgrass are 
Panicum anceps var. rhizomatum and Panicum 
rhizomatum.   The seed resembles the slightly curved 
beak of a bird, hence the common name, beaked 
panicgrass. 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Cattle and horses readily graze beaked 
panicgrass from early spring to late fall.  Grazing 
should be deferred through the summer because it  will improve plant vigor and density.  Overgrazing 
will reduce the amount of this plant and allow lesser 
value plants to invade.  
If cattle and horses graze  
 
Beaked panicgrass in the  winter, then protein and 
energy supplements are necessary. 
 
Wildlife : Deer graze on beaked panicgrass.  The seeds 
are eaten by most uplan d birds and by some 
waterfowl. 
 
Erosion:  Beaked panicgrass is used for the 
revegetation of surfaces such as mined land, logging 
sites, timber roads, and other disturbed areas. 
Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
 
Conservation Practices : Beaked panicgrass, because 
of its growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with certain conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Beaked panicgrass 
is a native, rhizomatous perennial.  The culms are 
glabrous, erect and up to 4 feet tall.  The blades are 
elongated, flat, glabrous to pubescent, and range in 
widths of ¼ to ½ inch wide.  The ligules are 
membranous, irregular shaped and about 1 ⁄16 inch 
long.  The inflorescences are open panicles, 6 to 15 
inches long, ascending and usually bearing 
appressed, short branchlets .  Spikelets are unequally 
positioned on the pedicle and range in lengths of  ⅛ to 
¼ inch wide.  The first glume is 1/4 to ½ the length 
of the spikelets.  It is sharply angled, 3 to 5 nerved, 
and encompasses nearly the entire base of the 
spikelet.  The second glume is  as long as the spikelet 
and with 5 to 7 nerves.  Th e second glume is curved 
like a bird’s beak.  The thin, dry sterile palea is  ⅛ 
inch long.  The fertile palea and lemma are angled, 
straw-colored, slightly pubescent with stiff hairs at 
the apexes and is up to  ⅛ inch long.  The caryopsis is 
oval-shaped and purple in color. 
 
Distribution : Beaked panicgrass can tolerate a wide 
range of habitats, from well-drained sandy soil to

waterlogged sites.  It is native to Louisiana and is 
found from New Jersey to Kansas, south to Florida 
and over to Texas.  For current distribution, consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Beaked panicgrass grows on moist to wet 
soils along margins of fresh marshes, swamps, and 
bottomlands that overflow occasionally.  It grows 
best under 30 to 35 percent shade. 
 
Beaked panicgrass reproduces by seeds, tillers, and 
rhizomes.  It flowers only once a year in the fall and 
produces an abundant amount of seed.  However, not 
much research has been done on germination.  
Beaked panicgrass is most commonly established by 
rhizomes, which will form  pure stands of large 
clumps. 
 
The seeds should be planted in the fall or early 
winter.  The rhizomes could be planted from 
December to April; however,  if planting after April, 
then plenty of water should be provided. 
 
Plants should be placed at 3 foot-centers.  Growth 
begins in February and beaked panicgrass remains 
green all year round. 
 
It is not recommended to mix beaked panicgrass 
seeds with cool season gras s seeds.  In parts of the 
United States where cool season grasses dominate, 
the warm season grasses can be taken over because 
they develop slower than the cool season grasses.  It 
is also recommended that seed not be moved more 
than 300 miles north, 100 miles east or west, or 200 
miles south of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
Beaked panicgrass maintains its production and 
contributes only small quantities of forage.  However, 
check with the local  extension service for 
recommended herbicides if it becomes weedy.  
Beaked panicgrass has no known pests or problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local NRCS  Field Office.  Common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed. 
 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No  200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 702. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Panicum anceps
. 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/46345
00e.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA, NRCS, Louisi ana State Office 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 06dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 10aug03 jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.