Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FALL PANICGRASS 
Panicum dichotomiflorum  
Michx.  
Plant Symbol = PADI  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Louisiana State 
Office, National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing 
Land Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Fall panic grass, fall panicum, kneegrass, spreading 
panicgrass, spreading panicum, spreading witchgrass, 
sprouting crabgrass, and zigzag grass.  The genus, 
panicum refers to the type of seed head.  
Dichotomiflorum refers to the individual flowers 
arranged in pairs.  Fall panicgrass resembles 
switchgrass ( Panicum virgatum ) and witchgrass 
( Panicum capillare ).  However, switchgrass is a 
perennial, clump-forming grass that does not fall to 
the ground after the beginning of winter.  Witchgrass 
has a rounder, dense seed head and the seeds are 
smaller. 
 
Uses 
Warning -Livestock:  Fall panicgrass has been blamed 
for causing nitrate poisoning and extreme sensitivity 
to light in livestock (called photosensitivity).   
of any skin that is not protected from the sun. 
 
Noxious:   Fall panicgrass has become a nuisance in 
cultivated fields, such as corn, alfalfa, and soybeans. 
 
Wildlife : Small seed eating birds and ducks eat the 
small seeds.  Fall panicgrass produces a large number 
of seeds.  After the first frost, the seeds fall to the 
water and the sites are used as feeding and loafing 
areas for ducks, coots, and wading birds.  It provides 
browse for deer and rabbits. 
 Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
 
Conservation Practices : Fall panicgrass, because of 
its growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with certain conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office.   
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a tufted, 
annual, vigorous grass, which belongs to the largest 
genus.  Culms are erect to ascending and range in 
heights of 6 feet.  Basally, the culms are decumbent 
to geniculate and root at the nodes.  The culms bend 
at the nodes forming a zigzag pattern; hence the name 
zigzag grass.  The blades  are flat, smooth, up to 20 
inches long, and ¾ inch wide.  The margins on the 
underside are scantily ciliate.  The leaf sheaths are 
loose, purplish, and smooth with the margins thin and 
dry.  The ligules are membranous and are surrounded 
in thick, small, white hairs.  The inflorescence is a 
panicle located on the top of  the main stem or on the 
primary stems.  The spikel ets are purple to brown, 
oblong and range in lengths of up to 10 inches long.  
The first glume is about ¹⁄ 20 inch long and with 1 to 3 
indistinct nerves.  The second glume and the sterile 
lemma are even in length, green or partially purple, 
acute, 5 to 7 nerved, and are twice as long as the first 
glume.  The fertile palea and lemma are acute, light

to dark brown or purple, and ⅛ to ¹ ⁄6 inch long.  The 
caryopsis is yellow-brown, and elliptic. 
 
Distribution 
Fall panicgrass is found mostly in moist areas along 
streams, floodplains, wet clearings, and as a weed in 
cultivated areas and waste sites.  It is commonly 
found with Echinochloa walteri  and Echinochloa 
crusgalli.   Fall panicgrass is located throughout the 
United States, Nova Scotia and in the West Indies.  It 
is native to Louisiana.  For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Fall panicgrass is found in freshwater to 
intermediate water where salinity ranges from 0 to 
3.5 parts per thousand.  During the summer, a change 
from moist soils to dry soils is required for the seeds 
to germinate.  Shallow flooding after germination 
provides for maximum growth.  Organic soils 
produce the most prolific stands; however, it can 
grow on mineral soils.  Fall panicgrass is an indicator 
plant for anaerobic, compacted soil.  
 
General : Seeds propagate fall panicgrass.  
Stratification of mature seeds must occur before the 
seeds will germinate.  Germination takes place from 
April to May and will continue throughout the 
summer months.  To obtain the highest germination 
percentage, a soil temperature  of 80° F is suggested.  
If competition is suppressed, plants that germinate 
first will produce up to ten times more dry matter 
than those maturing later in the year did.  Before 
flowering from August to September, fall panicgrass 
is at its peak in growth. 
 
It is not recommended to mix fall panicgrass seeds 
with warm season grass seeds.  In Louisiana, the 
warm season grasses can be taken over because they 
develop slower than the cool season grasses.  It is 
also recommended that seed not be moved more than 
300 miles north, 100 miles east or west, or 200 miles 
south of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
The best control method for fall panicgrass in 
cultivated fields is to establish a shady crop canopy, 
because fall panicgrass must  have full sun to grow.  
Check with the local extension service for 
recommended herbicides.  Fall panicgrass is 
susceptible to the following diseases: Barley yellow 
dwarf luteovirus, Maize chlorotic mottle 
machlomovirus, Maize white  line mosiac virus, and 
insusceptible to Panicum mosiac sobemovirus. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local NRCS  Field Office.  Common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed. 
 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 685. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Panicum dichotomiflorum. 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/46382
00e.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA NRCS Louisi ana State Office 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 06dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 10aug03 jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.