Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SINGLELEAF PINYON  
Pinus monophylla  Torr. & 
Frem. 
Plant Symbol = PIMO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Davis Arboretum 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Traditionally different tribes in 
California, the Great Basin,  and the Southwest U.S. 
have utilized this tree for fuel wood and the pine nuts 
for food.  The Washoe have made pinyon supple 
branches into stirring sticks for mixing pine nut soup.  
Pinyon pitch is melted and applied by different tribes 
as an outer covering for baskets to make them 
watertight or used to waterproof and repair pottery 
vessels.  The tree's large, orange-red to chocolate-
brown seeds have been an  important food to Native 
Americans for millennia and are extremely important 
today.  The cones are still gathered in the fall by 
tribes in California, the Great Basin and the 
Southwest roasted, parched, shelled, winnowed, 
ground into a meal, and made into nutritious pine nut 
soup, mush, and cakes.  Another modern way to 
prepare the pine nuts, is to roast them in the oven in 
their shells, and then shelled and eaten as a snack.  
Since the trees produce good crops every several 
years, each family relies  on a series of groves, 
rotating harvests at different groves--depending upon  which grove is the most pr
oductive.  Since trees can 
reach ages of more than 600  years, some of the tribal 
pinyon gathering sites have been visited for many 
generations.  Tools and harvesting methods are 
purposefully designed to enhance or maintain future  
pinyon cone production.  There are two major 
harvesting methods utilized today by different tribes.  
The first method is to use a hooked stick that brings 
down the flexible limbs of the tree and the green, 
immature cones are hand-twisted from the branches 
before they open and disperse their seeds.  The 
hooked stick can also be used to snap cones off the 
limbs.  Sometimes children climb the trunks of the 
trees and hand pick the cones, while others use 
ladders as a replacement for the hooked sticks.  
Harvested cones are placed in plastic buckets, a 
modern adaptation of the gathering basket.  A second 
gathering method is to wait until the cones open, and 
then whip the trees with  a pole, knocking the seeds 
out of the mature cones and collecting them from the 
ground.  During this process, dead or dying branches 
are pruned back, a practice various tribes say is good 
for the trees. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
Other : Early Euro-American settlers of the Great 
Basin logged pinyon trees, for wood, fuel for heating, 
cooking, and to supply steam engines.  Pinyon 
charcoals were used to smelt the silver ores that 
became Nevada's number one industry in the 1860's 
and 70's.  In the last three decades, public land 
agencies chained large tr acts of pinyon trees and 
reseeded areas with non- native grasses, such as 
crested wheatgrass ( Agropyron cristatum ) to increase 
grasses for livestock.  Other main uses of singleleaf 
pinyon include fence posts, Christmas trees, and 
edible seeds. 
 
Wildlife : Many kinds of birds and small mammals 
feed on the seeds including white-footed pinyon mice 
( Peromyscus truei ), chipmunks (Tamias  spp.), 
golden-mantled ground squirrels ( Spermophilus 
lateralis ), wood rats ( Neotoma spp.), white-breasted 
nuthatches ( Sitta carolinensis ), Clark's nutcrackers 
( Nucifraga columbiana ) and chickadees (Parus spp.).  
Black bears, deer, and porcupines feed on the seeds, 
bark, and foliage of the pinyon pine, while mountain 
sheep browse the foliage and twigs.  The inner bark is 
a staple food of the mountain pine beetle, as well as 
the fungus causing pinyon blister rust.  Even the 
pitch, dripping from pinecones is feasted upon by 
pitch midges, and is harvested for the nests of 
Dianthidium bees.  Saw flies feed on either needles

or pollen, while gall midges live in galls that occurs 
in the needle fascicle. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Pine Family (Pinacaeae).  Singleleaf pinyon 
is an evergreen tree reaching heights of up to 12 
meters.  When young, it forms a pyramidal or 
rounded silhouette against the sky, while mature 
pinyons display a more ungroomed, irregular 
branching appearance.  The cylindrical, bluish-gray 
leaves are generally one per bundle and 1 to 2 in. in 
length.  The female cones are wind-pollinated.  The 
subglobose cones ripen in August of the second 
growing season, full of 1/2-inch long, wingless seeds. 
Pinyon trees produce cones every three to seven 
years.  Trees usually do not start bearing cones before 
they are 35 years old and do not start producing good 
seed crops before 100 years. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found in pinyon-juniper woodland, 
montane juniper woodlands, Jeffrey pine forests, 
sagebrush steppe, montane white fir forest, and 
subalpine woodland.  In pure stands below 2800 
meters in the high Sierra Nevada, the Inyo and White 
Mountains, the Tehachapi Mountains, and the 
Peninsular and Transverse Ranges of southern and 
eastern California.  Its range extends into Arizona, 
New Mexico and northern Baja California in the 
southwest and occurs in the dry mountain ranges of 
Nevada, Utah, and southeastern Idaho on the east. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Singleleaf pinyon often grows in 
association with California juniper ( Juniperus 
californica ), Sierra juniper ( J.  occidentalis ), or Utah 
juniper ( J.  osteosperma ) with an understory of shrubs 
and grasses such as basin sagebrush ( Artemisia 
californica ), saltbush ( Atriplex spp.), rabbitbrush 
( Chrysothamnus  spp.), antelope brush ( Purshia spp.), 
hopsage ( Grayia spinosa ), Indian ricegrass 
( Achnatherum hymenoides ), blue-bunch wheatgrass 
( Pseudoroegneria spicatum  subsp. spicatum), and 
Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis ). 
 
Planting: This slow-growing tree is rarely seen in 
cultivation.  The seeds of pinyon need 1-3 months 
stratification to break wi nter dormancy before  planting unless the maximum germinating 
temperature is below 73 degrees F.   
 
Low elevation/warm winters
: Stratification is best 
done between the months of January and March.  
One method is to take two cups of sponge rock or 
perlite (expanded obsidian) and put it in a sieve and 
submerge it in water and let it drain.  The moistened 
perlite is then put in a plastic Ziploc ™ bag and 24 
pinyon seeds (with shells  removed) are placed in the 
perlite.  Remove much of the air and zip up the bag.  
Place the bag on a tray and put it in the back of the 
refrigerator for three months.  Check seeds weekly 
for mold and discard any moldy material.  If the 
medium is dry, remoisten it, and make sure that the 
bag is completely sealed. 
 
Those that germinate should  be planted with the root 
pointing straight down in deep tree tubes in well-
drained soils until ready for out-planting.  Plant 2-3 
germinated seeds in soil 1/8 inch deep in each tube.  
Place the tubes in filtered shade or on the north or 
east side of a building or under a tree.  Any leaf litter 
that falls on the tubes should be removed.  The tubes 
need to be protected from small mammals with the 
construction and placement of a cage over the tubes.  
Water the tubes once a week or more whenever the 
top of the soil is dry to the touch. 
 
Pinyon pine is slow growing and should be watered 
and kept in tubes for one y ear.  After that time, plant 
in well-drained soil to avoid the possibility of fungus 
and in full exposure to sun in October, ideally just 
before a good soaking rain.   If the climate is really 
hot, put a shade or shingle on one side of the tree to 
protect it from southwest sunlight.  Create a basin 
that is one foot wide and four or five inches deep.  
Make sure the downhill side of the berm is higher 
than the uphill side so the water will not run-off.  
Water deeply, but infrequently for the first two to 
three years after planting.  If there is a problem with 
voles, mice, deer, rabbits, antelope, and other animals 
undermining the roots and girdling the seedlings 
precautions need to be taken to create above and 
below-ground wire mesh or tubes that protect the 
seedlings until they get fully established.  Singleleaf 
pinyon pines are frost-resistant and extremely 
drought-tolerant, once established. 
 
High elevation/cold winters : The seeds from 
singleleaf pinyon pine can be directly planted just 
after harvest in tree tubes, placing 3 or 4 seeds per 
tube one-eighth inch deep.  Set tubes outside and 
subjected to freezing temperatures until spring.  They 
are then watered as soon as the ground thaws out and 
the soil surface becomes dry to the touch.  The

seedlings are watered regularly (unless rains suffice) 
until out-planted the following spring (one year later) 
as soon as the ground thaws out.  Once out-planted, 
continue to water for the first two to three years and 
continue to protect the s eedlings from large grazing 
animals and small mammals. 
 
Management 
Fire harms pinyon trees.  When the tree reaches 
adulthood Native Americans traditionally prune back 
any dead wood that may accumulate.  As a strategy to 
protect the pinyon trees from fire, some tribes in 
California and the Great Basin rake litter and duff 
from under pinenut trees and hand remove shrubs 
that might act as a fuel ladder during a fire.  They 
prune back low-lying limbs under the trees that could 
catch fire.  Historically  many areas in the pinyon 
juniper forests that we re places where people 
habitually camped or collected pine nuts were 
carefully cleaned of underbrush as part of routine and 
necessary maintenance.   
 
The pinyon pine engraver ( Ips confusus) is a bark 
beetle that inhabits pinyon pine.  The brown beetles 
bore egg galleries along the grain of the wood.  
Dwarf mistletoe ( Arceuthobium campylopodum ) taps 
pinyon limbs for water and nutrients, causing a 
hormonal imbalance, swelling in the plant, and acting 
as a food sump. Pinyon pine  is subject to attacks by a 
host of other pathogens, most of which weaken but 
do not kill the tree.  This  include needlecast fungi 
( Bifusella pini ) which inhabits the needles, pinyon 
bluster rust (Cronartium occidentale ) which infects 
the living branches, and elytroderma disease 
( Elytroderma deformans ) which upsets the hormonal 
balance causing bud stimulation.  This leads to the 
production of extra branches which gives the tree a 
brooming effect.  Brown crumbly rot ( Fomitopsis 
pinicola ), a heart rot fungus, will decimate senescent 
trees.  It moves from the heartwood into the roots, 
rotting them, and the tree falls over. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily available from nurseries 
throughout its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Curtis, E.S. 1924.   The Washo.  Pages 89-98 IN: F.W. 
Hodge (ed.), The North Am erican Indian Vol. 14. 
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.  Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden.  
Santa Barbara, California. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.  Subsistence.  Pages 64-97 IN: 
W.L. D'Azevedo, editor.   Handbook of North 
American Indians .  Vol. 11: Great Basin .  
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1996.   Historical perspectives on 
Timbisha Shosone land management practices, Death 
Valley, California.  Case Studies in Environmental 
Archaeology.  E.J. Reitz, L.A. Newsom, and S. J. 
Scudder (eds.).  Plenum Pr ess, New York, New York. 
 
Johnston, V.R. 1994.  California forests and 
woodlands: A natural history .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Lanner, R.M. 1983.   Trees of the Great Basin: A 
natural history . University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada. 
 
Lanner, R.M. 1981.   The pinon pine: A natural and 
cultural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York. 
 
Meeuwig, R.O., J.D. Budy, & R.L. Everett 1990.  
Pinus monophylla singleleaf pinyon .  Pages 380-394 
IN: Silvics of North America, Volume 1. Conifers.  
R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala (Tech. Coords). 
USDA, Forest Service, Agriculture Handbook 654, 
Washington, DC. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
Version: 05APR1999. 
 
Vasek, F.C. & R.F. Thorne 1988.  Transmontane 
coniferous vegetation .  Pages 797-812 IN: Terrestrial 
vegetation of California , M.G Barbour and J. Major 
(eds.), California Native Plant Society. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center

c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Warren Roberts 
Davis Arboretum, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Edited: 18jan01 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.