Plant Guide
PINK PAPPUSGRASS 
Pappophorum bicolor 
E. Fourn.  
Plant Symbol = PABI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
F orrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Alternate Names 
Pappophorum mucronulatum  
 
Uses  
Pink  pappusgrass  is  useful for upland wildlife plantings, 
highway right -of -ways and ecosystem restoration.  It 
provides fair  forage for  livestock.  It also may have uses 
in urban landscaping  and ornamental plantings.  The 
foliage is a deep green color and seedheads are an 
attractive pink coloration.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or end angered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values).  
  Description
 
General:   Pink pappusgrass  is  a native, warm -season, 
perennial bunch grass  with a height  of 2 to  5 feet  tall.  The 
leaf blade is flat, narrow  up to 10 inches long with edges 
that may roll inward.   The seedhead is 4 to 8 inches long, 
narrow, tightly contracted  but sometimes with erect 
spreading branches.  Pink pappusgrass, as its name 
implies, has a pink or purplish  tinge at maturity (Gould, 
1975 ).      
 
Distribution :  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   It i s  found in Texas, New Mexico , and  Arizona.  
 
Habitat :   Pink  pappusgrass  is found in the dry rangelands 
of Texas to Arizona  with annual rainfall of 10 to 20 
inches.  It is located on a wide variety of range sites 
including  gray sandy loam, clay loam, and  saline  clay .  It 
is associated with  Arizona cottontop, false  Rhodes grass, 
alkali sacaton , plains bristlegrass, and curly- mesquite . 
Pink and whiplash pappusgrass have considerable overlap 
in range and habit, and often grow together (Reeder , 
2008).  
 
Adaptation  
Pink  pappusgrass  grows  well on most soil types, 
including sandy loam, clay, clay loam and saline clay 
soils  
 
Establishmen t 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting ca n be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weeds,  pink pappusgrass  
can be planted in the late summer .  In Arizona and New 
Mexico planting should be timed to catch the summer 
monsoons.  Establish a clean, weed -free seedbed by either 
tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Pink  pappusgrass  is  best seeded using a native -grass  drill 
with picker wheels to ensure a good planting of the fluffy 
seed.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not easily 
planted with a drill, but some type of additional coverage 
such as culti -packing or light dragging  will be beneficial 
to ensure good seed to soil contact.   Seed coatings (talc 
based)  can also be used to increase the flowability of the 
fluffy  seed through standard seed drills.   
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to 
plant too shallow than too deep.  For calibration purposes, 
Maverick  Germplasm  pink pappusgrass  contains 
approximately  322,000 uncoated seeds per bulk pound.  A 
seeding rate of 3 pounds  of pure live seed (PLS) per acre 
is recommended.  In planting mixtures , reduce the rate