Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LEWIS’ 
MOCKORANGE 
Philadelphus lewisii  Pursh 
Plant Symbol = PHLE4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
     Gary A. Monroe        @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
mockorange, syringa, Gordon's mockorange, Indian 
arrowwood, wild mockorange 
 
Uses 
Lewis' mockorange furnishes excellent cover and 
habitat for wildlife, providing good browse for deer 
and elk.  It is not grazed  extensively by livestock but 
does receive fair amounts of use in some areas.  
Palatability increases following resprouting from fire.  
Quail, squirrel and mule  deer also use mockorange 
for food.   
 
Mockorange can be a valuable plant for revegetating 
disturbances on steep, rocky, unstable slopes.  It can 
also be planted in drier areas of degraded riparian 
zones. 
 
It is used as an ornament al in borders, screens and 
hedges.  Other uses include low-maintenance 
landscaping and recreational area plantings.   
 
Ethnobotany:  Native American used stems for 
making arrows, bows, combs, tobacco pipes, cradles 
and netting shuttles. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General:  Lewis' mockorange, the state flower of 
Idaho, was named for Captain Meriwether Lewis, 
who collected the plant in 1806.  Mockorange is a 
native, deciduous,  erect to spreading shrub that grows 
to 3 to 10 feet tall.  Showy white flowers occur in 
clusters of  three to fifteen.   It is extremely variable in 
vegetative and floral characteristics.  Leaves are 
opposite, simple, ovate to elliptic-ovate, with entire 
to remotely dentate margins.  Flowers are white, 1 to 
1.4 inches across, with four petals.  Fruit is a small 
dark brown capsule.  Seeds are small, averaging 
5,300,000 per pound.  Roots are fibrous. 
 
Distribution :  Lewis' mockorange occurs in 
Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana and California 
in the United States.  It also occurs in Alberta and 
British Columbia in Canada. 
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  Lewis' mockorange occurs on well-drained, 
moist sites.  It grows on deep, rich alluvial loams to 
rocky or gravelly loams.  It is commonly found on 
rocky sites, at the base of talus slopes and cliffs, 
along streams, and seasonally moist draws.  It is 
found at talus margins in the Columbia River Basin.  
It occurs at seeps, springs and rocky wet areas in the 
Crooked River National Grasslands in central 
Oregon.   
 
Mockorange occurs from sea  level up to 7,000 feet in 
the Cascade Range.  Lewis' mockorange grows best 
on northern and eastern exposures.   
 
Lewis' mockorange is tolerant of moderate shade.  It 
is an early to mid-seral sp ecies, and is often present 
in seral shrub communities.   
 
Mockorange tolerates fire and persists in forested 
environments where fire frequency is 5 to 45 years.  
It resprouts from adventitious buds in the root crown 
after top kill by fire.

Associated Species:  Associates include alders (Alnus 
spp.), serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia), red-osier 
dogwood (Cornus sericea), beaked hazelnut (Corylus 
cornuta), hawthorns (Crataegus spp.), oceanspray 
(Holodiscus discolor), hollyleaved barberry (Mahonia 
aquifolium), ninebark (Physocarpus malvaceus), 
chokecherry (Prunus virginiana Oregon white oak 
(Quercus garryana), baldhip rose (Rosa gymnocarpa), 
willows (Salix spp.), poison-oak (Toxicodendron 
diversilobum) and others. 
 
Adaptation 
Soil textures range from coarse to medium.  Soil pH 
is from 5.6 to 7.8.  Precipitation ranges from 14 to 69 
inches annually.  Sites range from low to mostly mid-
elevation. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from seed:   Three samples of seed 
averaged 5,300,000 seeds per pound.  Seeds that were 
cold stratified in coarse moist sand for 8 weeks at 41
0 
F and placed in coarse sa nd medium at 72 - 790 F 
germinated at 64 to 72 percent.  Fall sowing is an 
alternative to cold stratification.  Seedlings may be 
subject to kill by spring frost. 
 
Propagation from summer softwood cuttings:   Leafy 
softwood cuttings of current season's growth can be 
rooted in coarse grade perlite with bottom heat and 
mist.  Cuttings were taken 4 weeks (May 20) after 
plants fully leafed out.  Cuttings should be treated 
with fungicide if needed and then treated with .1% 
Indole-butyric acid powder (rooting hormone) on the 
freshly cut ends before sticking.  Rooting media 
should be kept at approximately 75 - 77
0 F.  Room 
temperature should be 5 to 10 degrees cooler.  Mist 
interval used was about 15-20 seconds (on) per 20 
minute period.  Rooting occurs in approximately 18 
to 30 days when plants can be transferred to a 
hardening table with mist.  Time required to grow 
usable plants in containers (10 cubic inch) is 
approximately 90 days. 
 
Conservation Plantings:   These plantings are usually 
done using potted plants produced from seed.  
Plantings should be done early enough to afford 
establishment of plant roots before moisture becomes 
limiting for growth.  Early plantings before the last 
spring frost should be done with dormant plants.  
Plants with leaves are at risk for spring frost.  Sites 
should be prepared to minimize competition from 
grasses and weeds.  Weed barrier is one option for 
reduction of competition.  Consult local NRCS 
offices for specific recommendations in your area.   Mice, voles and other rodents can present problems 
in getting plants established.  Physical barriers (tree 
tubes) are useful for protection from small rodents. 
 
Management 
Native and Conservation Stands:
  Mockorange is 
moderately tolerant of browsing but heavy grazing by 
wild ungulates and livestock has a negative impact. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No particular insect or disease problems are noted. 
 
Other Pests:   These include rabbits, mice/voles and 
deer.  Animal repellents have been used with varying 
success.  Physical barriers have provided better 
protection from rodents than repellents.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
None noted.   
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Lewis' mockorange is propagated via seeds, 
hardwood and softwood cuttings.  Vegetative 
propagation of cultivar material is recommended to 
maintain uniformity of desi red characteristics.  Seed 
propagation is ordinarily used where uniformity of 
plant characteristics is not an issue, such as in 
conservation plantings.  When seed propagation is 
used, fall planting in outside beds or artificial cold 
stratification is desirable to overcome dormancy and 
increase germination percentage. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Pullman Plant Material s Center, NRCS, Pullman, 
Washington released two mockoranges in 2002 as 
selected class releases.  These were St. Maries 
Germplasm (St. Maries, Idaho) and Colfax 
Germplasm (Colfax, Washi ngton).  These materials 
both produced seed in the third year after being 
planted.  Average bloom date was June 26 and fruit 
maturity was September 17 at Pullman, Washington.  
Both had excellent vigor, stem abundance, cold and 
drought tolerance ratings. 
 
St. Maries Germplasm attained a height of 59 inches 
with a 75 inch canopy widt h in 5 years and a height 
of 79 inches and a 55 inch  canopy width in 10 years. 
 
Colfax Germplasm attained a  height of 66 inches and 
a 41 inch canopy width in 5 years and a height of 87 
inches and a 63 inch can opy width in 10 years. 
 
'Waterton' was selected from the Waterton Lakes area 
of Alberta.  'Blizzard' was  selected from the Morden

Research Station, Manitoba.  Most of these cultivars 
are apparently meant for landscape uses. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist  1964.  Vascular 
plants of the Pacific Northwest .  Part 3: 
Saxifragaceae to Ericaceae   Seattle, WA:  Univ. of 
Washington Press.   
 
Lambert, S.M.  January, 1989.   Streamside 
revegetation .  Plant Materials Technical Note 12 
(Revised).  USDA, Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.  Spokane, WA. 
 
Carey, J.H. 1995; Harris, H. 1988   Philadelphus 
lewisii   In:  USDA, Forest Service Fire Effects 
Information System Database.  
<
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis>  [January 22, 
2003].  Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana 
 
University of Manitoba, Department of Plant Science    
Woody plants description.   [March 4, 2003]  
<
http://www.umanitoba.ca/afs/plant_science/courses/
39_079/woodyplantsnotes/woody_plantsp.html> 
 
Shaw, N.L., E.G. Hurd and P.F. Stickney   Woody 
plant seed manual   <
http://www.wpsm.net>  [March 
4, 2003]   
 
USDA, Natural Resources  Conservation Service 
2003.  The PLANTS Database, Version 3.5 
<
(http://plants.usda.gov)>.  National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490  
 
USDA, Soil Conservation Service  1980.   Soil survey 
of Whitman county, Washington    
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:   
Wayne Crowder, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 Drafted 20 March, 2003 wac;  Edited 21nov2003 jlk; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.