Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLASH PINE 
Pinus elliottii Engelm. 
Plant Symbol =PIEL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 © 2004 Horticopia, Inc.  
 
Uses 
Commercial uses: Slash pine is used for reforestation 
projects and timber plan tations throughout the 
southeastern United States. Its pines produced 
turpentine and crude rosins  used for a variety of 
purpose (i.e., poles, railroad ties, pilings, turpentine, 
and rosin). 
 
Wildlife uses:  The slash pine seeds are an excellent 
food source for gray and fox squirrels and wild 
turkey. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Slash pine (Pinus elliottii) is one of the hard 
yellow pines indigenous to southeastern United 
States. The slash pine is a medium to large tree that 
reaches heights of 80' to 100' tall.  It has a round top 
and "brooms" of needles at the ends of the branches. 
Its’ needles may be 5" to 11" long and are borne 2 to 
3 to a fascicle. The orange-brown bark is scaly with 
plates. It is durable and hard, nearly equivalent to that 
of longleaf pine (P inus palustrus).  It has thick, plate-
like bark with an extensive root system, and a 
moderate taproot. Its cones measure 8-16 cm (3 – 6 
inches) long, and are a glossy brown color.  And the 
cone scales are thin with fine prickles  
 
P inus elliottii  var. elliottii is found in the Coastal 
Plain of north and Central Florida.  Whereas, the 
Southern slash pine or  Pinus elliottii var,. densa is 
found in South Florida, We st Indies, Guatemala, and 
Honduras in Central America. 
 
The slash pine is commonl y associated with the 
loblolly pine ( Pinus taeda); however, the length and 
number of needles per fascicle, cones, and bark can 
be used to differentiate them. 
 
Distribution : The slash pine can be found on coastal 
plains throughout the Indian River Lagoon area, and 
in freshwater upland areas. It  occurs on coastal plains 
from South Carolina to Central Florida, and west to 
Louisiana. The P inus elliottii occurs from Central 
Florida through South Florida and the Florida Keys.  
Slash pine was introduced in Kentucky, Virginia and 
eastern Texas in the 1900's, and now reproduces 
naturally within these states. 
 
Habitat: The climate within the natural range of slash 
pine is warm and humid, and it likes wet summers, 
drier falls and springs. It grows well with rainfall 
averages about 1270 mm (50 in) per year, and 
summer rains of 13 mm (0.5 in) or more occur about 
four times per month. The mean annual temperature 
in the slash pine region is 17° C (63° F), with 
extremes of 41° C (106° F) and -18° C (0° F), and a 
growing season of 250 days. The slash Pine grows 
well on a variety of acidic soils in full sun or partial 
shade. It does poorly in basic soil (high pH) and is 
not recommended for irrigation water has a high pH. 
Once established, it is more tolerant of wet sites than

most other pines and is moderately salt-tolerant.  It is 
not highly drought-tolerant, but more so than most 
other pines. The horizontal branches break easily in 
ice storms. It is not recommended to plant the tree too 
close to high traffic areas, since shaded lower 
branches, die and drop, as the tree grows taller. This 
is dangerous because branches could fall on people or 
vehicles, unless there is a regular maintenance plan to 
remove them. 
 
Adaptation 
The slash pine grows in the infertile soils of 
sandhills, flatwoods, and near wet lowlands, such as 
swamps and ponds. Soils within its range are mostly 
Spodosols, Ultisols, and En tisols. Spodosols, Entisols 
are common along the coasts of Florida while the 
Ultisols are in the northern part of the range. 
Originally, slash pines were found in moist, well-
drained aerated soils, of  the southeastern United 
States, particularly along pond, stream, and lake 
margins. This habitat prefer ence is a reflection of the 
susceptibility of the seedlings to fire, with the advent 
of fire protection, slash pine has spread to drier soils 
in the southeast and Texas. Although slash pine is 
adaptable to a variety of site and topographic 
conditions, it grows best on pond margins and in 
drainages where soil moisture is ample but not 
excessive and the soil is well aerated. 
 
Establishment 
The slash pines are monoecious, and often hybridize 
with other pines such as loblolly pine ( P. taeda), sand 
pine ( P. clausa ) and longleaf pine ( P. palustris). 
They begin producing cones at approximately 10-15 
years of age. The typical va riety produces good cone 
crops every 3 years, while the south Florida variety 
produce good cone crops every 4 years. It has been 
estimated that 90% of the winged seeds from slash 
pines fall within 46 m (150 feet) of the parent tree.  
 
The male strobili begin to develop in June, and grow 
for several weeks.  It enters a dormant state until 
midwinter. Pollen is shed from January through 
February. The female strobili develop in late August 
and cones mature in September, approximately 20 
months after being pollinated. Natural seed fall 
occurs from October to March. 
 
The germination occurs within two weeks following 
seedfall. The slash pine seedlings in their first year 
are grass-like in appearance. Seedlings can have a 
year grass stage similar to  that of longleaf pines (P. 
palustris ). Grass-stage seedlings develop extensive 
root systems and root colla rs (Harlow et al. 1979). 
Root development in influenced by soil texture and 
structure, clay and clay loam soils produce larger  roots than does sandy soil. Soils with a high presence 
of mycorrhizae have a positive influence on seedling 
root development and survival. Growth is rapid in the 
first year, with seedlings reaching heights of 
approximately 41 cm (16 inches). 
 
Slash pine grown for commercial production is 
generally established in plantations using genetically 
improved planting stock. Sites selected for planting 
are usually site prepared by flat disking, chopping, or 
bedding. Disking and chopping are effective on dry 
sandy soils where control of competing vegetation is 
a problem and one is trying to reduce the use of 
chemical application for competition control. 
However, on sites with a shallow water table bedding 
will increase rooting space, aeration and increase 
seedling survival and growth. On droughty sites, 
bedding can be used if the site is irrigated and 
vegetation is controlled. These treatments are the 
standard for contemporary slash pine plantation 
management. Control of weeds, woody shrub, and 
herbaceous species is a vital part of increased slash 
pine plantation productivity. 
 
Plantation establishment from seedling is usually 
with 1-2 year old bare root seedlings or container 
seedlings. When out planting seedling by hand or 
machine care must be taken 
to insure that the roots 
are planted straight down to, avoid seedling 
mortality. Because many slash pine site are low in 
available phosphorus and nitrogen each site should be 
soil tested to determine the amount of nitrogen and 
phosphorus needed to ensu re seedling survival and 
volume growth 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Fusiform rust ( Cronartium quercuum f. sp.  
fusiforme ), annosus root rot ( Heterobasidion 
annosum), and  Fusarium moniliforme  var 
subglutinans  are the most serious pest of slash pines   
Fusiform rust, an obligate parasite requiring two 
living host trees pine and oak leaves to complete its 
life cycle. The fungus cannot spread from pine to 
pine, but must return to the oak leaves to produce the 
spores that in turn inf ect pine. The disease which 
develops at or near the point of infection, result in 
tapered, spindle-shaped swells, called galls, on 
branches and stems of pines. 
  
Annosus root rot is a fung al disease that infects 
freshly cut stumps of slash pine, and spreads to other 
trees by root contact. Diseased or dead and dying 
trees are usually found in groups. 
 
The slash pines can be damaged by insects pests such 
as the pales weevil ( Hylobius pales), that invades

logging areas and feeds on the bark of young 
seedling, girdling the stem and causing wilting and 
death. Blockheaded pine sawfly (Tetralopha 
rosbustella) or several different needle feeders may 
defoliate young trees. The black turpentine beetle 
( Dendroctonus terebrans ), engraver beetles (Ips 
spp .), can become major problems especially in naval 
store plantations. The southern pine beetle 
( Dendroctonus frontalis ), is not a major of slash pine 
except in areas where the growing environment has 
placed the trees under stress. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information. Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.” The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrahamson, W.G. 1984.  Species response to fire on 
the Florida Lake Wales Ridge . American Journal of 
Botany. 71(1): 35-43. 
 
Abrahamson, W.G. and D.C. Hartnett. 1990.  Pine 
flatwoods and dry prairies ,  Myers, R.L. and J.J. 
Ewel, eds. Ecosystems of Florida. University of 
Central Florida Press, Orlando, FL. 103-149 pp. 
 
Anderson, R. 1988.  Guide to Florida trees . Winner 
Enterprises, USA. 68 pp.  
 
Breininger, D.R. and R.B. Smith. 1992.  Relationships 
between fire and bird density in coastal scrub and 
slash pine flatwoods in Florida . American Midland 
Naturalist. 127(2): 223-240 pp. 
 
Duncan, W.H. and M.B. Duncan. 1988.  Trees of the 
southeastern United States.  University of Georgia 
Press, Athens, GA. 322 pp. 
 
Eyre, F.H., ed. 1980.  Forest cover types of the United 
States and Canada. Society  of American Foresters,  
Washington, D.C. 148 pp. 
 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, S. Ellwood, F.M. White. 
1979.  Textbook of dendrology.  6th edition. McGraw-
Hill, Inc. New York, NY. 510 pp. 
 
Hebb, E.A. and A.F. Clewell. 1976.  A remnant stand 
of old-growth slash pine in the Florida panhandle. 
Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club. 103(1):1-9 pp. 
 
Jackson, J.A. 1971. The evolution, taxonomy, 
distribution, past populations and current status of 
the red-cockaded woodpecker . Thompson, R.L., ed. 
The ecology and management of the red-cockaded 
woodpecker:  Proceedings of a symposium. May 26-
27, 1971, Folkston, GA. Tall Timbers Research 
Station, Tallahassee, FL. pp. 4-29. 
 
Landers, J.L. 1991.  Disturbance influences on pine 
traits in the southeastern United States.  Proceedings, 
17
th Tall Timbers fire ecology conference; May       
18-21, 1989, Tallahassee,  FL. Tall Timbers Research 
Station, Tallahassee, FL. 61-95 pp. 
 
Langdon, O.G. and F. Bennett. 1976.  Management of 
natural stands of slash pine.   Res. Pap. SE-147. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,    
Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, Ashville, 
NC. 12 pp. 
 
Lohrey, R.E. and S.V. Kossuth. 1990.  Pinus elliottii 
Englem. slash pine . Burns, R.M. and B.H. Honkala, 
technical coordinators. Silvics of North America. 
Volume 1. Conifers. Agricultural Handb. 654. U.S. 
Department of       Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C. 338-347 pp. 
 
McCune, B. 1988.  Ecological diversity in North 
American pines.  American Journal of Botany. 
75(3):353-368 pp. 
 
McCulley, R.D. 1950.  Management of natural slash 
pine stands in the flatwoods of  South Florida and 
North Florida . circular No. 845. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 57 pp. 
 
Monk, C.D. 1968.  Successional and environmental 
relationships of the forest vegetation of north Central 
Florida. American Midland Naturalist. 79(2): 
441-457 pp. 
 
Nelson, Gil.   The Trees of Florida: A Reference and 
Field Guide
.  Sarasota, Florida: Pineapple Press, Inc., 
1994.  
 
Stevenson, George.   Trees of Everglades National 
Park and the Florida Keys.   Homestead: Florida 
National Parks & Monuments Association, Inc., 
1992.  
 
Wade, D.D. 1983.  Fire management in the slash pine 
ecosystem. In: Proceedings of the managed slash 
pine ecosystem , 1981, Gainesville, FL. University of 
Florida, School of Forest Resources and

Conservation, Gainesville, FL. 203-227; 290-294; 
301 pp. 
 
Watkins, John W. and Sheehan, Thomas.  Florida 
Landscape Plants.   Gainesville:  The University 
Presses of Florida, 1975.  
 
Wright, H.A. and A.W. Bailey. 1982.  Fire ecology: 
United States and Southern Canada . John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. New York, NY. 501 pp.  
 
Prepared By:  
Lincoln M. Moore ,  
USDA NRCS NATIONAL Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson , 
Earth Team Volunteer, USDA NRCS NATIONAL 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS NATIONAL Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 22june06 lmm; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.