Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MONTEREY PINE 
Pinus radiata D. Don 
Plant Symbol = PIRA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Insignias pine, radiata pine, Cambria pine 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The seeds of all pine species are edible 
and pine nuts have historically been an important 
food utilized by many Native American tribes (Strike 
1994).  Pines were also valued for their wood, sap, 
and pine needles.  Because of its restricted range, few 
tribes used Monterey pine.  The Costanoan and 
probably the Salinan relied on the seeds as a source 
of food in coastal areas of their territory.  Pedro 
Fages (1937) describes the California Indians in the 
Monterey area as using many kinds of pine nuts and 
among them those of Monterey pine.  He writes, “the 
cones of the pine tree are small, and the nuts are 
extremely so, but very good  and pleasing to the taste.  
The method of gathering them is to build a fire at the 
foot of the tree, which in a few hours falls, making 
the fruit available without difficulty” (Fages 1937; 
68-69).  Many bedrock mort ars are found adjacent to 
Monterey pine forests, which may be additional 
evidence of their use by both tribes (Leonard 1963).  
The closed cones of Monterey pines were probably a 
particularly valuable resource because they remain on 
the tree and can therefore be  harvested all through the 
year.  The closed cones open in response to heat and  could be easily opened by placing them on or near a 
fire.  Pine nuts were eaten whole or pounded into 
flour that was made into porridge or mixed with other 
foods.  The young, male catkins are edible and said to 
have a nice flavor either raw or cooked (Couplan 
1998).  During heavy winters or times of scarcity the 
inner bark of pine trees would serve as an emergency 
food.   
 
 © Charles Webber California Academy of Sciences 
@ Calflora 
The needles of pines, which contain vitamin C, were 
brewed into a tea that was drunk to treat headaches 
(Heinsen 1972).  The Costanoan and others chewed 
pine resin to treat rheumatism.  This resin or pitch 
was used as a salve that was applied to burns and 
sores.  Pine resins were useful as glue or sealant.  
Pine resin was also chewed as gum.  Pine nuts were 
burned into charcoal, crus hed, and then applied to 
both sores and burns.  Various Native American 
tribes used the split roots of many pine species as the 
foundation to make fish traps, seed beaters, burden 
and many other types of baskets (Murphey 1959).  
The inner portions of slender new pine twigs could be 
processed into sewing materials (Barrett & Gifford 
1933).   
 
Livestock : Goats browse on Monterey pines.   
 
Wildlife: Black-tailed deer browse the leaves and 
branches of Monterey pine.  Porcupines are known to 
browse on leaves and branches as well as eat the 
bark.  Small mammals including deer mice, 
chipmunks, and ground squirrels eat the seeds.  
Among the birds that eat the seeds are scrub jays, 
Stellar jays, and crows.  Nesting chestnut-backed 
chickadees have been observed to obtain almost 80% 
of their insect diet from foraging in Monterey pine 
trees (Kleintjes & Dahlsten 1994).   
 
Other : Monterey pine is used for erosion control and 
stabilization of steep slopes because it is fast growing 
and has a wide spreading root system.  The trees are 
sometimes used as Christmas trees.   
 
Status 
The California Native Pl ant Society considers 
Monterey pine rare in its native range.  Please consult 
the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values).

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Description 
General : Pine family (Pinaceae).  Monterey pines are 
native to California and Baja California where they 
occur in only a few small populations.  Mature 
Monterey pines can reach 38 m in height with trunks 
up to 2 m in diameter.  The young trees begin as 
compact pyramids but age into varied shapes.  The 
adult canopy is usually rounded to flat-topped.  
Along the Pacific coast, th e winds sculpt Monterey 
pine canopies into picturesque shapes.  The bark is 
red-brown to blackish brown and has deep furrows.  
The leaves are glossy, dark  green needles, 6-15 cm 
long that grow in bundles of three.  Needles on older 
trees are sometimes a bluish green.  Flowers appear 
in late winter or early spring.  The trees are 
monoecious; having both male and female flowers 
(McDonald & Laacke 1990).  The yellow male 
catkins are 12mm long and are generally found on the 
lateral branches.  Female  flowers grow throughout 
the entire canopy.  The  grayish brown cones are 
asymmetrically oval, 6 to 15 cm long, and are born 
on short stalks in clusters of 3 to 7 cones.  The scales 
are smooth and rounded.  Each cone contains from 
120 to 200 dark brown to black, bumpy winged seeds 
that are 6-7mm long.  The c ones remain closed on the 
tree until the second year  or sometimes longer.  
Cones generally ripen and open from late winter to 
early spring of the second  year.  Thereafter, they may 
remain on the tree where they can open and close 
several times depending on temperature and 
moisture.  The close-grained wood is light and soft.  
Although it is not considered an important lumber 
tree in California, it has been widely planted in areas 
with Mediterranean climates throughout the world for 
use as lumber and pulp.   
 
Distribution : Monterey pines are native to California 
and Baja California.  Native Monterey pine forests 
occupy a small portion of  their historical range and 
are currently restricted to  five coastal locations: Año 
Nuevo in the north, the Monterey Peninsula, 
Cambria, and on Guadalupe and Cedros islands off 
the coast of Baja, California in the south.   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
 
Habitat: Monterey pines grow below 1200 meters in 
closed cone pine forests and oak woodlands.  The 
species is one of the 18 California species of pines 
and cypresses that bear closed cones (Dallman 
1998:27).  The remaining stands of Monterey pine 
are threatened by numerous factors including 
urbanization, recreational development, and fire 
suppression, pests and diseas es.  Fire suppression has 
resulted in very old stands of forest, which are more 
susceptible to attacks from pests and diseases.  In the 
Monterey area, the trees ar e seriously threatened by 
an epidemic of “pine pitch canker”, a fungal disease 
caused by  Fusarium subglutans pini .  This fungus 
was recently introduced to California from the 
southeastern United States and is carried from tree to 
tree by several native insects including the Monterey 
pine cone beetle ( Conophthorus radiatae ), twig 
beetles ( Pitophthorus  spp.) and engraver beetles ( Ips 
spp.).  Indigenous stands of Monterey pine are also 
threatened by genetic contamination, which results 
from crossbreeding with planted trees that were 
brought in from other areas.   
 
Adaptation 
Monterey pines are adapted to soils of medium to 
heavy texture.  Monterey pines have serotinous cones 
that do not release the seed s unless subjected to high 
temperatures.  Superheatin g may occur on very hot 
days or during fire events.  Because hot days do not 
often occur in the Central Coast of California, 
replenishment of the seed bank is highly dependant 
on fire (Hillyard 1997).   
 
Establishment 
Monterey pines are ornamental as well as useful.  
This species is the most widely cultivated pine in the 
world (Templeton et al.  19 97).  Monterey pines are 
also the most widely planted trees for choose-and-cut 
Christmas tree farms in California.  They are 
excellent shade trees, act as  effective wind and sound 
barriers, and have been used for erosion control.   
 
Be careful to select a prop er place to plant these fast 
growing trees.  Monterey pines are the most rapid 
growing pine of over 90 species that occur in the 
world (Labadie 1978).  Young trees can grow up to 2 
meters per year, generally reaching from 12 to 18 
meters within 25 years.  The trees have an average 
life span of 80 to 90 years.   
 
These trees require deep, well drained, medium to 
course textured soils of medium fertility.  Trees that

are planted on shallow or waterlogged soils may be 
unstable because of shallow vertical roots.  Monterey 
pines can be damaged or killed in areas where 
temperatures reach below freezing.   
 
Monterey pines are usually transplanted from 
containers or bare rootstock grown by commercial 
nurseries.  However, these plants usually come from 
New Zealand stock.  Even though the New Zealand 
stock originated from California populations, 
crossbreeding with native populations is considered a 
threat to the native population’s conservation because 
of genetic contamination (Cope 1993).   
 
Seed may propagate Monterey  pine trees.  Handpick 
mature cones from the trees or from the ground.  Air-
dry opened cones by spreading them in a sunny, dry 
place.  To open closed cone s, drop them into boiling 
water for 1 to 2 minutes or more, if needed.  Remove 
the seeds from the cones by shaking them out.  
Although the cones require he at in order to release 
the seeds, the seeds do not generally require 
pretreatment in order to  germinate.  One to three 
weeks of cold-moist stratification may improve 
germination, especially fo r seeds that have been 
stored (Emery 1988).  Monterey pines are not 
generally propagated by cuttings as, even with 
bottom heat, the cuttings may take four or more 
months to form roots.   
 
Management 
Established trees require occasional deep watering 
accompanied by a light fertilization to remain 
healthy.  To control the  size of the tree, and to 
increase bushiness, the new growth, called candles, 
may be pruned in the spring as they appear.  Remove 
dead or dying branches.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Western dwarf mistletoe, western gall rust, various 
needle blights, pitch moth, red turpentine beetle, 
pitch canker, Monterey pine scale, irregular pine 
scale, pine leaf scale, aphids, mites, pine tip borer, 
pine tip moth.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Although Monterey pines ar e threatened in their 
present native habitat, they have been considered a 
weedy pest in some areas of California where they 
have escaped cultivation.  Millar (1998) uses fossil 
evidence to support an alternate view: that Monterey 
pine populations have historically shifted in size and 
location along the Californi a and Baja coasts in 
response to changing climate.  She suggests, that in 
order to allow for the continued survival of Monterey 
pines, establishment of new stands of native stock  within the pine’s historical range should be 
considered as opportunities for their conservation and 
not as a threat to other native species.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plants are readily available from commercial 
sources.  Request plants established from native 
California rather than New Zealand stock.   
If you are planting trees in areas near native stands, 
be sure the seeds or seedlings are from the same 
genetic stock as those stands.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.  
Yosemite Association, Yosemite National Park, CA.  
388 pp.   
 
Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.   Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, CA.  768 pp.   
 
Burns, R.M. & B.H. Honkala 1990.   Silvics of North 
American, Volume 1, Conifers.   Agricultural 
Handbook 654, Forest Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Washington  D.C. Pp. 443-441.   
 
Cope, Amy B. 1993.  Pinus radiata.  IN: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory 
2001, May.   Fire Effects Information System , 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  [Accessed:  20 
October 2001].   
 
Couplan, F. 1998.   The encyclopedia of edible plants 
of North America.   Keats Publishing, New Canaan, 
Connecticut.  584 pp.   
 
Dallman, P.R. 1998.   Plant life in the world’s 
Mediterranean climates: California .  Fremontia, Vol. 
26, No. 2.  Pp18-27.   
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California.  115 pp.

Fages, P. 1937.  A historical, political, and natural 
description of California.  Translation by H.I. 
Priestley, University of  California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  83 pp.   
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   The medicinal herbs of Mission 
San Antonio de Padua.  Lockwood, California.  46 pp.   
 
Heizer, R.F. & A.B. Elsasser 1980.   The natural 
world of the California Indians.   University of 
California Press, Berkel ey and Los Angeles, 
California.  271 pp.   
Hickman, J.D., Editor 1993.   The Jepson manual: 
Higher plants of California.   University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California.  1400 pp.    
 
Hillyard, D. 1997.  Challenges in conserving 
Monterey pine forest.  Fremontia, Vol. 15, No. 2.  Pp. 
16-20.   
 
Kleintjes, P.K. & D.L. Dahlsten 1994.  Foraging 
behavior and nestling diet of chestnut-backed 
chickadees in Monterey pine.   The Condor, Vol. 96.  
Pp.  647-653.   
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
California.  248 pp.   
 
Leonard, N. N. 1968.   Part 1: Salvage investigations 
at the Pico Creek.   Archaeological salvage of the 
Pico Creek and Little Pico Creek sites, in Luis 
Obispo County, California .  Archives of California 
Archaeology Paper No. 4. Coyote Press, Salinas, 
California.   
 
Millar, C.I. 1998.   Reconsidering the conservation of 
Monterey pine.   Fremontia Vol. 26, No. 3.  Pp 12-16.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.   
 
Munz P.A. & D.D. Keck 1963.   A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, California.  1681 pp.   
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Mendocino County Historical Society, Fort Bragg, 
California.  81 pp.   
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California native 
plants.   University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  366 pp.   
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians Vol. 2: Aboriginal uses of California’s  indigenous plants.
  Koeltz Scientific Books USA, 
Champaign, Illinois.  210 pp.   
 
Webber, C. 1998.   Pinus radiata.  California 
Academy of Sciences.  Digital Library Project, 
University of California, Berkeley.  [Online]  
Available: http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query? 
seq_num=17181&one=T. [15 October 2001].   
 
Young, J. A. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.   Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  Pp. 248-266.   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Plant Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 05apr02 ahv; 29may03 ahv; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.