Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DEVIL’S CLAW 
Proboscidea parviflora  (Woot.) 
Woot. & Standl 
Plant Symbol = PRPA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & UC Davis Arboretum 
 
Alternative Names 
unicorn plant, doubleclaw,  Arizona devil’s claw, red 
devil’s claw 
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic : The claws of the mature seedpods of 
devil's claw were collected in autumn, split and used 
to create black basketry de signs by many tribes in 
southern California and the Southwest.  These tribes 
include the Chemehuevi, Kawaiisu, Owens Valley 
Paiute, Tubatulabal, Havasupai, Papago, and Pima.  
Because the claws are durable, they were often used 
to construct the base of baskets among the Papago 
and Pima.  The material is still gathered wild or 
plants are cultivated in home gardens by 
contemporary weavers.  The Papago used the young 
pods as food, while the Pima cracked the seeds 
between the teeth and ate them like pine-nuts.  To 
treat rheumatic pains, the Pima broke off a small 
piece of the claw and pressed it into the flesh, then 
lighted it and allowed it to burn. 
 
Other Uses : basketry, medicine, food, wildlife  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
:  Martynia Family (Martyniaceae).  This 
annual plant has broadly ovate-triangular leaf blades 
5-15 cm wide that are entire to shallowly 3-7 lobed.  
The inflorescence is 4-10 flowered and ranges from 
white to pink.  The throat of the corolla is mottled 
purple with two lines of purplish spots or not.  The 
nectar guides are yellow.  The fruits have beaks or 
claws and black seeds.  The plants from the desert 
have white seeds with claws  that are greater than 18 
cm long and have been called var.  hohokamiana. 
 @ Native Seeds/SEARCH 
 
Distribution 
Found in disturbed dry places below 1000 m. in the 
deserts of southwestern California to Arizona, 
southern Nevada, to western Texas and northern 
Mexico.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
 W.L. Wagner Smithsonian Institution, Botany Department 
 
Establishment 
Start devil's claw by seed.  The seeds should be 
soaked in warm water in a clean vessel for 8 hours 
prior to spring planting.  After soaking, plant the 
seeds immediately in full sun in a well-drained soil 
and at a depth that is the width of the seeds.  Water 
the seeds, keeping the area slightly moist.  After 
seedlings have appeared, allow the surface of the soil 
to dry between watering.  In areas with summer 
rainfall, only supplement watering if rain is sparse.  
In areas without summer rainfall, mimic this rainfall 
pattern by watering once every 2 to 3 weeks.  Once 
the seedpods have started to ripen, stop watering.

When the seedpods mature, collect them and shake 
the seeds to get them out of the pods and let them air 
dry in partial shade in a screened-in porch or indoor.  
Keep the seeds in a container or paper bag on an open 
shelf at room temperature until the next planting 
cycle, the following spring.  Devil's claw does not 
need protection from wildlife.  
 
Management 
Traditionally, tribes in the Southwest saved the seed 
from those pods with longer claws and planted them 
apart from the others.  The longer claws were highly 
desirable for basketry design material.  Today, this 
white seeded form with longer horns is different 
enough morphologically to be named as a special 
domesticated variety of  Proboscidea parviflora  var. 
hohokamiana .  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is somewhat  available through native 
plant nurseries within its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Curtin, L.S.M. 1984.  By the prophet of the earth 
ethnobotany of the Pima .  University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Heckard, L.R. 1993.   Martyniaceae.  Pages 762-763 
IN  The Jepson Manual: Higher plants of California.   
J.C. Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Kearney, T.H. & R. H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora.  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Kissell, M.L. 1982 .  Basketry of the Papago and 
Pima Indians .  (Reprint of the 1916 ed.  
Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of 
Natural History 17(4)).  Rio Grande Press, Inc., 
Gloreta, New Mexico. 
 
McKee, B., E. McKee, & J. Herold 194? .   Havasupai 
baskets and their makers: 1930-1940.  Northland 
Press. 
 
Nabhan, G.P. 1985.   Gathering the desert.  
University of Arizona Pr ess, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
---------------1987.  Plant domestication and folk-
biological change:  The upper Piman/devil's claw 
example.   American Anthropologist 89(1):57-73. 
 
Native Seeds/SEARCH 1999.   Fall seedlisting: 
Proboscidea parviflora .  Version: 000329.  
<http://www.azstarnet.com/~nss/catalog/>.  Tucson, 
Arizona. 
 
Southwest School of Botanical Medicine 2000.  
Proboscidea parviflora .  Version: 000329.  
<http://chili.rt66.com/hrbmoore/HOMEPAGE/Home
Page.html>.  Bisbee, Arizona. 
 
Strike, S.S. & E.D. Roeder 1994.   Ethnobotany of the 
California Indians.  Volume 2 .  Aboriginal uses of 
California's indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific 
Books, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000329.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Wayne’s Word 1999.   Devil’s claws.  Vol. 8, No. 1.  
<http://daphne.palomar.edu/wayne/ww0801.htm>.  
Version: 000329.  Escondido, California. 
 
Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Warren Roberts 
Superintendent, UC Davis Arboretum, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 04dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.