Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TORPEDO GRASS 
Panicum repens L. 
Plant Symbol = PARE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Louisiana State 
Office, National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing 
Land Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Bullet grass, bullet grass,  coastal bermuda grass, 
couch panicum, creeping panic, dogtooth grass, panic 
rampant, quack grass, torpedo grass, wainaku grass.  
A synonym of torpedo grass is  Panicum gouinii. 
 
Uses 
Livestock: It was once used for cattle in the 1920s 
and is resistant to grazing and trampling; however, 
better forages are now available that has higher 
quality and does not create the potential weed 
problems that torpedo grass did. 
 
Wildlife : Waterfowl and songbirds regularly use 
torpedo grass.  It is an excellent forage plant for 
several mammals. 
 
Erosion Control:  Torpedo grass is recommended for 
the use of shoreline stabilization.  It may be used in  
areas that have periods of both inundation as well as 
drought. 
 
Conservation Practices : Torpedo grass, because of its 
growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with certain conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office.   
 Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a warm 
season, rhizomatous perennial, which may form 
extensive colonies.  The rhizomes have characteristic 
torpedo-like apexes, hence the common name 
torpedo grass.  The culms are erect, glabrous, and 
rigid and range in height from 12 to 31 inches.  The 
sheaths are glabrous or pub escent with thin and dry 
margins.  The leaf blades are mostly short, flat, or 
rolled in tightly.  If flat, the blades are approximately 
¹ ⁄8 inch wide and if folded, the blades are 
approximately ¼ inch wide.  The ligules are 
membranous with fringed hair surrounding them.  
The panicles are open, loose, 4 to 7 inches long, and 
with strongly ascending bran ches.  The spikelets are 
straw colored and ¹ ⁄16 inch long.  The first glume is 
short and truncate.  The second glume and sterile 
lemma are about equal in size and apically acute to 
acuminate with 7 to 9 weak nerves.  The sterile pale 
is thin and dry.  The fertile lemma and palea are 
straw colored and sharply angled.  The caryopsis is 
pale yellow and oval in shape. 
 
Distribution 
Torpedo grass is found in marshy shores along the 
Gulf Coast from Florida to Texas and along tropical 
and subtropical coasts around  the world.  It is also 
found in disturbed sites, canals, and in poorly drained 
soil.  It is possibly introduced to Louisiana and the 
United States.  Linneaus in Europe first described 
torpedo grass in 1762.  It was first collected in North 
America near Mobile, Alabam a in 1876.  For current

distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: It may grow off shores and into water up 
to 6 feet deep forming a thick dense floating mat.  
Torpedo grass begins to grow in February and the 
seeds are formed in July.   They cannot tolerate cold 
weather and will die after the first frost.  The dry 
grass in winter retains a relatively high nutrient 
content.  Once established, torpedo grass is difficult 
to eradicate.  It can be distributed by using improper 
soil sanitation and by tilling and fertilizing.  Torpedo 
grass is tolerant of drought and partial shade, and can 
grow on heavy upland soils.  It thrives best on moist 
to wet sandy or organic soil. 
 
Torpedo grass is propagat ed by seed or by plant 
division; however the best propagation method is 
through plant division.  The seeds are variable in 
abundance and viability. 
 
The rhizomes can be dug and cut into segments, 
which will then sprout new shoots.  The stems may 
also be cut and propagated. 
 
It is not recommended to mix torpedo grass seeds 
with cool season grass seeds.  In parts of the United 
States where cool season grasses dominate, the warm 
season grasses can be taken over because they 
develop slower than the cool season grasses.  It is 
also recommended that seed not be moved more than 
300 miles north, 100 miles east or west, or 200 miles 
south of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
To maintain existing torpedo grass colonies, avoid 
long term deep flooding and abusive livestock 
grazing.  The plant prospers with periodic fire 
provided sufficient soil moisture is present to avoid 
scorching root systems.  Once established, it is 
difficult to kill.  Check with the local extension 
service for recommended herbicides.  Torpedo grass 
has no known pests or problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local NRCS  Field Office.  Common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed. 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 697. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Panicum repens . 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/46441
00e.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .   
Version: 10aug03.  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA. <http://plants.usda.gov> 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA, NRCS, Louisi ana State Office 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly of USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited  06dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 10aug03 jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.