Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW FRINGED ORCHID  
Platanthera ciliaris  (L.) Lindl. 
Plant Symbol = PLCI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate names 
Orange-plume, orange-fringe, bobwhite’s moccasin, 
owl’s head.  This plant is referred to as  Blephariglotis 
ciliaris  (L.) Rydb. or  Habenaria ciliaris  (L.) R. Br. 
ex Ait., in much of the older literature.   
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Cherokee and Seminoles as well 
as other Native American tribes in the Eastern United 
States used the yellow-fringed orchid for medicinal 
and other purposes.  The roots were used to make 
infusions to treat diarrhea.  The roots were also used 
to treat snakebites.  A cold  infusion of the root was 
taken to relieve headaches.  A piece of the root was  used on fishhooks to “make the fish bite better.”  In 
Florida, it was known as “rattle snake’s master” and 
was used both internally and externally to treat 
snakebite.   
  
Status 
This plant may be listed as threatened in your state. 
This rare plant is threatened by loss of habitat, 
harvesting, and changes in land management 
practices, such as fire suppression, in much of its 
native range.  It is listed as
 threatened by many states 
and is probably locally extinct in Canada.  It is also 
listed in Appendix II of the CITES database of 
threatened plants.  Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
USDA, NRCS @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Orchid Family (Orchidaceae).  This plant is 
a native, perennial herb.  The upright stems will grow 
30 cm to 1m tall.  The roots are tuberous or fleshy.  
The plant has numerous la nce-shaped leaves.  The 
lower leaves are about 30  cm long, 3 to 6 cm wide, 
with smaller leaves toward the top.  The plants have 
showy spikes (5 to 20 cm long) of loosely clustered 
flowers.  The flowers grow  in racemes, opening from 
bottom to top.  The flowers can be bright yellow 
through apricot to deep orange.  The lower petal or 
lip of the flower is linear-oblong (8 to 12 mm long, 2-
3 m wide) with long ciliated fringe (12 to 16 mm 
long).  The spurs are 20 to 33 mm long.  Blooming 
time is variable, but usually from late June in the 
North to late September in the South.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: The plants are native to sphagnum and sedge 
bogs, swamps, marshes, wet sandy barrens, thickets 
on borders of streams and ponds, moist woods, wet 
meadows, prairies, and in deep humus of upland 
forests in the Eastern Unite d States and Canada.   
 
Establishment 
Yellow-fringed orchids are  attractive and easier to 
grow than most fringed orchids.  They do well in 
either partial shade or full sun.  The plants grow in 
slightly acid soils with a pH from 5 to 6.

Pests and Potential Problems 
The plants need to be protected from slugs, snails, 
and cutworms.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are not readily available from 
commercial sources.  However, there are specialty 
growers who are propagating this plant.  Do not 
harvest these plants from the wild as they are 
threatened throughout mo st of their range.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians . Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Connecticut Botanical Society 2001.   Yellow-fringed 
orchid.  [Online].  Available: 
http://www.ct-botanical-society.org/galleries/
platantheracili.html.  (23 June 2001). 
 
Convention on international trade in endangered 
species of wild fauna and flora 2001.   CITES-listed 
species database: flora . [Online].  Available: 
http://www.cites.org/index.html.  (23 June 2001). 
 
Duncan, W. H. & L.E. Foote 1975.  Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol. 2.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  933 
pp.  
 
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.  1999.  
List  of endangered, threatened and rare species by 
county.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.in.gov/dnr/n aturepr/index.htm. (23 June 
2001). 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(23 June 2001). 
 
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of 
Natural Areas & Preserves 2001.   Ohio natural data 
base, Washington County rare plant species (2000-
2001 status list).  [Online].  Available:  
http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/odnr/dnap/heritage/counti
es/washington.html. (23 June 2001).    
 
Royal Botanical Gardens 2000.  Canadian native 
orchids.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.rbg.ca/orchid s/files/pla_cil.htm.  (23 June 
2001).   
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Steffek, E.F. 1983.   The new wild flowers and how to 
grow them.  Timber Press, Portland Oregon.  186 pp. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
The Nature Conservancy 2000.   Orange fringed-
orchid.   Oak openings region web site.   [Online].  
Available:  
http://www.oakopeningsregi on.com/qOrangeFringed.
htm.  (23 June 2001).   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California

Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.