Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK 
COTTONWOOD  
Populus balsamifera  L. ssp. 
trichocarpa  (Torr. & Gray ex 
Hook.) Brayshaw 
Plant Symbol = POBAT  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate names 
Common black cottonwood, balsam cottonwood, 
western balsam poplar, California poplar;  Populus 
trichocarpa Torr. & Gray  
 
Uses 
Industry : Black cottonwood is a commercially 
valuable tree.  Primary products include particle 
board, plywood, veneer, and lumber.  The wood is 
light colored and light in weight; it is diffuse-porous 
(indistinct growth rings), w ith a fine, even texture.  
The light weight, good nailing characteristics, and 
light color of the lumber are ideal for manufacture of 
pallets, boxes, and crates.  It also is used in concealed 
parts of furniture.  The fibers are short and fine, 
making the wood useful in production of pulp for 
tissues and high-grade book and magazine paper.   
 
Poplar hybrids, particularly  Populus trichocarpa x P. 
deltoides , are currently the subj ect of much research  into their genetics and physiology.  These are 
extremely fast-growing and biomass-productive 
when grown as short-rotation coppice or single 
stems.  On good sites, hybr
id poplars grow faster than 
any other northern temperat e region tree and hybrids 
are usually more widely adaptable than the parents.  
They are easily propagated  from stem cuttings, but 
because of quick re-sprouting, replanting after 
harvesting may be unnecessary, especially for short 
harvest cycles.  These trees have great potential for 
conservation and ornamental plantings, paper, and 
lumber and plywood.  The wood is similar to that of 
native black cottonwood, and branches and tops left 
from pulp harvests can be converted to pelletized fuel 
for use in power stations and home heaters.   
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife : Black cottonwood provides food and cover 
for a variety of wildlife species, including deer, elk, 
and beaver.  Large birds use the crowns for nesting 
sites and various animals rely on the trunk cavities, 
which commonly result from heart rot in most stands 
nearing maturity.  The rotten trunks of black 
cottonwood provide an important wildlife habitat 
otherwise scarce, especially of the Cascades.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Disinfectant properties of resin from 
buds were discovered by Native Americans, who 
used the resin to treat sore throats, coughs, lung pain, 
and rheumatism.  It is still used in some modern 
natural health ointments.  Soap was produced from 
the inner bark.  The wood was used to make friction 
fire sets.   
 
Conservation : Black cottonwood is a very fast-
growing and potentially large tree, easy to establish, 
and useful for shade and ornament.  Black 
cottonwood also has been planted as windbreaks and 
shelterbelts and it is commonly used for screening 
along motorways in Europe.  The aggressive root 
systems of black cottonwood are effective soil 
stabilizers and make the species useful in restoration 
of riparian areas, where it  also provides protection for 
the aquatic environment, especially in helping to 
maintain low water temperatures through shading.  
The high nitrate uptake and extensive rooting of these 
trees make them useful for buffer or "filter" planting 
along streams in agricultural areas.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s

current status, such as state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Willow Family (Salicaceae).  These are 
native trees up to 30-60 m tall, usually with a 
straight, branch-free trunk for more than half its 
length, forming a broad, open crown in open sites; 
bark gray to gray-brown on mature trees, deeply 
furrowed into flat ridges on older portions.  The 
leaves are deciduous, si mple, alternate, ovate-
lanceolate to deltate but variable in size and shape on 
same tree, rounded or cordate at base, 7-12 cm long, 
3.5-7.5 cm wide, hairless or nearly so, the margins 
finely toothed, dark green above and slightly paler 
beneath, commonly with whitish or brownish resin 
blotches, turning yellow in autumn, the petioles 
round, 3-4 mm long.  Flowers male (staminate) and 
female (pistillate), on separate trees (the species 
dioecious), each type borne in pendent catkins, the 
female elongating to 6-8 cm long.  Fruits nearly 
globular capsules 3-4 mm long, splitting to release 
the seeds; seeds ca.2  mm long, each with a tuft of 
long, white, silky hairs (“cotton”), easily blown by 
the wind.  The common name is in reference to the 
dark colored bark.    
 
Black cottonwood is the largest American poplar and 
the largest hardwood tree in western North America.   
  
Variation within the species:  black cottonwood is 
most commonly and widely known as the distinct 
species  Populus trichocarpa but is sometimes treated 
as  Populus balsamifera  var. trichocarpa, the western 
North American segment of the broader species  P. 
balsamifera  (Brayshaw 1965, 1976).  Black 
cottonwood and balsam cottonwood have similar 
appearances, biological features, and ecology, and 
they hybridize and introg ress where their ranges 
overlap.  Still, they have essentially separate 
geographic ranges, and, like  various other species of 
Populus  that are separated by relatively small 
differences, black cottonwood and balsam poplar 
differ in a number of technical features, as partly 
summarized here.   
 
1. Petioles 7-10 cm long, often with glands at base; 
terminal bud with 5 scales;  staminate catkins 7-10 cm 
long; mature pistillate catkins 10-13 cm long; fruits 
ovoid, 6-7 mm long, splitting  into 2 parts. .......... P. 
balsamifera  
 
1. Petioles 3-4 cm long, without basal glands; 
terminal bud with 6-7 scal es; staminate catkins 4-5 
cm long; mature pistillate  catkins 12-15 cm long;  fruits nearly globular, 3-4 mm long, splitting into 3 
parts. ........ 
P. trichocarpa  
 
Brayshaw has recognized  two varieties within 
“subsp. trichocarpa :”  Var. trichocarpa  (in central 
and coastal British Columb ia and southward) and 
Var.  hastata  (Dode) Brayshaw (mainly in the Rocky 
Mountain region and central British Columbia) 
Natural hybrids occur between black cottonwood and 
other species: narrowleaf cottonwood ( P. 
angustifolia ), eastern cottonwood ( P. deltoides), 
Fremont’s cottonwood ( P. fremontii), and rarely even 
aspen ( P. tremuloides ).    
 
Distribution 
The range of black cottonwood extends from Alaska, 
including various islands, through coastal regions of 
western Canada (Yukon, British Columbia, and 
Alberta) into the northwestern US (Washington, 
Oregon, Montana, Idaho, and Nevada; rare in North 
Dakota, Wyoming, Utah, and California) and as far 
south as Baja California Norte.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Black cottonwood grows on alluvial sites, riparian 
habitats, and moist woods on mountain slopes, at 
elevations of  0–2100(–2750) meters.  It often forms 
extensive stands on bottomlands of major streams 
and rivers at low elevations  along the Pacific Coast, 
west of the Cascade Range.  In eastern Washington 
and other dry areas, it is restricted to protected 
valleys and canyon bottoms, along streambanks, and 
edges of ponds and meadows.  It grows on a variety 
of soils from moist silts, gravels, and sands to rich 
humus, loams, and occasionally clays.    
 
Black cottonwood is a pioneer species that grows 
best in full sunlight and commonly establishes on 
recently disturbed alluvium.  Seeds are numerous and 
widely dispersed because  of their cottony tufts, 
enabling the species to colo nize even burn sites, if 
conditions for establishment are met.  Seral 
communities dominated or codominated by 
cottonwood are maintained by periodic flooding or 
other types of soil disturbance.  Black cottonwood 
has low drought tolerance; it is flood-tolerant but 
cannot tolerate brackish water or stagnant pools.   
 
Flowering occurs in late March to May (-June), just 
before or during leaf emergence and fruiting occurs 
in late May to early or mid-July.

Establishment 
Black cottonwood begins producing seed at about 8-
10 years – abundant seed is usually produced every 
year.  Seeds under natural conditions are short-lived, 
usually for less than a month.  Seed will readily 
germinate on a variety of favorable sites, particularly 
where mineral soil has been exposed or new soil 
deposited.  High germination rates and seedling 
survival depend on continuously moist conditions, 
such as in fresh alluvium, during the first month.   
 
Maximum height and size are usually reached in 60-
75 years although some may continue to grow well 
past that.  Maximum age is at least 200 years.   
 
Black cottonwood sprouts readily from the stump and 
roots as well as from branch es and logs that are left 
after logging.  Small shoots with green leaves abscise 
naturally and either root where they fall or are water-
transported some distance before they root.   
 
Management 
In urban sites, the aggressi ve root systems of black 
cottonwood can invade and damage drainage systems 
and also may heavily draw available moisture from 
gardens and building foundations, especially in clay 
soil.  Root suckers also may be considered a 
maintenance problem, and the profuse production of 
cottony seed from female plants can be a minor 
nuisance.  The shallow root system of black 
cottonwood, especially on  wet soils, make the species 
susceptible to damage from ice storms, heavy snow, 
and wind.  Unseasonably early or late frosts may 
damage saplings, but in dormancy, it is one of the 
most frost-resistant trees in  the northwestern USA.    
 
Black cottonwood is susceptible to fire damage 
because of its thin bark and shallow root system.  
Seedlings and saplings are usually killed by fire of 
any intensity, and all trees may killed by high-
intensity fire.  Even relatively cool fires may wound 
older trees and open the way to heartwood decay.  
Repeated fire at short intervals may permanently 
exclude black cottonwood.   Even so, post-fire 
regeneration may be effective and rapid in black 
cottonwood.  Thickened bark on lower portions of the 
trunk after 10-20 years affords better fire protection, 
and moist soil contributes to the survival of 
underground parts.  Trees can quickly sprout from the 
stump and roots following top-kill or damage by fire.  
Abundant production of seeds and their wide 
dispersal enable black cottonwood to rapidly colonize 
large areas of moist soil after burns, which provide 
ideal conditions of maximum light and bare mineral 
soil.   
 
Collect seeds for propaga tion as capsules begin to 
open (late May to mid July).  Place in paper bags and 
allow them to finish opening in warm area.  They 
need to be sown within a few days of ripening; 
otherwise they may be kept viable for up to a year by 
drying and storing cold in an air-tight container.  In a 
cold frame, sow on the surface or lightly cover the 
seeds.  Plant into permanent positions either in late 
summer or the following spring, depending on 
growth of the young plants.   
  
Cuttings of twigs of the current season's growth, 20-
45 cm long and 1-3 cm diameter, taken during the 
dormant season and with healthy axillary buds, can 
be placed in a sheltered outd oor bed or directly into 
permanent positions.  Plant with one bud above the 
surface.  Cuttings grown in  a mist-propagator also 
root easily.  Nursery- or container-grown seedlings 
and rooted cuttings establish easily and grow rapidly 
on moist well-drained soils in full sun.  Live stakes 
should be 3.5 cm diameter and 1.2 m long, stuck 
directly into ground on-site.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Authors 2000.  Hybrid poplar research program .  
Dept. of Energy, Biofuels Program, Washington State 
University, Puyallap, Washington.  SEP00.  
<http://www.puyallup.wsu.edu/poplar/hybridpoplar/p
oplar.htm>   
 
Brayshaw, T.C. 1965.   The status of the black 
cottonwood (Populus trichocarpa Torrey and Gray) .  
Canad. Field-Naturalist 79:91-95.   
 
Brayshaw, T.C. 1976.   Catkin bearing plants of 
British Columbia .  Occas. Pap. No. 18.  The British 
Columbia Provincial Museum, Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada. 
 
DeBell, D.S. 1990.   Populus trichocarpa Torr. & 
Gray, black cottonwood.  Pp. 60-69, IN: R.M. Burns 
and B.H. Honkala (tech. coords.).   Silvics of North 
America .  Volume 2.   Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
SEP00.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/volume
_2/populus/trichocarpa.htm>

DeBell, D.S., C.A. Harrington, G.W. Clendenen, 
M.A. Radwan, & J.C. Zasada 1997.  Increasing the 
productivity of short-rotation Populus plantations .  
Final Report, USDA, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, Olympia, Washington.  
<http://bioenergy.ornl.gov/r eports/debell/contents.ht
ml>  Accessed September 2000.   
 
Dickmann, D.I. & K.W. Stuart 1983.   The culture of 
poplars in eastern North America .  Michigan State 
University, Department of Forestry, East Lansing, 
Michigan. 
 
Eckenwalder, J.E. 1977.   North American 
cottonwoods Populus (Salicaceae) of sections Abasco 
and Aigeros .  J. Arnold Arb. 58:193-207.   
 
Galloway, G., & J. Worrall 1979.  Cladoptosis: A 
reproductive strategy in black cottonwood?   Canad. 
J.  
Forest Res. 9:122-125.  
 
Holifield, J.L. 1990.   Populus trichocarpa. IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT.  
<http://fire.org/feis/plants/tr ee/poptri/Final Report>  
Accessed September 2000.   
 
Johnson, J.D., T.M. Hinckley, & H.D. Bradshaw 
2000.   Disease resistance, its physiology and genetics 
of short-rotation black cottonwood .  Dept. of Energy, 
Biofuels Program, Washington State University, 
Puyallap, Washington.  SEP00.  
<http://www.puyallup.wsu.edu/poplar/rschprojects/rs
ch1.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
James Henson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.