Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAIDENCANE 
Panicum hemitomon  J.A. 
Schultes  
Plant Symbol = PAHE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Louisiana State 
Office, National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing 
Land Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Paille fine, canouche.  The genus name,  Panicum, is 
the largest group of grass genera with approximately 
500 species identified, which are generally found in 
warmer regions. 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Maidencane’s forage value has been rated 
excellent for livestock.  It is known to produce as 
much as 5 tons of forage per acre, which has been 
proved to be high in crude protein.  When grazed, the 
digestibility is at a peak of 50% and protein is at a 
peak of 10 to 11%.  One  acre of the best range of  maidencane will support an animal unit for a six- 
month grazing period.  However, as the plant dies 
back, it becomes tougher and less desirable as a 
forage food.  The best practice is using the grass 
during the winter and spring, with a rest in the 
summer and fall.  In wetter areas, cattle walkways 
may be needed for greater accessibility. 
 
Wildlife
: Maidencane’s forage value for wildlife has 
been rated fair for wildlife.  Burning maidencane in 
the late fall, provides nesting and food for other 
mammals, reptiles, birds, amphibians, and 
vertebrates; however, the vegetation may become so 
dense that it is less appealing to other wildlife.  Also, 
fishermen are often seeking out clumps of 
maidencane located in at  least two feet of water 
because the openings in the  clumps are likely to be 
filled with bass. 
 
 Grass Images @ Texas A&M University 
 
Erosion:  Maidencane is used for erosion control 
along shorelines of ponds, lakes and other waterways 
because its expansive rhiz omes stabilize the soil.  
Shoreline erosion can be prevented if the waves do 
not exceed 2 to 3 feet high for an extended period of 
time.  It can spread 24 to 30 inches per growing 
season; therefore, it is one of the best plants to use to 
control erosion. 
 
Conservation Practices : Maidencane, because of its 
growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with certain conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office.   
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a warm 
season, aquatic or sub-aquatic, extensively 
rhizomatous perennial that forms almost pure stands.  
The culms are glabrous and range in heights of 3 to 5 
feet.  The leaf sheaths are overlapping, glabrous to 
greatly pubescent.  The margins are generally ciliate.  
The blades are flat and range in lengths of 8 to 12 
inches, ½ inch wide, usually scabrous on top, and 
glabrous on the bottom.   The blades are slightly 
narrowed at the base, tapering as it reaches the tip,

and the margins are scabrous.  The ligules are 
membranous with irregular margins.  The 
inflorescence consists of rames.  The lower rames are 
spaced out, whereas, the upper rames are spaced 
closely together.  The spikelets are awnless, broadest 
at the base and up to ¹ ⁄6 inch long.  The first glume is 
3 nerved, sharply angled, glabrous or scantily 
scabrous apically, and ½ as long as the second glume.  
The second glume is 5 nerved, sharply angled, and 
scantily scabrous on mid-nerve apically with opaque 
margins.  The sterile lemma is 3 nerved, glabrous, 
and strongly angled to acuminate with opaque 
margins.  The sterile paleas are strongly angled to 
acuminate and have opaque margins.  The fertile 
lemma and palea are straw colored and acuminate.  
The caryopsis is ellipsoid and smooth. 
 
Distribution : Maidencane is found in coastal and 
freshwater marshes, edges of ponds, lakes, ditches, 
canals, and cypress-gum ponds.  It is found in coastal 
states reaching from New Jersey to Texas, also in 
Arkansas, Tennessee, and Brazil.  It is native to 
Louisiana.  For current dist ribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Maidencane is found in all of 
Louisiana’s Major Land Resource Areas (MLRA) 
except for Western Gulf Coast Flatwoods (152B).  
Pure stands of maidencan e are frequently found in 
shallow regions, usually rang ing at water levels that 
fluctuate from 2 inches above the soil surface to 4 
inches below the soil surface.  However, it may be 
found in areas of water depths of up to 7 feet or more.  
It is found in freshwater where salinities range from 0 
to 0.5 parts per thousand.  Intrusion of salt water can 
destroy maidencane.  It thrives on a wide range of 
soils, from firm mineral clay to floating organic soils.  
Maidencane is probably the major contributor of 
organic matter to the Louisiana coastal marsh.                                                  
                                                                                 
Sometimes, maidencane can 
become a weed in moist 
cultivated fields.  If it becomes a weed, then periodic 
mowing is recommended.  Spraying herbicides in 
dense stands can create openings.  Check with the 
local extension service for recommended herbicides.  
Maidencane has no known pests or problems. 
 
Maidencane can be propagated by seed or by plant 
division.  It grows from late winter until fall and 
flowers through the months  of April to October.  
Maidencane fruits abundantly during wet years that 
follow periods of drought.  The fresh shoots appear 
from January to March and a second growing period 
may take place from October to December.  
Maidencane should be planted in a high to normal 
water level. 
 
The rhizomes are transplanted on wet, periodically 
flooded freshwater sites in late winter or early spring.  
The plants should not be placed in water over 1 inch 
deep.  Maidencane rhizomes should not be planted  more than 2 inches deep in the soil and spaced at one 
foot apart or less.  If planted in furrows, cover the 
rhizome with soil.  At establishment, broadcast five 
pounds of 13-13-13 fertilizers or its equivalent per 
100 feet of planted row.  
No fertilizer is needed if 
planted on catfish pond levees or in constructed 
wetlands.  The nutrients in the water will supply 
enough fertility for the plants. 
 
In parts of the United States where cool season 
grasses dominate, the warm season grasses can be 
taken over because they develop slower than the cool 
season grasses.  It is also recommended that seed not 
be moved more than 300 miles north, 100 miles east 
or west, or 200 miles south of its point of origin. 
 
When the rhizomes are deeply submerged and 
protected and the water levels do not recede more 
than 4 inches below the soil surface, fire can have a 
positive impact on maidencane.  Burned during stable 
conditions, maidencane’s re -growth is healthier and 
faster by producing new shoots 3 to 4 days after and 
it is denser in 6 months than it was before the fire.  
Not only does fire cause maidencane to flower 
sooner, it also increases the number of inflorescences.  
Regrowth depends on the following three factors: 
how quickly it was burned, depth the soil was burned, 
and how slowly the water levels increase.  Studies 
have shown that inundation after a fire and burning 
too late in the year have not produced desirable 
effects.  If the fires do no t occur, then woody species 
would invade the area and maidencane would 
eventually disappear.  If  burning maidencane is not a 
preference, roller chopping in the late winter or early 
spring produces the similar desired effects. 
 
Management 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local NRCS  Field Office.  Common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed.  The USDA, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the 
Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Experiment 
Station, released ‘Halifax’ in 1974.  It was collected 
near Halifax, North Carolina.  ‘Halifax’ was selected 
for growth and persistence in erosion control on sites 
at the waterline and constructed wetlands.

References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 704-706. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images: 
Panicum hemitomon. 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/taesgrass/46399
00c.jpg>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .   
Version: 10aug03.  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA. <http://plants.usda.gov> 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA, NRCS, Louisi ana State Office 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly of USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 06dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 10aug03 jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.