Plant Guide
MULTILOBED 
GROUNDSEL  
Packera multilobata  (Torr. & A. 
Gray ex A. Gray) W.A. Weber &  A. Löve 
Plant Symbol = PAMU11  
 
And  
 
Rocky Mountain  Groundsel  
P. streptanthifolia  (Greene) W.A. 
Weber & Á. Löve 
Plant Symbol = PAST10  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS  Aberdeen, Idaho  P lant 
M aterials  Center  
 
Multilobed groundsel. Photo by Derek Tilley, USDA -NRCS  
Alternate Names  for Multilobed groundsel  
Lobeleaf groundsel  
Senecio multilobat us 
 
Alternate Names for Rocky Mountain groundsel  
Rocky Mountain butterweed , cutleaf groundsel 
Packera cymbalarioides, P.  oodes, Senecio acutidens, S. 
adamsii, S. cymbalarioides, S. fulgens, S. jonesii, S. 
laetiflorus, S. leonardii, S. longipetiolatus, S. oodes, S. 
pammelii, S. platylobus, S. rubricaulis, S. 
streptanthifolius, S. subcuneatus, S. suksdorfii, S. wardii  
Uses  
Multilobed groundsel has been used in restoration and 
w ildlife enhancement plantings. The flowers attract a 
variety o f native bees.  It has been  used medicinally by 
Native Americans as an aid for a variety of internal 
problems (Moerman 1998).  
 
Multilobed groundsel and Rocky Mountain groundsel 
contain  pyrrolizidine alkaloids  (Tilley and St. John 2011) , 
and presents a risk to livestock  in sufficient quantities  
(Talcott  2003). 
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator val ues). 
Description  
General :  Multilobed groundsel is a short -lived  perennial 
forb  in the sunflower family (Asteraceae) arising from a 
taproot. The plan ts grow to approximately 10 to 60 cm (4 
to 24 in) tall  from a cluster of basal leaves. The leaves are 
2 to 12 cm ( 1 to 5 in) long, obovate in outline with 
pinnatifid (multilobed) margins.  The stem leaves are 
much smaller than the basal leaves. The flower head has 7 
to 13 yellow ray flowers, 4 to 10 mm  (0.16 to 0.4  in) long 
and yellow -orange disk flowers.  The achenes bear a white 
pappus of capillary bristles (Welsh and others 2003). 
There are approximately 900,000 seeds/lb.  
 
Rocky Mountain groundsel is similar in appearance to 
multilobed groundsel but lacks the deeply cleft leaves. It 
also tends to have a more fibrous root system than the 
taprooted multilobed groundsel. The leaves are relatively 
thick and firm and somewhat succulent. The species is 
highly variable morphologically as evidenced by the 
numerous named ta xa. Hybrids between Rocky Mountain 
groundsel and multilobed groundsel are common 
(Cronquist et al 1994).