Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NARROWLEAF 
COTTONWOOD  
Populus angustifolia  James 
Plant Symbol = POAN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names 
Bitter cottonwood, willow cottonwood, willow-leaf 
cottonwood, mountain cottonwood, Rydberg 
cottonwood, smooth-bark cottonwood  
 
Uses 
Industry: Wood of narrow-leaf cottonwood is 
susceptible to decay and warp s when cut into lumber.  
Because of this and its relative scarcity, it is 
commercially unimportant – used mostly for 
fenceposts and fuel, less commonly for crating, 
boxes, pallets, plywood veneer, and pulpwood; wood 
shavings are used for bedding, insulation, and animal 
food supplements. 
 
Wildlife : Narrow-leaf cottonwood provides habitat, 
cover, and food for a diversity of wildlife.  Common 
residents include squirrels, aquatic fur bearers, bears, 
white-tailed deer, and many bird species.  Twigs and 
leaves are browsed by rabbits, deer, and moose and 
buds and catkins are eaten  by quail and grouse.  
Beaver cut all sizes of cottonwoods to build and 
maintain lodges and dams and use the bark for 
immediate food or stor age in winter caches. 
 
Conservation: Narrow-leaf cottonwood is planted as 
a fast-growing ornamental tree in western US cities.  
These trees can be used at high elevations and are 
useful in landscaping on deer winter ranges since 
deer will not damage them through overbrowsing.  
The species was early encountered (in1805) by the 
Lewis and Clark expedition, who observed that 
horses would not eat it.   
 @ PLANTS 
 
The aggressively spreading root system of narrow-
leaf cottonwood makes it useful for soil stabilization 
in erosion control and streambank reclamation 
projects.  This same feature, however, may be a 
liability in urban areas where the roots may clog 
drains and sewers.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used young 
cottonwood shoots to make baskets.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Willow Family (Salicaceae).  Native trees 
up to 15-20 m tall, single-stemmed with slender, 
upright branches forming a narrowly spreading 
crown.  The bark is yellowish green to grayish 
brown, smooth on upper portions and furrowed into 
broad, flat ridges on older lower portions.  Leaves are 
deciduous, simple, alternat e, lanceolate to ovate-
lanceolate, rounded at base, 5-9(-13) cm long, 1-2.5 
cm wide, hairless or nearly so, the margins glandular-
toothed, dark green above and slightly paler beneath, 
turning dull yellow in autumn, the petioles less than 
15 mm long, about 1/3 as long as the blade, flattened 
only near the base.  Flowers male (staminate) and 
female (pistillate), are on separate trees (the species 
dioecious).  Each type is borne in pendent catkins, the 
female elongating to 6-8 cm long.  Fruits are ovoid,

pointed capsules 6-8 mm long, splitting to release the 
seeds; seeds 2-3 mm long, each with a tuft of long, 
white, silky hairs (“cotton”), easily blown by the 
wind.  The common name is in reference to the 
slender leaves.   
 
Variation within the species: No variants have been 
recognized within the species, but natural hybrids are 
frequent between narrow-leaf cottonwood and other 
species:  
 
balsam poplar ( P. balsamifera) = P. x brayshawii 
Boivin  (Brayshaw’s poplar);  
 
eastern cottonwood ( P. deltoides)  = P. x acuminata 
Rydb. (lanceleaf poplar);  
 
Fremont cottonwood ( P. fremontii) = P. x 
hinckleyana  Correll.   
 
Distribution 
Narrow-leaf cottonwood occurs primarily in 
mountainous areas from southern Alberta and 
Saskatchewan south to Oregon and California (east of 
the Sierra Nevada), Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Trans-Pecos Texas and in northern Mexico 
(northeastern Sonora).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Narrow-leaf cottonwood grows along streambanks in 
dry mountains, desert shrublands, and prairie 
grasslands and in coniferous forests with willows and 
alders, at elevations of 900-2450 meters.  It is 
commonly found on narrow, periodically flooded 
benches adjacent to streams and smaller rivers.  
Common associates are Douglas-fir, blue spruce, 
ponderosa pine, Rocky Mountain juniper, maples, 
birches, alders, other cottonwoods and aspen; in 
relatively undisturbed sites, the understory often 
includes red-osier dogwood, chokecherry, 
serviceberry, willows, and currants.    
 
Narrow-leaf cottonwood is a pioneer that colonizes 
sandbars and other fresh alluvium in areas of full sun.  
Such sites tend to become dominated by a dense, 
closed canopy of cottonwood.  Continual 
disturbances such as flood and fire allow such 
communities to persist.   
 
This species flowers in May, before or during leaf 
emergence and fruits May-Ju ly, with seed dispersal 
in June-July.   
 
Establishment 
Flowering begins at about 15 years in narrow-leaf 
cottonwood.  Male and female trees must be grown in 
proximity if seed is desired.  Large seed crops are 
produced each year but seeds are viable for probably 
no more than 3 weeks.  They establish only if they 
land on unoccupied, wet, sandy soil in full sun.  
Flood disturbance along waterways enhances 
seedling recruitment, and periodic fires may serve the 
same purpose – removing competing conifers, 
allowing more light penetration, and exposing 
mineral soil.  Narrow-leaf cottonwood is a fast-
growig but short-lived species in natural conditions.      
 
Narrow-leaf cottonwood reproduces vegetatively by 
sprouting from roots and stumps.    
 
Management 
Because of its short period  of viability, seed needs to 
be sown within a few days of ripening in the spring.  
Otherwise they may be kept viable by drying and 
storing cold in an airtight container.  In a cold frame, 
sow on the surface or lightly cover the seeds.  Plant 
into permanent positions either in late summer or the 
following spring, depending on growth of the young 
plants.   
 
Cuttings of twigs 20–45 cm long and 1-3 cm 
diameter of the current season's growth, taken during 
the dormant season, can be placed in a sheltered 
outdoor bed or directly into permanent positions.  
Initial growth of un-rooted cuttings may not be as 
rapid as that of rooted cuttings.  Cuttings grown in a 
mist-propagator also root easily and survive potting.  
Nursery- or container-grown seedlings and rooted 
cuttings establish easily and grow rapidly on moist 
well-drained soils in full sun.  Growth may be 
minimal on wet soils and upland sites.   
 
Beaver activities may inhibit cottonwood 
regeneration; seedlings and saplings are stripped of 
bark for food and larger  trees are cut for building 
material.  Poorly oxygenated water in stagnant ponds 
causes a decline in hea lth.  Severe grazing by 
livestock, and associated trampling of seedlings, 
reduces cottonwood regeneration potential.   
 
The aggressive root systems can invade and damage 
drainage systems and also may heavily draw 
available moisture from gardens and building 
foundations, especially in clay soil.  Root suckers 
also may be considered a maintenance problem, and 
the profuse production of cottony seed from female 
plants can be a minor nuisance.

Narrow-leaf cottonwood will produce stump sprouts 
and root suckers after light to moderate intensity 
fires.  Seedlings, saplings, and young trees are 
damaged or killed by fire, but they develop more fire-
resistant bark after 15-20 years of age.  Older trees 
may be killed by even relatively cool fires, which 
wound trees and open the way to heartwood decay.  
Where spruce is climax, peri odic fire may contribute 
to the maintenance of cottonwood stands, but mature 
bottomland hardwood stands will not persist in the 
face of fire.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Eckenwalder, J.E. 1977.  North American 
cottonwoods Populus (Salicaceae) of sections Abasco 
and Aigeros.  J. Arnold Arb. 58:193-207.   
 
Eckenwalder, J.E. 1989.   Natural intersectional 
hybridization between North American species of 
Populus (Salicaceae) in sections Aigeros and 
Tacamahaca. II.  Taxonomy .  Canad. J. Bot. 62:325-
335.    
 
Harris, H.T. 1989.   Populus angustifolia .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  SEP00. 
 
Lanner, R.M. 1983.   Trees of the Great Basin: A 
natural history .  Univ. of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
James Henson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.