Plant Guide

GRAY PINE

Pinus sabiniana Dougl. ex 

Dougl .

Plant Symbol = PISA2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
J. S. Peteson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
Alternative Names 
foothill pine, bull pine, digger pine, California 
foothill pine 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The seeds of gray pine were eaten by 
many California Indian tribes and are still served in 
Native American homes today.  They can be eaten 
fresh and whole in the raw state, roasted, or pounded 
into flour and mixed with other types of seeds.  The 
seeds were eaten by the Pomo, Sierra Miwok, 
Western Mono, Wappo, Salinan, Southern Maidu, 
Lassik, Costanoan, and Kato, among others.  Sierra 
Miwok men climbed the trees and twisted the green 
cones off by hand before the seeds were fully 
developed.  These immature cones were roasted for 
20 minutes in hot ashes, yielding a brown, sweet 
syrup.  The pitch of the gray pine was used as a 
medicine by the Western Mono and the branches 
were made into household utensils for stirring acorn 
mush.  The Costanoan used the pitch as a treatment 
for rheumatism. The needles were used for thatch, 
bedding, and floor covering and the bark for house 
covering by the Sierra Miwok.  The branches and 
roots were used in California Indian basketry and still 
gathered to a limited extent by contemporary 
weavers. 
Wildlife: Numerous birds feed on the seeds of gray 
pine including the red-shafted flicker, California jay, 
and band-tailed pigeon.  The foliage, bark, and seeds 
provide food for black bears, Douglas chickarees, and 
gray squirrels.  Mule and white-tailed deer browse 
the foliage and twigs. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description 
General: Pine Family (Pinaceae).  This native tree 
reaches 38 m in height with a trunk less than 2 m 
wide.  The gray-green foliage is sparse and it has 
three needles per bundle. Each needle reaches 9-38 
cm in length. The trunk often grows in a crooked 
fashion and is deeply grooved when mature.  The 
seed cone of gray pine is pendent, 10-28 cm, and 
opens slowly during the second season, dispersing 
winged seeds. 
Distribution 
It ranges in parts of the California Floristic Province, 
the western Great Basin and western deserts. For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Establishment 
Adaptation: This tree is found in the foothill 
woodland, northern oak woodland, chaparral, mixed 
conifer forests and hardwood forests from 150-
1500m. 
Extract seeds from the cones and gently rub the 
wings off, and soak them in water for 48 hours, drain 
them, and thoroughly surface-dry.  Put seeds in a 
plastic bag, without any medium, seal the bag and 
place them in refrigerated conditions until their 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

chilling treatment begins.  Allow three times the air 
space as seed space in the bag.  It is best to sow the 
seeds in May and therefore, expose the seeds to a 
chilling treatment of at least sixteen weeks prior to 
sowing.  After cold stratification, plant the seeds in a 
well-drained coarse potting mix in leach tubes that 
are narrow but deep with two seeds per tube.  These 
containers should allow roots to reach the air and stop 
growing and be at least 6 inches deep.  Fertilize the 
containers with a starter formulation of fertilizer with 
low or zero nitrogen.  These containers can be kept in 
a greenhouse for the first 4 to 6 weeks, receiving 70-
degree temperatures during the day.  Keep the surface 
of the soil moist during the germination phase.  Next 
after the first set of cotyledons, water the plants with 
a deep, thorough soaking and let the plants dry in 
between watering.  Thin the plants down to one per 
container and move the pots into a shade-house with 
30 percent shade after 4 to 6 weeks. Protect the 
plants from wind and wildlife.  During the main 
summer growing season use a balanced fertilizer 
applied to each container.  At the end of the growing 
season use a finisher formulation of fertilizer.  Plant 
the plants in the ground outside in the late winter or 
early spring in moist soil.  Conduct supplemental 
hand watering or irrigation if the rains are 
insufficient. Clear weeds in a 3 feet by 3 feet area 
around the plants to encourage better survival and 
growth rate.  Make sure a protective barrier is placed 
around the conifers such as vexar tubing to shield 
them from jack rabbits, deer and other wildlife that 
may feed on the leaves, stems, and roots. 
Management 
The Pomo pruned the trees periodically. 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available from most nurseries within 
its range that handle native plants.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933. Miwok material 
culture. Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
Beard, Y.S. 1979.  The Wappo A Report. Malki 
Museum Press.  Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.  Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington. Economic Botany 38(2):240-255. 
CalPhotos 2000.  Pinus sabiniana. 
<http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?seq_num 
=16975&one=T>.  Version: 000229.  CalFlora, Inc., 
Berkeley, California. 
Essene, F. 1942. Culture element distributions: XXI 
Round Valley.  Anthropological Records 8(1):1-97. 
Goode, R.W. 1992.  Cultural traditions endangered. 
Unpublished report. 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V. P. Lawson Kashaya 
Pomo plants. American Indian Studies Center.  
University of California, Los Angeles, California. 
Griffin, J.R. 1993.  Pinus. Pages 117-120 IN: The 
Jepson manual: Higher plants of California. J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
Littlejohn, H.W. 1928. Nisenan geography. 
Unpublished manuscript in the Bancroft Library, 
University of California, Berkeley, California. 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food 
habits. Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
Peri, D.W., S.M. Patterson, & J.L. Goodrich 1982.  
Ethnobotanical mitigation Warm Springs Dam-Lake 
Sonoma California. Unpublished report prepared for 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, San Francisco 
District, San Francisco, California. 
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database. 
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 000229.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Environmental Horticulture, 
University of California, Davis, California 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of

race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.