Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KNOTGRASS 
Paspalum distichum  L. 
Plant Symbol = PADI6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Louisiana State Office, 
National Plant Data Center, & the Grazing Land 
Conservation Initiative-South Central Region 
 
Alternative Names 
Eternity grass, Fort Thompson grass, ginger grass, 
joint grass, joint paspalum, saltene, salt jointgrass, 
salt-water couch grass, salt-water paspalum, seashore 
paspalum, and turfgrass.  Synonyms of the scientific 
name are Digitaria paspaloides , Paspalum distichum 
var. indutum , and Paspalum paspaloides.   Some 
botanists consider Paspalum distichum and  Paspalum 
vaginatum  as one species because they are similar in 
appearance and are found in similar habitats.  
However, the second glume at the base of the spikelet 
is hairy for  Paspalum distichum . 
 
Uses 
Livestock: Knotgrass is valuable forage in areas of 
high salinity.  It is recommended that knotgrass is 
lightly grazed and given a rest period of 
approximately 2 ½ to 3 months because the rooted  
stolons are often floating.  It can be made into hay 
but is not suitable for silage. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping: Knotgrass is used in golf 
course turfs and lawns.   
 Southern Wetland Flora USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center 
 
Wildlife : It is grazed by many mammals and is 
considered a substantial source of food for ducks in 
Louisiana marshes. 
 
Erosion:  Knotgrass is recommended in the 
restorations of wetlands, marshes, beaches, and 
stream banks. 
 
Conservation Practices : Knotgrass, because of its 
growth habit, potentially has application when 
established with certain conservation practices; 
however, conservation practice standards vary by 
state.  For localized information, consult your local 
NRCS Field Office.  NRCS  practices include the 
following: 327-Conservation Cover; 342-Critical 
Area Planting; 386-Field Border; 390-Riparian 
Herbaceous Cover; 393-Filter Strip; 512-Pasture and 
Hay Planting; 550-Range Planting; 560-Access Road; 
562-Recreation Area Improvement; 643-Restoration 
and Management of Declining Habitats; 644-Wetland 
Wildlife Habitat Management; 647-Early 
Successional Habitat Development/Management; 
656-Constructed Wetland; 657-Wetland Restoration; 
658-Wetland Creation; 659-Wetland Enhancement. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  It is a perennial 
which may be creeping or growing in clumps.  The 
creeping stems produce roots  at the nodes in which 
flowering stems emerge.  The culms are firm and 
range in heights up to 1½ feet.  The nodes on 
creeping stems are often pubescent whereas the nodes 
on the mat-forming stems ar e glabrous.  The sheaths 
are loose and glabrous to pu bescent.  The blades are 
flat and taper to an inrolle d apex.  They are 2 to 6

inches long and about 1 inch wide.  The flowering 
stem bears terminal digital racemes in 2’s or 3’s, that 
are up to 3 inches long.  Axes are winged and 
glabrous with thin, dry margins.  The spikelets are 
solitary and straw-purple in color.  The first glume is 
rarely present.  The second glume and sterile lemma 
are glabrous and 3-nerved.  The grain is yellowish 
and oblong to ellipsoid. 
 
Distribution 
Knotgrass is found in both wet and well-drained 
areas.  It frequents meadows, marshes, and ditches.  It 
can also be found in cultivated or disturbed areas, and 
bordering wooded areas.  It  is located throughout the 
southeast United States, Ar kansas, Texas, Oklahoma, 
and in the western United St ates.  It is native to 
Louisiana.  For current dist ribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Knotgrass can tolerate high salinity and a 
waterlogged environment.  It has no tolerance of 
shade.  New growth starts in early March and it stays 
green until the first frost. 
 
Knotgrass reproduces from rhizomes, stolons, and 
seeds.  It can be easily es tablished by sowing stolons 
in damp holes.  If planted in water, knotgrass will 
remain green throughout the year. 
 
Knotgrass may flower throughout the year.  The 
seeds may be gathered; however, they require a 
period of dormancy.  The seeds yield their highest 
germination when temperatures are between 82 to 95º 
F and when they receive about 16 hours of light.  
Ripening can be sped up with dry storage at 122º F.  
Also, scarring the seeds  with acid may increase 
germination. 
 
It is not recommended to mix knotgrass seeds with 
cool season grass seeds.  In  parts of the United States 
where cool season grasses dominate, the warm 
season grasses can be taken over because they 
develop slower than the cool season grasses.  It is 
also recommended that seed not be moved more than 
300 miles north, 100 miles east or west, or 200 miles 
south of its point of origin. 
 
Management 
Tilling knotgrass on a dr y surface will increase 
stolons to root and encourage a denser sod.  Grazing 
also increases knotgrass.   It withstands burning if 
water is above soil surface.  The rhizomes enable 
knotgrass to survive fire.  It sometimes can be 
troublesome by blocking irrigation ditches.  In direct- seeded rice it is a serious weed that grows vigorously 
under favorable conditions.  Check with the local 
extension service for recommended herbicides.  
Knotgrass has no known pests or problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local NRCS 
Field Office.  Common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of 
native seed.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA Miscellaneous Publication No 
200.  Agricultural Research Administration, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp. 603-604. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 1999.   Southern 
wetland flora: field office guide to plant species: 
Paspalum distichum . (Version 12APR99). 
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1999/soutflor/
species/2/paspdist.htm>.  USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, South National Technical 
Center, Fort Worth, Texas. Northern Prairie Wildlife 
Research Center Home Page, Jamestown, North 
Dakota. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Selena Dawn Newman 
USDA, NRCS, Louisiana Pl ant Materials Program 
Maraya Gates 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne 
Louisiana State University, Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 06dec00 jsp;05feb03ahv; 10aug03 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.