Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BITTER PANICUM 
Panicum amarum Ell. 
Plant Symbol = PAAM2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 USDA-NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names  
Bitter panicgrass, bitter beachgrass, coastal 
panicgrass, Chasea amara (Elliott) Nieuwl.,  Panicum 
amaroides  Scribn. & Merr.,  Panicum amarulum  
(Hitchc. & Chase) P.G. Palmer,  Panicum amarum 
Elliot var. minor Vasey. Varieties include  P. amarum 
Ell. var. amarulum and  P. amarum Ell. var. amarum. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control : The principal use for bitter panicum 
is in coastal dune erosion control, however it may 
have a role in stabilizing other dry, sterile areas such 
as roadsides and minespoils. 
 
Bitter panicum is recommended for beach dune 
enhancement and stabilization on coastal beaches and 
barrier islands.  It is an ideal dune plant.  The above 
ground portion of the plant reduces wind velocity 
allowing sand to drop out of the wind stream and 
accumulate.  The below gr ound portion of the plant 
stabilizes and holds the sand in place with an 
extensive fibrous root and rhizome system. 
Livestock and forage : Bitter panicum is consumed by 
cattle, sheep, and goats.  This grass has a low-
medium browse and grazing palatability and a 
medium protein potential.  It is a favorite forage of 
livestock in some areas and was eliminated along 
some portions of the Texas barrier islands by grazing.   When livestock are removed, this grass reestablishes 
rapidly. 
 
Ethnobotanic: 
A warm infusion of  Panicum sp. 
(panicgrass) leaves was taken by the Creek Indians 
for fevers, especially those caused by malaria.  It was 
also used for ‘rabbit sickness’, muscular cramps, 
cough, dry throat, noisy chest and as a bath for 
‘gopher-tortoise sickness’ by the Mikasuki Seminole.  
Stems were used for padding the inside of Cherokee 
moccasins. 
 
Wildlife Use : Bitter panicum can provide cover 
and/or habitat for song birds, water fowl and small 
mammals. 
 
Status 
This plant is listed as Threatened in Connecticut with 
state protection status.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for changes on th is plant’s current status 
(e.g. threatened or endange red species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae). Bitter panicum is a 
native, perennial, rhizomatous, warm-season grass 
growing to a height of 4-8 feet with a growth habit 
ranging from erect to pros trate to decumbent.  The 
leaves are 1/4 to 1/2 inch wide, 7 to 20 inches long, 
smooth without hair, and bluish in color.  A robust 
grass, it spreads slowly from short, strong rhizomes 
or by rooting from lower nodes of plant stems 
(culms) to form open clumps.  The inflorescence is a 
narrow panicle 12 to 15 inches in length that is 
contracted in maturity.  Flowering begins in 
September and continues th rough December.  Bitter 
panicum is a hexaploid (2n=54), consequently, seeds 
are consistently sterile.  Small quantities of poor 
quality seed are produced on compact clusters 6 to 12 
inches long and 2 to 4 inches wide.  Reproduction is 
vegetative by lateral tillering from established plants.  
Plants can spread from an aggressive, scattered 
system of rhizomes, but the stands are rather open. 
 
Distribution : The native range and distribution of 
bitter panicum is along the coastal beach system of 
the north central Gulf of Mexico basin.  It is also 
distributed throughout the East and lower Midwest; it 
can be found along the Atla ntic Ocean and the Gulf 
of Mexico from Connecticut to northeastern Mexico.  
It is also found as an introduction in a few inland

locations in New Mexico, North Carolina, and West 
Virginia, as well as in the Bahamas and Cuba.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Bitter panicum grows on coastal dunes, in 
interdunal swales, overwash sands, wet sandy soils, 
low fertility soils, and the margins of swamps.  On 
coastal dunes, it is most likely found in the lower 
foredune slopes of the frontal zone, which is closest 
to the ocean and supports mainly grasses and other 
herbaceous plants tolerant of exposure to salt spray.  
It also occurs on dune crests, as well as in the 
backshore area near dunes and on both the leeward 
and the windward slopes of dunes or dune ridges.  It 
favors exposed areas where windblown sand 
accumulates. 
 
In the southeastern U.S., bitter panicum is equally 
likely to occur in wetlands or non-wetlands 
(estimated probability 34%-66%).  In the northeast 
and the southern plains it usually occurs in non-
wetlands (estimated probability 67%-99%), and is 
only occasionally found on wetlands (estimated 
probability 1%-33%). 
 
Adaptation 
Bitter panicum is an early colonizing species that can 
tolerate the harsh environment of the dune system 
which is subject to salt spray, storm surges, 
occasional inundation, high temperatures, low soil 
moisture and fertility, sand abrasion, and smothering 
by drifting sand.  It is adapted to very dry, sterile sites 
and can flourish on fertile, well drained soils.  It is 
better adapted for transplanting than seaoats ( Uniola 
paniculata ).  In areas of heavy sand accumulation, 
only a small fraction of the entire plant may be 
exposed.  
 
It can withstand periods of extended drought and is 
somewhat winter hardy.  Year long growth can occur 
where sand is actively accumulating, but winter cover 
is sparser.  This grass does not perform well in shade 
and prefers a soil pH of 5.0-7.5. 
 
Plant Production 
Bitter panicum is established from container grown 
or bare root plant materials.  Most any plant container 
size can be used successfully.  Propagation for 
container production is accomplished by plant 
divisions or cuttings.  Rhizomes or stem nodes are 
used for cuttings.  Sand to sandy loam potting 
medium is preferred, however, sand peat mix or other 
prepared soil mixes can be  used successfully.  When 
propagating from stem cuttings, prepare stem 
sections with two nodes per cutting.  Cuttings are  placed vertically in the co
ntainer with both nodes 
buried in the medium.   
 
Establishment 
Generally, no site preparation is required when 
planting bitter panicum.  Freshly dug bareroot shoots 
(tillers) and rooted or unrooted stem cuttings can be 
used in plantings.  Container grown plants have been 
proven to be more reliable in establishing stands.   
 
Field plantings are established by planting on 2 to 5 
feet centers between plants.  Spacing is dependent on 
the protective cover desired, but a 2 foot spacing is 
frequently used.   Place plants 8 to 10 inches deep or 
deeper in moist soil.  Bury unrooted stems end to end 
in trenches 4 to 6 inches  deep and 2 to 3 feet apart 
leaving the top 6 to 10 inch es of the stem exposed.  
Unrooted cuttings can also be planted 3 to a hole.  
 
Bitter panicum can be established in the fall with 
rooted cuttings.  It can be planted in late winter or 
early spring, although su ccess has been noted when 
planting young tillers in late spring, if a rainy season 
is more likely to occur then, as in some regions of 
distribution.  Containerized plants can be planted 
year around if moisture is adequate; however, better 
establishment may be achieved by planting in late 
winter or early spring. 
 
This grass can grow on low  fertility soils, however, if 
fertilization is desired place a  slow release tablet with 
each plant while planting or broadcast a balanced 
fertilizer such as 13-13-13 after planting. 
 
Management 
During establishment, restrict traffic and livestock 
grazing.  All sites should be allowed to establish the 
first year, prior to any grazing.  Once grazing is 
started, do not graze lower than 4 to 6 inches.  Apply 
fertilizer according to soil test recommendations.  
Application of fertilizer may be split.  Bitter panicum 
has a high fire tolerance, making it tolerable to 
controlled burns.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of bitter panicum. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known serious environmental concerns.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Fourchon’ originated from a native stand of bitter 
panicum found growing on a coastal beach in 
Lafourche Parish, Louisiana.  It was selected for its 
vigorous growth, persistence after storm events, and

performance in stabilizing dunes enhanced or created 
with sand fencing structures.  Fourchon bitter 
panicum has been tested and has proven performance 
in plantings on coastal beaches of Mississippi and 
Louisiana.   For more information on the availability 
and use of Fourchon bitter panicum, contact the 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Golden 
Meadow Plant Materials Center.  
 
Other cultivars include ‘Northpa’ (NC) and ‘Southpa’ 
(FL) both of which have a vigorous rhizomatous 
growth habit and rapid spread rate.  Plant materials 
are available from commercial sources. 
 
References 
Britton, J.C. and B. Morton. 1989.  Shore Ecology of 
the Gulf of Mexico . University of Texas Press, 
Austin.  387 pp. 
 
Flora of North America Editorial Committee, eds. 
1993+.  Flora of North America North of Mexico . 7+ 
vols. New York and Oxford. [Online Database @ 
http://www.efloras.org/flora_page.aspx?flora_id=1]  
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the Grasses of the 
United States .  Ed. Agnes Chase.  United States 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  
1051 pp.   
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, C.R. Bell. 1976.  Manual 
of the Vascular Flora of the Carolinas .  University of 
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 1183 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W.  1993.  Field Guide to Coastal Wetland 
Plants of the Southeastern United States .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst. 328 pp. 
 
University of  Michigan. 1998.  Native American 
Ethnobotany  [Online Database @ 
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/]. Dearborn MI 48198]. 
Publication, Timber Press,  Portland, OR.  927 pp.  
 
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
Germplasm Resources Info rmation Network - (GRIN) 
[Online Database @ 
http://www.ars-grin.gov].  
National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville, Maryland.  
 
USDA, NRCS.  2000. Fourchon Bitter Panicum 
(Panicum amarum ) brochure.  Data compiled by staff 
at the USDA-NRCS Golden  Meadow Plant Materials 
Center, Galliano, LA.  
 
USDA, NRCS. 2005. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 
(http://plants.usda.gov). Data compiled 
from various sources by Mark W. Skinner. 
National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
 
USDA, SCS. 1984.  Plants for Coastal Dunes of the 
Gulf and South Atlantic Coasts and Puerto Rico , 
Agricultural Information Bulletin 460. U.S. GPO: 
1984-445-394.  41 pp. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Julia Lamphere 
USDA NRCS 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center 
Galliano, Louisiana  Edited: 30jan06 jsp; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.