Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK SPRUCE 
Picea mariana (Miller) B.S.P. 
Plant Symbol = PIMA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names  
Bog spruce, swamp spruce, shortleaf black spruce 
 
Uses 
The primary use of black sp ruce wood is for pulp.  
Lumber is of secondary  importance because of the 
relatively small size of the trees.  The trees and wood 
also are used for fuel, Christmas trees, and other 
products (beverages, medical salves, aromatic 
distillations).  Black spruce is the provincial tree of 
Newfoundland.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Trees to 25 meters tall (often shrub-like 
near tree-line), the crown na rrowly conic to spire-like 
or “irregularly subcylindric;” branches short and 
drooping, frequently layering; twigs not pendent, 
slender, yellow-brown, hairy; bark gray-brown.  
Needles evergreen, 0.6-1.5( -2) cm long, 4-angled, 
stiff and blunt-tipped, waxy and pale blue-green.  
Seed cones 1.5-2.5(-3.5) cm long, fusiform, purple-
brown at maturity; cone scales fan-shaped, broadest 
near apex, 8-12 mm long, rigid, margin at apex 
irregularly toothed.  Native.  The common name 
refers to the dark (blackish) foliage.   
 © Kenneth J. Sytsma University of Wisconsin – Madison Wisconsin State Herbarium 
 
Variation within the species : Black spruce shows 
north-south clinal variation in photoperiodism, 
productivity, and other traits, and discrete variants are 
not recognized at present,  except for one.  Fernald 
(1950) recognized “depressed” and “trailing” alpine 
forms at the rank of  forma, but Roland and Smith 
(1969) and Rouleau and Lamoureux (1992) have 
treated them as var.  semiprostrata.  These occur in 
Keewatin, Quebec, Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia:   
•   Picea mariana  var. mariana   
•  Picea mariana  var. semiprostrata  (Peck) 
Teeri  
•   Synonym:  Picea mariana  forma 
semiprostrata  (Peck) Blake 
However, these are of little significance to NRCS and 
conservation personnel in  the United States.   
 
Black spruce hybridizes with red spruce (Picea 
rubens ) on disturbed sites in eastern Canada and with 
white spruce in a few places.  Reports of natural 
hybrids between black sp ruce and white spruce 
apparently remain unverified.    
 
Distribution : Black spruce occurs across the northern 
range of North America,  from Alaska, Yukon, and 
British Columbia eastward to Nova Scotia, 
Newfoundland, New Brunswick, and Québec. It also 
occurs in the northeastern United States and 
sporadically in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation 
In muskegs, bogs, bottomlands, and relatively dry 
peatlands; at 0-1500 meters.  Black spruce usually 
grows on wet organic soils but productive stands also 
grow over deep humus, clays, loams, sands, coarse

till, and shallow soil mantles.  It is often a postfire 
pioneer on both uplands and peatlands.  In fire-prone 
areas, such as upland ridges, fire usually results in the 
immediate reestablishment and eventual dominance 
of black spruce, because it produces seed at an early 
age. 
 
Establishment 
Black spruce may produce a few cones as early as 10 
years of age, but maximum production occurs 
between 100 and 200 years.  Heavy seed years occur 
at intervals of 2-6 years and peak crops every 4 years 
over most of the range.  Fires open the cones and 
accelerate seed release for pe riods of 60 days to 2-3 
years, depending on fire intensity.  Viable seed may 
be dispersed from a cone for up to 25 years, 
providing a seed supply after fires occur.   
 
Sphagnum mosses can provide a continuously moist 
seedbed for black spruce, but growth of seedling 
growth may be slow here because of inadequate 
nutrients.  Feathermosses may provide a suitable 
seedbed during wet years but may dry out before 
penetration by the seedling root.  Moist mineral soils 
usually provide good seedbeds, but exposed mineral 
soil may be too waterlogged or subject to frost 
heaving in some low-lying areas.  Fires that 
completely remove the surface organic layer usually 
provide good seedbeds.  Seedling mortality seems to 
be highest on burned duff and lowest on moss and 
mineral soil surfaces with adequate moisture.  
Seedlings develop in as little as 10% of full light 
intensity, but survival and growth are much better in 
the open.     
 
Layering is an important means of reproduction in 
black spruce on some sites, especially where rapidly 
growing mosses cover lower branches.  Such layering 
develops most abundantly in the more open-grown 
stands and less frequently in dense stands with higher 
wood volume.  It also is common at tree line, 
probably as a result of depression of the lower 
branches by snow, and accounts for the presence of 
"candelabrum" spruce, a circular clump originating 
from one individual with the tallest tree in the center. 
 
The average maximum age for black spruce is about 
200 years, but ages up to 300 years have been 
reported.   
 
Management  
Black spruce grows more slowly than many 
associated trees and shrubs, and mature trees in 
spruce-fir stands apparently respond better to release 
than white spruce and subalpine fir.  Many  intermediate and suppressed black spruce in swamp 
stands, however, die after heavy cutting  
 
Clearcutting in strips or patches is generally 
considered to be the best silvicultural system for 
managing black spruce.  Sa
tisfactory reestablishment 
after clearcutting requires an adequate seed source 
and often some kind of site preparation.  Uneven-
aged or all-aged management is best applied on poor 
sites where stands are windfirm and have abundant 
layering.     
 
Eastern dwarf-mistletoe causes serious problems for 
black spruce in the Lake St ates and eastern Canada.  
The spruce budworm and various other insects are 
damaging.  Black spruce is easily killed by both 
ground and crown fires.  Peatland stands have a low 
risk except during very dry periods 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Fernald, M.L. 1950. Gray’s manual of botany .  Ed. 8. 
American Book Co., New York.   
 
Little, E.L., Jr. and S.S. Pauley. 1958. A natural 
hybrid between black and white spruce in Minnesota.  
Amer. Midl.  Naturalist 60:202-211.  
 
Morgenstern, E.K. an d J.L. Farrar. 1964. 
Introgressive hybridization in red spruce and black 
spruce. Univ. Toronto, Fac. Forest., Techn. Rep. 4.  
 
Roland, A.E. and E.C. Smith. 1969.  The flora of 
Nova Scotia . Nova Scotia Museum, Halifax.   
 
Rouleau, E. and G. Lamoureux 1992.  Atlas of the 
vascular plants of the island of Newfoundland and 
the islands of St. Pierre et Miquelon .  Groupe 
Fleurbec, St. Henri de  Levis, Quebec.   
 
Sytsma, K.J. 2004. Wisconsin State Herbarium . 
(http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora/scripts/detail.a
sp?SpCode=PICMAR, 20 December 2004).  
University of Wisconsin, Madison.   
 
Taylor, R.J. 1993.   Picea.  Pp. 369-373 in: Flora of 
North America, north of  Mexico. vol. 2. Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York.

Teeri, J.A. 1969.  The phytogeography of subalpine 
black spruce in New England.  Rhodora 71:1-6.   
 
Viereck, L.A. and W.F. Johnston 1990.   Picea 
mariana .  Pp. 227-237 in: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala  Silvics of  North America. vol 1 . USDA 
Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, 
D.C.  
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Gerald Guala 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 20Dec2004 rln; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.