Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
WHEATGRASS 
Pascopyrum smithii  (Rydb.) A. 
Love 
Plant Symbol = PASM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron smithii , Elytrigia smithii 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Western wheatgrass is 
palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is 
a preferred feed for cattle, horses, deer, and elk in 
spring and is considered a desirable feed for sheep 
and antelope in spring.  It is considered a desirable 
feed for cattle, horses, and elk in summer, fall and 
winter.  In spring, the protein levels can be fairly high 
and decreases as it matures and cures out.  This  species is generally a relatively low forage producer, 
but can be utilized as native hay.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation
: Western wheatgrass is 
well adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils 
because of its strong spread ing rhizomes.  It does not 
compete well with aggressive introduced grasses 
during the establishment period, but is very 
compatible with slower developing natives such as 
bluebunch wheatgrass ( Pseuoroegneria spicata ), 
thickspike wheatgrass ( Elymus lanceolatus ssp. 
lanceolatus ), streambank wheatgrass (Elymus 
lanceolatus  ssp. psammophilus ), and needlegrass 
species ( Nasella spp., Stipa spp., and  Ptilagrostis  
spp.).  Stands are generally slow to develop and may 
be non-existent the establishment year.  However, 
over 50 percent stands are typically achieved by the 
end of the fourth growing season.  Poor germination 
accounts for the poor initial  establishment and strong 
rhizome spread accounts fo r stand development in 
later years.  Its relative drought tolerance combined 
with strong rhizomatous root systems and adaptation 
to a variety of soils make  this species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receiving  12 to 20 inches annual 
precipitation.  Its low growth form, vigorous sod, and 
low maintenance requirements make it ideal for 
ground cover purposes.  This grass can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover and to stabilize ditchbanks, 
dikes, and roadsides. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS
 
Status 
This is a native species.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s cu rrent status, such as, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Western 
wheatgrass  Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) A. Love 
(formerly) is perhaps one of the best known and most 
common of our native grasses.  It is long-lived with 
an extensive, very strong, rhizomatous root systems 
combined with a few deep roots. 
 
Stems arise singly or in small clusters and grow from 
1 to 3 feet tall.  The sheaths are hairy and the purplish 
auricles are clawlike and clasp the stem.  The seed 
spike is stiff, erect and about 2 to 6 inches long.  The 
awn-tipped (to 5mm) lemmas, paleas and glumes are 
generally glabrous or short-hairy.  The ligule is 
inconspicuous and leaves ar e flat, very rough on the

upper surface and margins, blue-green in color, with 
very prominent veins.  Because of this bluish color, 
western wheatgrass is sometimes called bluestem or 
bluejoint wheatgrass.  
 
Distribution 
It is a cool season perennial grass common to moist, 
sometimes saline to saline-sodic, medium to fine 
textured soils in the Great Plains, Southwest, and 
Intermountain regions of the western United States.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Western wheatgrass is similar to 
thickspike and streambank wheatgrasses in 
appearance.  However, it is  coarser, its rhizomatous 
trait is more aggressive, and its coloration is blue-
green rather than green.  It 
is not as drought tolerant 
as thickspike or 
streambank wheatgrass.  
In comparison to 
thickspike and 
streambank wheatgrasses, 
it greens up and heads out 
later and total biomass 
production is generally 
higher.  Thickspike and 
streambank wheatgrasses 
do better on medium to 
coarse textured soils.  
Streambank wheatgrass 
can be found on slightly 
heavy to medium to 
coarse textured soils.  
Western wheatgrass may 
be a better choice on 
heavy textured soils if 
rainfall is high enough. 
Western wheatgrass tolerates saline and saline-sodic 
soil conditions, poor drainage, and moderately severe 
drought.  It will tolerate spring flooding, high 
watertables, and considerable silt deposition.  It is 
very cold tolerant, moderately shade tolerant, and 
tolerant of fire if in the dormant stage.  Recovery 
from fire however, is slow.  It will not tolerate long 
periods of inundation.  
 
On native sites western wheatgrass is most abundant 
in the 10 to 20 inch annual precipitation zones.  
Seeded varieties do best with 12 to 20 inches of 
precipitation.  The natural geographic range of 
western wheatgrass is from southern Ontario and 
northern Minnesota, west to British Columbia, and  south to west central California and western Texas 
from 1000 to 9000 feet elevation.  Western 
wheatgrass is a component of many native plant 
communities and grows in association with blue 
grama (
Bouteloua gracilis ), buffalograss (Buchloe 
dactyloides ), needlegrasses (Stipa  spp.), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), rough fescue 
( Festuca scabra ), Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis ), 
prairie junegrass ( Koeleria cristata), and basin 
wildrye ( Elymus cinereus). 
 
Planting: Seed of western wheatgrass should be 
seeded with a drill at a depth of ¾ to ½ inch or less 
on medium to fine textured soils.  Single species 
seeding rates recommended for western wheatgrass is 
6 to 12 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) or 13 to 26 PLS 
per square foot.  If used as a component of a mix, 
adjust to percent of mix desired.  For mined lands and 
other harsh critical areas, the seeding rate should be 
increased to 18 to 23 pounds PLS or 40 to 50 PLS per 
square foot.  Mulching and light irrigations are 
beneficial for stand establishment.  
B&W Texas A&M Univ.  (1997) 
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
or in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late 
summer (August - mid September) seedings are not 
recommended unless irrigation is available.  It can 
also be established using sod.  Seedling vigor is poor 
to fair; stands are generally slow to develop and may 
be non-existent the establishment year.  However, 
over 50 percent stands are typically achieved by the 
end of the fourth growing season.  Poor germination 
accounts for the poor initial  establishment and strong 
rhizome spread accounts fo r stand development in 
later years.  
 
It is moderately compatible with other species and 
can be used in seeding mixtures.  It should not be 
seeded with strongly competitive introduced species.  
Under favorable conditions it can become a good 
weed barrier. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce seed development.  Grasshoppers and other 
insects may also damage new stands and use of 
pesticides may be required. 
 
Management 
Western wheatgrass “greens up” in March to early 
April and matures in mid-July to August.  It makes 
good spring growth, fair summer growth and good 
fall growth if moisture is available.

Western wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It is a preferred feed for 
cattle, horses, deer, and elk in spring and is 
considered a desirable feed for sheep and antelope in 
spring.  It is considered a desirable feed for cattle, 
horses, and elk in summer, fall, and winter.  In 
spring, the protein levels can be fairly high and 
decreases as it matures and cures out.  This species is 
generally a relatively low forage producer, but can be 
utilized as native hay in areas where it is dense.  
Irrigation will improve western wheatgrass stands 
and aid in stand establishment.  Weed control and 
fertilization help with stand establishment and overall 
production. 
 
Established stands can withstand heavy grazing.  
Rotational grazing systems on western wheatgrass 
are recommended and 40 to 50 percent of the annual 
growth (3 to 4 inch stubble) should remain following 
grazing.  Stands of western wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they have firmly established.  Six inches 
of new growth should be attained in spring before 
grazing is allowed in established stands. 
 
Western wheatgrass is a low maintenance plant 
requiring little additional treatment or care.  
However, on better sites, stands can become 
sodbound and may need attention in the form of 
fertilization and moderate spring/fall deferment.  
Stands may also benefit from ripping if sodbound 
conditions occur to increase forage production.  Care 
should be taken to avoid excessive tillage, because 
stands may be damaged.  
 
Once established, western wheatgrass is very 
competitive with weedy species.  Its primary pests 
include grasshoppers, ergot, and stem and leaf rusts. 
 
Environmental Concerns : Western wheatgrass is 
long-lived, spreads primarily via vegetative means 
(rhizomes), but also may also spread via seed 
distribution.  It is not considered "weedy", but can 
spread into adjoining vegetative communities under 
ideal climatic and environmental conditions.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of western  wheatgrass has been very 
successful under cultivated  conditions.  Row spacing 
of 24 to 36 inches are recommended (although 
rhizomatous, it should be maintained in rows).  
Cultivation will be needed to maintain rows.  
 
Seed fields are productive for three to five years. 
Average production of 75 to 150 pounds per acre can 
be expected under dryland conditions in 14 inch plus  rainfall areas.  Average production of 150 to 300 
pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated 
conditions.  Harvesting is best completed by direct 
combining or swathing in the hard dough stage, 
followed by combining of the cured windrows.  
Stands are prone to lodging and careful application of 
irrigation is recommended.  Seed is generally 
harvested in late July to mid August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed are available through 
the appropriate state Crop
 Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
‘Arriba’ western wheatgrass  was released for dryland 
hay production, grazing, and conservation seedings in 
the western part of the Central Great Plains and 
Southwestern United States.  It was collected from 
native plants growing near Flagler, Colorado.  Seed is 
commercially available and the USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Los Lunas, New Mexico maintain 
Breeder and Foundation seed. 
 
‘Flintlock’ western wheatgrass is a broadbased 
cultivar derived from seed collections made in 
Kansas and Nebraska.  It is recommended for 
conservation seeding, dryland hay production, and 
grazing in the Central Great Plains.  Seed is 
commercially available.  
 
‘Barton’ western wheatgra ss was a native collection 
from clay bottomlands in central Kansas.  It is a 
strongly rhizomatous, l eafy accession with 
intermediate growth between the northern and 
southern types.  Barton is high in forage and seed 
production.  Commercial seed is available.  Breeder 
and Foundation seed is maintained at the USDA, 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas. 
 
‘Rosana’ western wheatgra ss is a northern type 
collected in east-central M ontana near Forsythe.  It 
was selected for seedling vigor and ease of 
establishment.  Rosana is recommended for reseeding 
depleted rangelands and the reclamation of disturbed 
land in the Northern Great Plains and Intermountain 
regions.  Rhizomes produce a tight sod. Seed is 
commercially available.  Breeder and Foundation 
seed is maintained at  the USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Bridger, Montana. 
 
‘Rodan’ western wheatgrass is a northern type 
originating from seed collect ed on the Missouri River 
bottom in central North Dakota.  It was selected for 
drought-tolerance, leafiness,  and forage vigor.  It is 
moderately rhizomatous and forms dense swards.

Leaves are thinner and less heavily veined than other 
released cultivars.  It was developed by USDA, ARS, 
Northern Great Plains Research Center, Mandan, 
North Dakota, in cooperation with USDA, NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, North Dakota, and 
the North Dakota Agricultural Experiment Station.  
Seed is commercially available.  Breeder and 
Foundation seed is maintained at USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Bismarck, North Dakota.    
 
‘Walsh’ western wheatgrass was released by 
Agriculture Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta.  It was 
selected for rhizome development, freedom from 
disease, and improved forage  and seed yields.  It is a 
northern type originating from seed collected in the 
Northern Great Plains of southern Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, Canada.  Seed is commercially 
available.  
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Carlson, J.R. & M.E. Barkworth 1997.   Elymus 
wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Triticeae, Poaceae) .  
Phytologia 83:312-330.  
 
Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H. Holmgren, J. 
L. Reveal, & P. K.  Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora .  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.   Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000413.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State  Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp;10feb03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.