Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SCREWBEAN 
Prosopis pubescens Benth. 
Plant Symbol = PRPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Various kinds of mesquite trees 
provided staple foods for indigenous people of 
southern California, the Great Basin and the 
Southwest and their seed pods are still highly relished 
today.  Screwbean pods we re eaten by the Maricopa, 
Hualapai, Pima, Cahuilla, Luiseno, Mohave, 
Panamint and Death Valley Shoshone, the 
Chemehuevi, Ute, Gosiute, and Southern Paiute 
groups as far east as the edge of the Colorado 
Plateau.  The pods can be harvested at two different 
times, in the spring, while still green and consumed 
raw as snacks or in the late summer when the pods 
are ripe.  If collected in the late summer, traditionally 
they were placed in bedrock mortars or tree-stump 
mortars and pounded to fine flour using stone pestles.  
The meal was set out to dry and then stored in 
baskets in grass- or bark-lined pits in rock-shelters or 
caves.  Basketfuls of meal were also kept in 
indigenous homes and added to cooked agave or 
made into small cakes.  An other way to prepare the 
pods was to cook the screwbeans in pits covered with 
earth and left to stand three or four days, and then 
spread to dry.  The mass was then pounded in a 
mortar and the fine meal eaten as pinole. 
 
The plant was also important medicinally.  The Pima 
used the bark of the root of the screwbean as a 
dressing for wounds.  There were two ways to 
prepare the dressing and then these concoctions were 
applied at different times.  First, the bark was boiled  and the liquid applied to the fresh wound.  Second, 
the bark was ground up in a mortar, dried, and again 
pounded into a fine meal in a metate and this powder 
was applied to the wound after a few days.  The Pima 
also used a tea made from 
the roots of screwbean to 
regulate a woman's menstrual troubles.  A gummy 
exudate sometimes found on the bark was gathered 
and soaked in water and the Moapa Paiute used the 
resulting liquid as eyewash.  The large branches were 
used in construction such as fencing and binding for 
large granary baskets made by the Pima, and the 
Cahuilla sometimes used the smaller branches for 
bows.  The mescal cutter, a long pole that was used 
by the Cahuilla to sever agave leaves was made of 
screwbean. The root wood is good for firewood for 
cooking.   
Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Wildlife : Screwbean is an important tree to wildlife.  
The seeds are eaten by jackrabbits, Gambel quail, 
songbirds, various small mammals, and domestic 
livestock.  Western chipmunks, ground squirrels, 
pocket mice, and various species of kangaroo and 
wood rats consume the foliage. Different birds also 
nest in the tree's canopy.  The early spring growth 
also furnishes food for domestic livestock. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
 M. Kat Anderson USDA NRCS NPDC 
@ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  This upright, 
deciduous shrub or tree reaches  up to 10 m in height.

It has gnarled, shaggy multiple trunks and forms a 
round spreading crown.  The ascending branches 
have pairs of spines that are 4-12 mm long.  The 
compound leaves are hairy and measure 2-6 cm long, 
with as many as eighteen tiny leaflets per leaf.  The 
leaflets are arranged on the two-branched prongs of a 
Y-shaped leaf stem.  The yellow flowers have fused 
petals and are in a raceme, 4-8 cm. and spikelike.  
The dark tan fruit is tightly coiled, 3-5 cm and 
appears in pod clusters of 2 to 15.  The pods are 
persistent and often exit holes can be seen on each 
pod, evidence that tiny bruchid beetles have 
deposited their nurseries inside.  The tan seeds are 
very small, about 3 mm.   The pollen of screwbean is 
toxic to honeybees.  The plants crown-sprout after 
injury to the trunk or after cutting.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is uncommon in California, found 
mainly in the San Bernardino Mountains and the 
desert.  It is more common in the southwestern 
United States in southern Nevada, southwestern 
Utah, southern Arizona and New Mexico, western 
Texas and northern Mexico in Baja California, 
Sonora, and Chihuahua.  It  is found in creek and river 
bottoms, sandy/gravely washes, or ravines from 100-
1300 m. 
 
 Steve Hurst USDA ARS Systematic Botany @ PLANTS 
 
 
Establishment 
Gather the seed pods and take the seeds out of the 
pods.  Some seed lots may need scarification.  
Otherwise the seeds require no treatment.  Plant the 
seeds in a well-drained soil in deep pots. Sprinkle soil 
on top of the seeds and pl ace one-quarter inch gravel 
on top of the soil.  The seeds should be spaced one- half inch apart and the pots
 placed in partial shade.  
The seeds germinate best at warm soil and air 
temperatures.  Water the pots right away.  Keep the 
pots moist if the rains are insufficient.  As soon as the 
plants form one true leaf,  transplant one plant per pot 
and water.  Keep the pots damp.  Plant each plant out 
in the ground the following winter when dormant in 
full sun and well-drained soil.  Protect the plants 
from wildlife.  Water the plants and keep them damp 
if the rains are insufficient.  Also do some watering in 
summer.  Continue to water throughout the life of the 
plant once in awhile.  Mesquite should be lightly 
damp all summer long.  
 
Management 
Screwbean can tolerate pruning and can be shaped 
into a small tree with an  exposed trunk or let grown 
naturally with the branches touching the ground. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This plant is available through some of the native 
plant nurseries throughout its range.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel. 1972.   Temalpakh: 
Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of plants . 
Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Castetter, E.F. & W.H. Bell. 1942.   Pima and Papago 
Indian agriculture .  The University of New Mexico 
Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
 
Dobyns, H.F. 1956.   Pre-conquest Hualapai plant 
food gather ing.  An unpublished report to Marks and 
Marks, Phoenix, Arizona and Strasser, Spielberg, 
Fried and Frank, Washington, D.C. 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986 .  Subsistence.  Pages 64-97 IN:  
Handbook of North American Indians. Volume 11, 
Great Basin.  Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
D.C. 
 
McClintock, E. 1993.   Prosopis.  Pages 641-642 IN:  
The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California.  J.

Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.  An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Mielke, J. 1993.   Native plants for southwestern 
landscapes .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Nabhan, G.P. 1985.   Mesquite as mirror, mesquite as 
a harbor .  Pages 60-74 IN: Gathering the Desert.  
University of Arizona Pr ess, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Phillips, J. 1987.   Southwestern landscaping with 
native plants .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Sante 
Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Rea, A.M. 1997.   At the desert's green edge: An 
ethnobotany of the Gila River Pima .  University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Shreve, F. and I.L. Wiggins 1964.   Prosopis.  Pages 
602-605 IN: Vegetation and Flora of the Sonoran 
Desert.  Volume I.  Stanford University Press, 
Standford, California. 
 
Stewart, O. 1942.  Culture element distributions 18 
Ute-Southern Paiute .  University of California 
Anthropological Records 4:3. 
 
Train, P., J.R. Henrichs, & W.A. Archer 1957.  
Contributions toward a flora of Nevada No. 45: 
Medicinal uses of plants by Indian tribes of Nevada.   
USDA, ARS, Beltsville, Maryland. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California  
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political  beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.