Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
         
SANDBERG 
BLUEGRASS  
Poa secunda Presl 
Plant Symbol = POSE 
including: 
P. ampla  Merr. (POAM) 
P. canbyi (Scribn.) Howell (POCA)  P. gracillima  Vasey (POGR) 
P. juncifolia  Scribn. (POJU) 
P. nevadensis Vasey (PONE3) 
P. sandbergii  Vasey (POSA12) 
P. scabrella  (Thurb.) Benth (POSC)
 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
  Mark Majerus, Montana Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana 
 
Alternate Names 
P. ampla = Big bluegrass 
P. canbyi  = Canby’s bluegrass 
P. gracillima  = Pacific or Slender bluegrass 
P. juncifolia  = Alkali bluegrass 
P. nevadensis  = Nevada bluegrass 
P. sandbergii = Sandberg bluegrass 
P. scabrella  = Pine bluegrass  Description 
General
: The Sandberg bluegrass complex is 
composed of cool-season (with some summer active 
ecotypes) perennial bunch grasses. Most accessions 
mature early in the growing  season.  This grass is one 
of the first to green up in the spring, but is commonly 
cured and dormant by early summer.  The plant 
usually occurs as small tufts, with soft basal leaves 
and few to many flowering stalks that are naked 
except for one or two small leaves.  The leaves have 
the typical bluegrass characteristics of prow-shaped 
tip and double groove down the center of the upper 
leaf surface.  Sandberg bluegrass has a prominent 
membranaceous, acute ligule.  The seeds are glabrous 
except for short crisp hairs on the lower portion of 
the lemmas.  The flowers are  in narrow panicles that 
are somewhat spreading during anthesis.  Plants 
seldom exceed 60 cm (24 in)  in height.  Plants of the 
Sandberg bluegrass complex have extensive, deep 
penetrating, coarse, fibrous roots that make them 
quite drought tolerant and resistant to grazing and 
trampling. Species within the complex have 
approximately 2,000,000 seeds per kilogram 
(925,000 seeds per pound).  
 
Distribution : Plants occur throughout Western North 
America with disjunct populations in Quebec and 
Chile. For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Taxonomy 
The type specimen for  Poa secunda was collected 
between 1790 and 1794 in “cordilleras Chilensibus” 
by Thaddeus Haenke and was described by Presl in 
1830.  In 1892, Sandberg  collected a plant near 
Lewiston, Idaho which was described the following 
year by Vasey as  Poa sandbergii. Presl’s work is 
recognized as having taxonomic priority due to its 
earlier date (Arnow 1981). 
 
The Sandberg bluegrass complex has included up to 
45 named species including eight species recognized 
by Hitchcock (1935): Canby’s bluegrass ( P. canbyi), 
big bluegrass  ( P. ampla ), little mountain bluegrass 
( P. curtifolia), Pacific bluegrass ( P. gracillima), 
alkali bluegrass ( P. juncifolia),  Nevada bluegrass ( P. 
nevadensis ), Pine bluegrass  ( P. scabrella)  and the 
traditional Sandberg bluegrass ( P. sandbergii) 
(Arnow 1981). Kellogg (1985a, 1985b) however, 
demonstrated that for all species except P. curtifolia , 
the characters used to separate the species were

unreliable. Many were often environmentally 
determined, for example plants turning red when dry, 
leaf rolling and leaf glaucusness. Research has shown 
that under garden and greenhouse conditions these 
characters don’t exhibit themselves as they do under  
field conditions (Kellogg 1985b). Other characters 
vary so widely within a population that they are not 
reliable to delineate groups within the complex.  
 
Based on these findings, Kellogg (1985a) 
synonomized the entire complex with the exception 
of  P. curtifolia, a well-defined species endemic to 
serpentine outcrops in the Wenatchee Mountains in 
Kittitas and Chelan Counties, Washington (Hitchcock 
and others 1971). 
 
Variation in Sandberg bluegrass re leases; left to right: ‘Sherman’ 
big bluegrass, High Plains  and Mountain Home Sandberg 
bluegrass.  
Derek J. Tilley, USDA NRCS Idaho PMC, Aberdeen, Idaho
 
 
Although evidence cu rrently points to a large, highly 
variable suite of forms making up the Sandberg 
bluegrass complex, the authors of this paper believe 
that unique phenotypes exist and the separation of 
these forms is still useful in describing ecological 
sites, predicting revegetation performance and in 
making land management decisions. In this light, the 
authors have decided to provide descriptions here of 
the seven separate forms of Sandberg bluegrass 
recognized by Hitchcock (1935), minus  P. curtifolia, 
as an aid to land managers.  
 
The following taxonomic key taken from Cronquist 
and others (1977) should be useful in separating the 
seven species of the Sandberg bluegrass complex. 
 
1. Lemmas crisp puberulent to nearly glabrous, the   
    pubescence sometimes co nfined to the very base.  
     2. Panicles open, the lower branches nearly at    
         right angles to the axis; culms often decumbent  
         at the base; plants summer flowering 
         …………………………………… P. gracillima 
     2. Panicles contract ed or somewhat open; culms  
         usually erect.            3. Plants relatively small, culms mostly less 
              than 30 cm tall; basal leaves forming a short  
              dense tuft, 3-10 cm high; panicles 2-7 cm  
              long; mostly spring flowering...
P. sandbergii 
          3. Plants larger, mostly more than 30 cm    
              tall; basal leaves looser, the tuft 5-30 cm 
              high; panicles 6-16 cm long; mostly summer  
              flowering 
               4. Basal tuft of leaves 3-15 cm high;  
                   panicles 4-12 cm long…........ P. scabrella 
               4. Basal tuft of leaves 15-30 cm high;  
                   panicles 9-16 cm long……….... P. canbyi 
1. Lemmas usually glabrous, sometimes minutely 
    scaberulous 
     5. Ligules decurrent, long, 1.5-6.5 mm long, 
         acuminate or sharply acute…… .P.  nevadensis 
     5. Ligules not obviously decurrent, short, 1-2 mm 
         long, rounded or obtuse to truncate. 
          6. Blades involute, mostly less than 1.5 mm  
               broad, greenish; plants 20-70 cm tall;  
               usually growing in alkaline soils 
               ...................................................P. juncifolia  
          6. Blades mostly flat, 1.5-3.5 mm broad, often  
              glaucous; plants robust, 60-180 cm tall; 
              growing in non-alkaline soils……... P. ampla   
 
‘Sherman’ big bluegrass.  USDA NRCS. 
 
Big bluegrass ( Poa ampla) 
This is the most robust species within the Sandberg 
bluegrass complex. Culms r each 60 to 130 cm (24 to 
48 in) tall, with basal leaves growing to 40 cm (16 in) 
long and 1.5 to 3.5 mm (1/16 to 1/8 in) wide. The 
leaves are typically blui sh-green and somewhat 
glaucus. Panicles range from 10 to 18 cm (4 to 7 in) 
long and are narrow with densely arranged spikelets. 
This species occupies sagebrush slopes, mid-
elevation meadows and openings in aspen stands. Big

bluegrass is notable for early green-up, greater forage 
production and its importance to range management.  
Canby’s bluegrass (Poa canbyi) 
Canby’s bluegrass bears green to glaucus leaves with 
culms to 80 cm (31 in) tall. The basal leaves are 
typically 15 to 30 cm (6 to 12 in) long and 1 to 3 mm 
(1/16 to 3/32 in) wide. The panicles are loose to 
compact with erect branches  growing to a length of 
16 cm (6 ¼ in). Plants of Canby’s bluegrass grow on 
open grassy or sagebrush slopes at middle elevations. 
In its native habitat this species actively grows during 
the late spring and matures by early July as opposed 
to  P. sandbergii  (Cronquist and others 1977) 
 
Pacific or Slender bluegrass ( Poa gracillima) 
This is another summer  active species. Culms range 
from 20 to 50 cm (8 to 20 in) tall. Leaf blades are flat 
and lax from 5 to 15 cm (2 to 5 in) long and 0.7 to 2 
mm (1/32 to 1/16 in) wide. The panicles are open and 
pyramidal. Lemmas of Pacific bluegrass have longer 
hairs on the keel than  P. sandbergii. This species can 
be found in meadows, stream banks and rocky slopes 
from British Columbia to the California Sierras, with 
populations also found in northern Nevada, northern 
Utah and Colorado. 
 
Nevada bluegrass ( Poa nevadensis) 
This is the most robust species within the Sandberg 
bluegrass complex next to  P. ampla. This species is a 
perennial bunchgrass with culms as much as 100 cm 
(39 in) tall. Basal leaves ty pically reach a length of 
25 cm (10 in) with a width of 1 to 3 mm (1/16 to 3/32 
in). Nevada bluegrass has distinctive long acuminate 
ligules from 1.5 to as much as 6 mm (1/16 to ¼ in) 
long. The narrow panicles are  10 to 18 cm (4 to 7 in) 
long with yellowish-green to purplish-tinged 
spikelets. Nevada bluegrass can be found in mountain 
foothill to mountain areas in sagebrush communities 
including mountain meadows from Alaska to 
southern California and east to Arizona, Colorado 
and Montana.  
 
Alkali bluegrass (Poa juncifolia ) 
This species is regarded as being closely related to  P. 
ampla  (Cronquist and others 1977) and it has been 
shown that when grown under garden conditions the 
differences between the two species are lost 
(Hitchcock and others 1969). Typically the plants are 
smaller with culms growing 30 to 70 cm (12 to 26 in) 
tall. Leaf blades are tightly rolled and less than 2 mm 
(1/16 in) wide. Panicles are narrow, 7 to 15 cm (2 ¾ 
to 6 in) long with short, ascending branches. This 
species prefers moist or  dry alkaline meadows from 
the sagebrush zone to mountain communities from 
British Columbia and south to South Dakota,  Wyoming, Nevada, and Utah. Populations have also 
been found in New Mexico. 
 
Sandberg bluegrass (
Poa sandbergii) 
This is probably the most common bluegrass species 
in the Intermountain West, at least in the drier 
portions of the region, and is an important species for 
small animals and birds in spring and fall (Cronquist 
and others 1977). It is not considered an important 
forage species for livestock or large wildlife species. 
Plants are relatively small  with culms reaching 20 to 
35 cm (8 to 14 in) tall and basal leaves 3 to 5 cm (1 to 
2 in) long. Plants occur in dry areas in sagebrush and 
mountain shrub communities, and occasionally in 
alpine sites. 
 
Pine bluegrass ( Poa scabrella) 
This species can be tentatively separated from 
Canby’s bluegrass by its being a spring flowering 
species as opposed to summer, and from Sandberg 
bluegrass by its smaller size. However; it is 
admittedly very closely related to both and extremely 
difficult to separate when the species are found in 
close proximity to one another. Typically this species 
is found on relatively dry sites on sagebrush hills and 
forest lands at low to mid-elevations from British 
Columbia to Baja California, Nevada Utah and east 
to Colorado and Minnesota. 
 
 Pine bluegrass. http://www.tarl eton.edu/~range/Home/home.htm 
 
Uses 
Sandberg bluegrass species and the other spring 
ecotypes are palatable to livestock early in the 
growing season, becoming less desirable during the 
summer when cured.  Summer growing ecotypes are

palatable longer into the season. By autumn Sandberg 
bluegrass is frequently selected again as an available 
alternative. Deer, pronghorn antelope, and bighorn 
sheep utilize Sandberg bluegrass forage and birds and 
small mammals utilize the seed (Johnson and Larson 
1999).   
 
Because of the small stature and early maturity, most 
of the species of Sandberg bluegrass do not provide 
much usable forage; however, big bluegrass and 
Nevada bluegrass can be important forage producers 
for larger animals.  Sandberg bluegrass is usually a 
minor component of many grassland communities, 
but is still considered one of the six most important 
rangeland grasses of the Intermountain and Pacific 
Northwest regions (USDA Forest Service 1937).   
 
The anticipated use of commercially available 
Sandberg bluegrass seed is for inclusion in native 
mixtures for wildlife habitat, reclamation of disturbed 
sites, restoration of native rangeland and for 
conservation plantings. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Adaptation 
Sandberg bluegrass is consid ered an increaser in mid 
and short-grass prairies, mountain meadows, and 
foothills of south-central Canada and western United 
States (Dakotas west to Washington), south to 
Mexico (Hitchcock 1935) (Hitchcock & Cronquist 
1976).  It is found at elevations ranging from 100 to 
3,650 meters (300 to 12,000 ft).  It grows well on 
medium texture soils but is also common on 
badlands, ridge tops, and dry, stony, or sandy soils.  It 
is a pioneer species, one of the first grasses to 
colonize on disturbed sites.  Plants of the Sandberg 
bluegrass complex occupy a niche in bunchgrass 
plant communities. The primary area of use would 
include the northern Great Plains (Montana, 
Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Colorado), 
the Intermountain West including the Great Basin 
(Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Utah), and the 
Palouse country (Idaho, Oregon, Washington). 
 
Sandberg bluegrass is considered to be a facultative 
apomyct, reproducing primarily (but not limited to) 
agamospermy, or asexual seed production (Kellogg 
1987). Larson and others (2001) showed that genetic 
diversity within natural populations of Sandberg 
bluegrass was much greater than that in the releases 
Sherman or Canbar. Accordingly, releases, such as  Reliable Sandberg bluegrass germplasm, have been 
developed from multiple plant populations to ensure 
higher amounts of genetic diversity and greater 
adaptation (Waldron and others 2006). 
 
Establishment 
For best results, seed should be planted into a firm, 
weed-free seedbed, preferab
ly with a drill that will 
ensure a uniform seed pl acement of about 6 mm (1/8 
to 1/4 inch).  The small seed can be broadcast seeded, 
harrowed, and packed for good seed-soil contact; 
however, in dryland situations good precipitation at 
the time of germination is critical for emergence and 
establishment.  The full seeding rate is 1.7 kg/ha PLS 
(2.0 lb/ac PLS), but this species would seldom be 
seeded in a pure stand.  This species would normally 
be included in native seed mixtures at a rate of 0.3 to 
0.6 kg/ha PLS (1/4 to 1/2 lb/ac PLS).  Seeding in 
early spring is favored in areas that have early 
growing season moisture patterns such as the 
Northern Great Plains, while fall dormant seedings 
are preferred in winter rainfall areas such as the 
Columbia Basin and most of the Intermountain West. 
Sandberg bluegrass is considered a pioneer  species 
and is often one of the first grasses to respond to 
surface  manipulation of deteriorated rangeland.  
Sandberg bluegrass is a relatively short-lived grass, 
but often perpetuates itself through prolific seed set 
and shatter . 
 
Management  
Sandberg bluegrass will withstand heavy grazing and 
trampling, in part, because  of its early maturity and 
apparent dormancy during the summer and fall 
grazing period.  When planted in a native reclamation 
mix, it will be a minor component of the establishing 
plant community; therefore management should be 
based on other key species in the mixture.  Any new 
planting should be deferred from livestock grazing 
until it is well established which may require 1 to 3 
years (Schwendiman 1971).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Sandberg bluegrass is susceptible to stem and leaf 
rusts which can significantly decrease seed 
production (Mosman 2005). Rust outbreaks can be 
prevented and controlled by applying a 14 oz rate of 
systemic fungicides such  as Propiconazole and 
Azoxystrobin (‘Quilt’ 
tm).  Always follow the label in 
any pesticide application. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Sandberg bluegrass is a native perennial grass that is 
considered an increaser  under heavy grazing 
conditions and is a pioneer (early colonizing species) 
on rangeland disturbances  or surface manipulated

sites.  This species is a bunchgrass and seed shatter 
does not travel far from the parent plant.  It occupies 
space in bunchgrass plant communities and assists 
with deterring invasive species encroachment due to 
its extensive root system.  
 
It is recommended in mixtures on sites needing an 
early spring perennial grass to compete against 
annual weeds. Sandberg blue grass is known to fill in 
interspaces between la rger bunchgrasses and 
effectively impedes the spread of cheatgrass (Monsen 
and others 2004). Seed may be consumed by 
songbirds, upland game birds, and small mammals 
and spread through feces.  Sandberg bluegrass is not 
aggressive, and therefore is not considered to be 
invasive.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed should be planted in rows using a drill that will 
ensure a uniform 6 mm (1/4 inch) planting depth.  
Seeding is best in early sp ring (April 1 to May 15).  
Seed in rows with at l east 45-60 cm (18-24 in) 
spacing on irrigated sites and 75-90 cm (30-36 in) on 
dryland sites.   
 
Seed production should not be attempted on dryland 
sites receiving less than  380 mm (15 inches) of 
annual precipitation.  Seed  of this species matures 
early, so a long growing se ason is not necessary.  
However, seed production should not be attempted in 
areas that have a high probability of a killing frost 
past May 15
th.   Commercial seed production fields of 
Sandberg bluegrass will not produce seed the first 
(establishment) year.  Seed production fields should 
be established using a rate of 150 to 250 seeds/linear 
meter of row (50-80 PLS/linear foot). This will 
equate to 0.6 to 1.2 kg/ha (0.5 to 1 lb/ac) of pure live 
seed.  Because of the small seed size, seeding rates 
are often in the neighborhood of 2.2 kg/ha (2 lb/ac) 
because of the difficulty in metering such a small 
volume of seed through a drill.   
 
Seeding in wide-spaced rows facilitates weed control 
and allows for more robust plant development 
resulting in optimum seed production.  Close 
cultivation should occur only during the 
establishment year.  As the stand matures, cultivation 
should be further away from the row, allowing 
tillering from the edges and preventing damage to 
surface roots.  There are se veral broadleaf herbicides 
that are registered for us e in grass seed production 
fields, however, options  are limited for chemical 
control of annual grassy weeds. 
 
The average harvest date in south-central Montana 
ranges from June 24 to August 19; the harvest date  varying with spring and early summer climatic 
conditions.  Good seed production can be expected 
during the second and third years of production with 
seed production dropping off drastically the fourth 
year.  Expected seed production is 85-175 kg/ha (75-
150 lbs/ac) on dryland and 110-445 kg/ha (100-400 
lbs/ac) on irrigated sites.  Seed ripening is uniform 
enough that seed can be
 direct combined, but 
swathing and combining from a cured windrow is the 
preferred method of harvest. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Various "ecotypes" should be utilized within a 
reasonable geographic range from the original source, 
since available releases are primarily source 
identified or selected germplasm releases and have 
not been progeny tested to determine their range of 
adaptation and performance. 
 
Service  big bluegrass ( Poa ampla) comes from a 
collection made east of Whitehorse, Yukon Territory, 
Canada. It is intended for use in reclamation, native 
habitat restoration and erosion control throughout 
most of Alaska (Alderson and Sharp 1994). Breeder 
seed is available through the Alaska Plant Materials 
Center, Palmer, Alaska. 
 
‘Sherman’  big bluegrass ( Poa ampla) was collected 
from a native population near Moro, Sherman 
County, Oregon in 1932 and this cultivar was 
released in 1945 by the Washington, Idaho and 
Oregon Agricultural Experiment Stations and the 
Pullman Washington Plant Materials Center.  This is 
a large stature bunchgrass growing to nearly 1 meter 
tall (Alderson and Sharp 1994). It is intended for use 
in range reseeding, cropla nd retirement plantings, and 
revegetation of disturbed lands in mountain brush 
communities and openings in aspen and conifer 
forests. It is best adapted  to areas that receive 10-24 
inches of annual precipitation.  Plants of Sherman are 
readily eaten by livesto ck and large game. 
Foundation seed is available through Washington 
State Crop Improvement Association, and breeder 
seed is maintained by the Pullman, Washington Plant 
Materials Center. 
 
‘Canbar’  Canby’s bluegrass ( Poa canbyi) is a 
cultivar release and was selected from a single 
collection made in the Blue Mountains, Columbia 
County, Washington. It is adapted to sites receiving 
10 to 24 inches annual precipitation and is intended 
for use in basin, Wyoming and mountain big 
sagebrush plant communities in western states. 
Canbar should be used in a mixture on sites needing 
an early spring perennial grass to compete against

annual weeds. Canbar is known to fill in interspaces 
between larger bunchgrasses and effectively impedes 
the spread of cheatgrass (Monsen and others 2004). 
Foundation seed is available through the Washington 
State Crop Improvement Association. Breeder seed is 
maintained by the Pullman, Washington Plant 
Materials Center. 
 
Opportunity Selected Germplasm Nevada bluegrass 
(Poa nevadensis)  was released in 2008 from the 
Bridger Plant Materials Center. This is the first 
release of the Nevada bluegrass type to the 
commercial seed industry. The Nevada bluegrass 
type is a more robust, taller, significantly more 
productive and later maturing grass than the 
Sandberg bluegrass type. The original collection of 
this seed came from a site near Wisdom Junction 
along Highway 1 east of Anaconda, Montana. This 
site was severely contaminated with heavy metals 
from smelter fallout and other mine tailing sources. 
This release is a late maturing, large stature bluegrass 
with folded leaves similar to big bluegrass and long 
ligules. It is best adapted to 2000 to 6500 feet (610 to 
1980 m), native to drastically disturbed sites in the 10 
to 18 inch mean annual precipitation zones. This 
collection has performed well on sites with low pH 
and contamination by heavy metals.  G
1 (equivalent 
to Foundation) seed is  available to commercial 
growers through the Foundation Seed Program at 
Montana State University and the University of 
Wyoming.  The Montana and Wyoming Seed 
Certification Programs will recognize G
2 (equivalent 
to Registered) and G
3 (equivalent to Certified) classes 
of germplasm.  
 
 Seed production field of High Plai ns Sandberg bluegrass at the 
Bridger, MT PMC.  
Susan Winslow, USDA NRCS Mont ana PMC, Bridger, Montana 
 
High Plains Selected Germplasm Sandberg bluegrass 
(Poa sandbergii)  was released in 2000 from the 
Bridger Plant Materials Center.  This is the first  release of the 
Poa sandbergii  type to the commercial 
seed industry.  This releas e is a composite of three 
accessions originating from  the high plains of 
Wyoming; one each from Natrona (300-350 mm 
precip., elev. 1,590 m), Campbell (250-300 mm 
precip., elev. 1,430 m),  and Uinta (175-225 mm 
precip., elev. 1,920  m) counties.  G
1 (equivalent to 
Foundation) seed is availa ble to commercial growers 
through the Foundation Seed Program at Montana 
State University and the Un iversity of Wyoming.  
The Montana and Wyoming Seed Certification 
Programs will recognize G
2 (equivalent to 
Registered) and G
3 (equivalent to Certified) classes 
of germplasm. 
 
Mountain Home Germplasm Sandberg bluegrass 
( Poa sandbergii)  is test material from the USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mounta in Research Station in 
Boise, ID. Mountain Home Germplasm is not a 
release at this point, but is under commercial 
production and being utilized in seed mixes in the 
Intermountain West. 
 
Hanford Source Identified Germplasm  Sandberg 
bluegrass ( Poa sandbergii ) is a release from L&H 
Seeds in Connell, Washington. The original material 
was collected from Hanfor d, Washington from an 
area receiving an average 6 inches of annual 
precipitation. It is adapted to droughty regions in the 
west and/or locations with well drained sandy soils.  
 
Duffy Creek and Wallowa Source Identified 
Germplasm  (Poa sandbergii)  are releases from 
Benson Farms Inc. Both are intended for use in arid 
sites throughout the western states.  
 
Reliable Selected Germplasm  Sandberg bluegrass 
( Poa sandbergii)  was released by the USDA-ARS 
and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station in 
2004. This is a multi-origin germplasm stemming 
from 28 collections representing seven USDA-NRCS 
ecological sites. Reliable was developed for its high 
genetic diversity and to provide adaptation over a 
broad ecological range (Waldron and others 2006). 
G
1 and G2 seed is maintained by the USDA-ARS 
Forage and Range Research Laboratory, Logan, UT. 
G
3 seed is available through the Utah Crop 
Improvement Association. Seed through the G
5 
generation will be eligible for certification as 
Selected Class germplasm. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and W.C. Sharp. 1994. Grass Varieties 
in the United States. Rev. ed. Agricultural Handbook 
170. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 296 p.

Arnow, L.A. 1981. Poa secunda Presl. Versus  P. 
sandbergii  Vasey (Poaceae). Systmatic Botany 
6:412-421. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren and 
J.L. Reveal. 1977.  Intermountain Flora: Vascular 
Plants of the Intermountain West , U.S.A. The New 
York Botanical Garden. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S.  1935.  Manual of the Grasses of the 
United States.  Miscellaneous Publication No. 200.  
US Printing Office, Washington D.C. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Owenby and J.W. 
Thompson. 1969. Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of  Washington Press. Seattle, 
WA.  
 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist.  1976.  Flora of 
the Pacific Northwest-An Illustrated Manual.  
University of Washington Press. Seattle, WA. 
 
Johnson, R.J. and G.E. Larson.  1999.  Grassland 
Plants of South Dakota and the Northern Great 
Plains.  B-566, South Dakota State University, 
Brookings, SD. 
 
Kellogg, E.A. 1985a. A biosystematic study of the 
Poa secunda  complex. J. Arnold Arboretum 66:201-
242. 
 
Kellogg, E.A.  1985b. Variation and names in the 
Poa secunda  complex. J. Range Management. 
38:516-521. 
 
Kellogg, E.A. 1987. Apomixis in the  Poa secunda 
complex. American Journal of Botany 74: 1431-
1437. 
 
Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. 
Grasses. In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 295-424. 
 
Mosman, D. 2005. Personal communication. 
Mosman Seed Ranch. Craigmont, ID. 
 
Schwendiman, J.L. 1971. Culture and uses of 
‘Sherman’ big bluegrass.  USDA SCS Plant Science 
Handbook.  Spokane, WA. 
 
USDA Forest Service. 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  
U.S Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.  Waldron, B.L., S.R. Larson, K.B. Jensen, R.D. 
Harrison, A.J. Palazzo 
and T.J. Cary. 2006. 
Registration of Reliable Sandberg Bluegrass 
Germplasm. Crop Science 46: 487-488. 
 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist, 
USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Mark Majerus , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana (retired) 
 
Roger Hybner , USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana 
 
Larry Holzworth , USDA NRCS, Bozeman, Montana 
(retired) 
 
Mark Stannard , USDA NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Edited: djt010407; dgo041008; lkh110706; ms120706; 081006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service
.