Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOUGLAS FIR 
Pseudotsuga menziesii  
(Mirbel) Franco 
Plant Symbol = PSME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Two varieties of this species are currently 
recognized: Rocky Mountain Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii  (Mirbel) Franco var. glauca 
(Beissn.) Franco and Douglas-fir ( Pseudotsuga 
menziesii  (Mirbel) Franco var.  menziesii). 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Douglas-fir needles were made into a 
tea and drank by Isleta Puebloans in New Mexico to 
cure rheumatism.  Douglas-fir resin was used by the 
Shasta in northern Californi a to poultice cuts and the 
Yuki along the California coast used a decoction  from spring buds to treat venereal diseases.  The 
Sinkyone of California made Douglas-fir bark tea 
which eased colds and stomach ailments.  The 
Kayenta Navaho of Arizona used the tree to treat 
stomach disease and headache
s, although what part 
of the plant was used is not known.  Also, historically 
the Kayenta Navajo ground part of tree with a certain 
rock and mixed it with corn seeds to insure a good 
crop.  The Pueblo people used the wood to 
construction dwellings while the twigs were worn on 
various parts of dancers' costumes.  Prayer sticks 
made of Douglas-fir wood were excavated from 
archeological sites in New Mexico dating back to the 
Anasazi.  The White Mountain Apache used the pitch 
of this conifer as gum and applied it to water jugs to 
make them watertight.  Douglas-fir roots were used 
in California Indian basketry. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau  © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Commercial : The tree is one of the world's most 
important and valuable timber trees and historically it 
was used by Westerners for telephone poles and 
railway ties among many other uses.  Today Douglas-
fir is also grown for Christmas trees.  
 
Wildlife : The winged seeds are eaten by western 
squirrels, the red tree mouse, and the dusky-foot 
woodrat.  The foliage and twigs are browsed by 
antelope, mule and white-tailed deer, elk, and 
mountain sheep.  The staminate cones and needles of 
Douglas-fir provide a significant winter food of the 
blue grouse. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Pine Family (Pinaceae).  This native, 
evergreen tree has a round  crown when mature and a 
conic crown when young.  It  reaches up to 67 m tall 
and 4.4 m wide.  The bark on mature trunks is dark 
brown, thick, and deeply furrowed.  The flat leaves 
are 2-4 cm in length, taper to a short petiole, with two 
whitish bands on the lower surface.  The deciduous 
seed cones are 5-9 cm and mature the first season.  
The seeds have wings that are less than 25 mm. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web

site.  This tree is common in the northern and 
central parts of Arizona, southward to northern 
Mexico, and eastward to western Texas.  Douglas-fir 
is also widespread in mixed evergreen and mixed 
conifer forests in California below 2200 m.  It is 
found in the Klamath Ranges, the outer North Coast 
Ranges, high Cascade Range, high Sierra Nevada, 
San Francisco Bay Area, Central Coast, outer South 
Coast Ranges, and northward to British Columbia. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Douglas-fir needs excellent drainage.  In 
the higher elevations of th e West that receive snow 
and in the lower foothills that have moderately cold 
winters and hot summers, Douglas-fir requires 
moderate summer watering, generally 1-4 times per 
month depending upon the absorption rate and water 
retention capacity of the soil.  It does best in full or 
part-shade and may tolerate morning and winter sun 
in ocean-influenced areas  of northern and central 
California. 
 
If establishing the tree by seed, remove the seeds 
from the cones, gently rub the wings off, and soak 
them in water for 24 hours, drain them, and 
thoroughly surface-dry them.  Put them in a plastic 
bag, without any medium, seal the bag and place 
them in refrigerated conditions until their chilling 
treatment begins.  Allow three times the air space as 
seed space in the bag.  It is best to sow the seeds in 
late February to early March.  Expose the seeds to a 
chilling treatment of at least four weeks prior to 
sowing.  After cold stratification, plant the seeds in a 
well-drained coarse potting mix in leach tubes that  are narrow but deep with 
two seeds per tube.  These 
containers should allow roots to reach the air and stop 
growing and be at least 6 inches deep.  Fertilize the 
containers with a starter fo rmulation of fertilizer with 
low or zero nitrogen.  These containers can be kept in 
a greenhouse for the first 4 to 6 weeks, receiving 70-
degree temperatures during the day.  Keep the surface 
of the soil moist during the germination phase.  Next, 
after the first set of cotyledons, water the plants with 
a deep, thorough soaking and let the plants dry in 
between watering.  Thin the plants down to one per 
container and move the pots into a shade-house with 
30 percent shade after 4 to 6 weeks.  Protect the 
plants from wind and wildlife.   During the main 
summer growing season use a balanced fertilizer 
applied to each container.   At the end of the growing 
season, use a finisher formulation of fertilizer.  Plant 
the plants in the ground outside in the late winter or 
early spring in moist soil.  Conduct supplemental 
hand watering or irrigation if the rains are 
insufficient.  Clear weeds in a 3 feet by 3 feet area 
around the plants to enco urage better survival and 
growth rate.  Make sure a protective barrier is placed 
around the conifers such as Vexar tubing to shield 
them from jack rabbits, deer, and other wildlife that 
may feed on the leaves, stems, and roots. 
 Charles Webber © California Academy of Sciences @CalPhotos 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available from most nurseries specializing in native 
plants within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo Province  exploring ancient and 
enduring uses .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa 
Fe, New Mexico. 
 
CalPhotos 2000.   Pseudotsuga menziesii .  
<http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?seq_num
=11920&one=T>  Version: 000229.  CalFlora, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Griffin, J.R. 1993.   Pinaceae.  Pages 115-121 IN: 
The Jepson Manual: Higher plants of California . J.C. 
Hickman  (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 
 
Hermann, R.K. & D.P. Lavender 1990 .  Pseudotsuga 
menziesii (Mirb.) Franco Douglas-Fir.   Pages 527-

540 IN: Silvics of North America Vol. 1: Conifers.  
R. M. Burns and B.H. Honkala (tech. coordinators).  
USDA, Forest Service Agriculture Handbook 654.  
 
Kearney, T.H. & R.H. Peebles 1960.  Arizona flora.  
University of California Pr ess, Berkeley, California 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Reagan, A.B. 1929.   Plants used by the White 
Mountain Apache Indians of Arizona.   Wisconsin 
Archeologist 8(4):143-160. 
 
Strike, S.S. & E.D. Roeder 1994.   Ethnobotany of the 
California Indians-volume 2 .  Aboriginal uses of 
Claifornia's indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific 
Books, Champaign, Illinois. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 000229.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Wyman, L.C. & S.K. Harris 1951.   The Ethnobotany 
of the Kayenta Navaho.  University of New Mexico 
Publications in Biology 5.  University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited 0500dec jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.