Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD PLUM 
Prunus americana  Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = PRAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Missouri State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
American plum, American wild plum, sandhill plum, 
Osage plum, river plum, sand cherry, thorn plum, 
wild yellow plum, red plum, August plum, goose 
plum, hog plum, and sloe 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Wild plum fruit was and still is 
extensively consumed by th e Indians of the prairies, 
either fresh or made into  a sauce (Kindscher 1987).  
The Pawnee, Kiowa, Comanche, Omaha, Teton 
Dakota, Lakota, Comanche, Crow, Assiniboin, and 
Kiowa ate the wild plums or chickasaw plums 
( Prunus angustifolia ) fresh or dried.  Plums were also 
pitted and dried, although the Pawnee reportedly 
often dried them without removing the pits (Gilmore 
1977).  Early explorers an d travelers of the Prairie 
Bioregion often mentioned wild plums in their 
journals and diaries and also appreciated them as 
food (Kindscher 1987).  Today wild plums are eaten 
fresh, canned, preserved in jams and jellies, baked, 
and made into fruit roll-ups. 
 
The Omaha scraped and boiled the bark from the 
roots of the wild plum and applied it to abrasions  (Gilmore 1977, Kindscher 1992).  They bound 
together the twigs of the wild plum and made them 
into a broom.  The Cheyenne mixed the crushed  
 
fruits of the wild plum with salt to treat mouth 
disease (Hart 1981).  They also crushed and boiled 
the small rootlets and the bark of older wild plum 
with the roots of the scarlet thorn (Crataegus 
chrysocarpa
) as a diarrhea remedy (Youngken 1925).  
The Mesquakies used the root bark of the wild plum 
to cure canker sores around  the mouth (Smith 1928).  
 Mike Clayton @ Imhoff (2000) 
 
The Teton Dakota used the sprouts or young growth 
of the wild plum as a wand in the “waunyampi” 
ceremony (Gilmore 1977).  This is an offering or 
form of prayer, consisting of a wand made from a 
peeled and painted wild plum sprout.  The 
“waunyampi” ceremony is usually offered with 
prayers for the sick.  
 
The various species of wild plum are astringent and 
sedative, and the bark is a tonic (Smythe 1901).  The 
roots and bark contain a bitter substance as well as a 
substance called phloretin, which is an active agent 
against gram positive and negative bacteria (Lewis 
and Elvin-Lewis 1977). 
 
Wildlife : Wild plums are eaten by turkey, black bear, 
and wolves (Thwaites 1904).  Foxes, black-headed 
grosbeaks, and ring-tailed cats utilize wild plums 
(Martin et al. 1951).  Plum thickets often furnish 
valuable protective shelter. 
 
Conservation : Wild plums have been recommended 
for their drought resistance and widely planted in 
shelter belts in the western Great Plains (Jerry Kaiser 
pers. comm. 1999).  They also make good wildlife 
habitat and are effective in erosion control because 
their roots hold the soil.  Th eir thorny branches catch 
tumbleweeds, leaves, and other plant materials, 
which, when windstorms occur during times of 
drought, provide an effective means of slowing wind 
erosion of soil.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Wild plum 
( Prunus americana ) is a shrub or small tree 3-8 m (3-
24 ft) tall, and are usually forming thickets.  The 
small branches are sometimes spiny.  The leaves are 
alternate, egg-shaped to oval, 6-10 cm (2-4 in) long.  
The upper leaf surface is shiny green and the lower 
surface is slightly hairy;  leaf margins are sharply 
toothed.  The white roseaceous flowers are in-groups 
of 2-5 at the ends of branchlets.  Flowers usually 
appear before the leaves in  April and May.  There are 
five separate, oval petals 8-12 mm (5/16-1/2 in) long.  
The reddish-purple plums are fleshy, oval, 2.0-2.7 cm 
(0.75-1.25 in) long; each fruit contains one seed.  
Wild plum flowers are insect pollinated. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The range is from Massachusetts west to 
Manitoba and Montana, south to Utah, Colorado, and 
Oklahoma, east to Florida, and north to New York 
(Stephens 1975). 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Wild plum grows in prairies, woodlands, 
pastures, and along roadsides and riverbanks. 
 
Wild plums can be planted from seed and they are 
relatively easy to transplant.  Plant in well drained 
soil; wild plum tolerates shade.  Flowering occurs in 
April and May and fruit ripens from August to 
September.  The plant has fruit every year.  
 
Propagation from Cuttings:  Prunus americana 
cuttings are not easy to root.  Hardwood cuttings 
taken in late January have been rooted.  Hardwood 
cuttings are those made of matured, dormant 
hardwood after leaves have abscised and before new 
shoots emerge in the spring.  Material should be 
taken from healthy, moderately vigorous stock plants 
grown in full sunlight.  Central and basal portions 
(not the tip) of a shoot make the best cuttings.  
Cuttings vary from 10 to 76 cm (4 to 30 in).  Ensure 
that at least two nodes are included in the cutting; the 
basal cut is just below a node and the top cut is 1.3 to 
2.5 cm (0.5-1 in) above a node. 
 
It is important that hardwood cuttings not dry out 
during handling and storage.  Dip bases of hardwood 
cuttings with IBA at 20,000 ppm liquid formulation 
to promote rooting.  Alternatively, treat with 2% IBA 
talc.  This will promote rooting on both suckers and 
stem cuttings.  Dip the cuttings into root promoting 
hormone, IBA at 2000 ppm, for a few seconds, then 
keep in the dark at temperat ures of 10º (50ºF).  Plant  the cuttings in open ground in prepared holes with 
good potting soil.  Firm the soil around the cuttings 
and water.  To ensure survival of cuttings through the 
following winter in cold climates, the potted cuttings 
should be kept in heated cold frames or poly-houses 
to hold the temperature between 0-7°C (32-45°F).  
Rooted cuttings that had shoot growth in the fall, but 
were not given nitrogen, had the best over-winter 
survival in a cold frame with microfoam. 
Propagation from Seed
: Harvest the fruit in the 
summer when ripe (the fruit turns dark purple), 
usually in August.  Remove the pulp or fruit from the 
seed.  Seeds can be extracted by maceration and 
recovered by flotation.  Put the seed in a 50ºF cooler 
over the winter.  For prolonged storage, seeds must 
be air dried and stored in sealed containers at cold 
temperatures.  The seeds can also be planted outdoors 
in the fall so they are naturally “cold stratified.”  
Natural germination occurs predominantly in the first 
or second year after seedfa ll, depending on the year. 
 
If sowing seed in the fall, it is important to sow early 
enough so seeds can pre-chill  before seedbeds freeze.  
This can be overcome by mulching the seedbeds.  
Seedlings reach suitable size for transplanting in one 
to two years.  Cold stratifying up to 6 months in a 
moist environment can brea k seed dormancy.  Wild 
plum seeds have fairly low germination.  There are 
6.5 seeds per gram. 
 
Management 
Wild plum grows on the edges of prairies and 
woodlands.  Traditional resource managers burned 
this community regularly, thus maintaining the 
patchwork mosaic of prairie and woods on the 
landscape (Thwaites 1906).  Burning provided habitat 
for wild plum to become established, and the nutrient 
enrichment increased fruit  production.  The branches 
of wild plum were often pruned or cut back to 
increase production. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Blackhawk’, ‘Hawkeye’,  and ‘De Soto’ cultivars are 
descendents of the wild species (Kindscher 1987).  
There are many different cultivars of  Prunus species 
developed for both ornamental flowers and edible 
fruits.  Consult your local nurseries to choose the 
right cultivar for your specific landscape.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Andros, F. 1883.  The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1:116-118. 
 
Beichel, C., E. McDonald, & T. Cole ( eds.) 1993.  
Encyclopedia of gardening .  Dorling Kindersley, 
London, New York, Stuttgart.  648 pp. 
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939 .   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25:517-543. 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977 (1919).   Uses of plants by the 
Indians of the Missouri River region .  University of 
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. Reprint of a 
work first published as the 33
rd Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology.  Washington, D.C.  
 
Grinnell, G.B. 1962.   The Cheyenne Indians .  2 Vols. 
Cooper Square Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Hart, J. A. 1976.   Montana native plants and early 
peoples .  Montana Historical Society, Helena, 
Montana. 
 
Imhoff, J. 2000.   Wild edible plants of Wisconsin .  
<http://www.wisc.edu/botit/Wisc_edib/>.  Version: 
000323.  University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Wisconsin. 
 
Kaiser, J. 1999.  Personal communication.  State 
Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Elsberry, Missouri. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie .  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie .  University Press of Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Lewis, W.H. & M. Elvin-Lewis 1977.  Medical 
botany.  Wiley, New York, New York. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts a guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
McClintock, W. 1909.   Materia medica of the 
Blackfeet .  Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie: 273-279. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Bark ley, R.E. Brooks, & E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1985.   Flora of the Great Plains .  Great Plains Flora Association.  University Press of 
Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.  
Medicinal plants of Native 
America .  Research Reports in Ethnobotany, 
Contribution 2, University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology Technical Reports, Number 19.  534 
pp. 
 
Schopmeyer, Technical Coordinator 1974.   Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States .  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450. Forest Service, USDA, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Ojibwa 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(3):327-525. 
 
Smythe, B.B. 1901.   Preliminary list of medicinal 
and economic Kansas plants .  Kansas Academy of 
Science Transactions 18:191-209. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the north 
central plains .  The University Press of Kansas.  530 
pp. 
 
Thwaites, R.G. (ed.) 1904.   Original journals of the 
Lewis and Clark expedition .  6 Vols.  Dodd, Mead, 
and Company, New York, New York. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000323.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1974.   Collecting, 
processing, and germinating seeds of wildland 
plants .  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Youngken, H.W. 1924.   The drugs of the North 
American Indian .  American Journal of Pharmacy 96: 
485-502. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Jerry Kaiser 
USDA NRCS Missouri St ate Office, Elsberry, 
Missouri 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California

Edited 04dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.