Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ATLANTIC 
NINEBARK  
Physocarpus opulifolius  (L.) 
Maxim. 
Plant Symbol = PHOP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names  
Eastern ninebark, common ninebark 
 
Uses 
Atlantic ninebark is cultivated in the US and in 
Europe for its foliage, clusters of white flowers in the 
spring, and red fruits in the autumn.  Various 
cultivars have been selected for compactness of 
growth, yellow or golden leaf color, and greater size 
and showiness of flower clusters.    
 
Flowers of Atlantic ninebark are an excellent nectar 
source, and the fruits are  eaten by many species of 
birds. 
  
Physocarpus monogynus  of the southwestern US, 
was used by Indians to relieve pain – the roots were 
boiled to softness and placed  on sores and lesions as 
a poultice.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Native shrubs 
growing 1-3 meters tall, sometimes tree-like, with 
wide-spreading, recurved branches, the twigs brown 
to yellowish, glabrous; bark brown to orangish, 
peeling into thin strips or broader sheets on larger 
trunks.  Leaves are deciduous, alternate, simple, 
ovate to obovate or nearly round, 3-12 cm long, with 
3(-5) shallow, palmate-veined lobes, basally truncate 
or cuneate, on petioles 1-3 cm long, glabrous above 
and mostly so beneath but sometimes with a sparse 
covering of stellate hairs beneath, with crenate or 
dentate margins.  Inflores cence of numerous flowers 
found in rounded clusters 2.5-5 cm wide; flowers 7-
10 mm wide, calyx cup-shaped, glabrous or with 
stellate hairs, 5-lobed; pe tals 5, white or pinkish; 
styles 5; stamens 30-40.  Fruit is compressed but 
inflated, ovoid, 8-12 mm long, shiny, red at maturity, 
glabrous or hairy, with papery but firm walls, 
splitting along two sides, in clusters of (2-)3-5 per 
flower; seeds 2-4.  The common name comes from 
the bark, which continually molts in thin strips, each 
time exposing a new layer of bark, as if it had “nine 
lives.”  This species flowers in May-July and fruits in 
May-July.   
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species : two varieties are 
sometimes recognized with in the species.  Var. 
intermedius  (Rydb.) B.L. Robins. has fruits that are 
persistently covered with stellate hairs, while var. 
opulifolius  has glabrous fruits.  Var.  intermedius is 
the more western form, occurring from New York, 
Ontario, Ohio, Indiana,  Illinois, Missouri, and 
Arkansas to the westernmost localities for the 
species.  Var.  opulifolius is broadly distributed in the 
east, to Minnesota and Iowa, and in Canada from 
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia to Manitoba.  
Intergradation in the fruit character makes it difficult 
to discern clear distributional boundaries.  
  
Distribution 
Atlantic ninebark occurs widely in eastern North 
America, in Canada from Manitoba to the 
easternmost provinces, and in the US from Minnesota 
to Arkansas (with outlying occurrences in Colorado, 
North Dakota and South Dakota to Oklahoma) and 
eastward to the Atlantic states.  It has not been 
recorded from Texas, Loui siana, or Mississippi.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.

Adaptation  
The plants are found on moist soils in thickets, along 
streams in sand or gravel bars, and on rocky slopes 
and bluffs.  Dirr (1997) observes that “the species is 
adaptable to all conditions, probably even nuclear 
attacks, and once established, requires a bulldozer for 
removal.”   
 
Establishment 
Atlantic ninebark can be propagated from cuttings or 
seeds, which germinate without pre-treatment.  It 
transplants readily and apparently grows easily over a 
range of light, moisture, and acidity.   
 
Management 
Information on fire response is not available for 
Atlantic ninebark, but shrubs of the western US 
species  Physocarpus malvaceus  (Greene) Kuntze 
readily re-sprout after intense surface burns (Lea & 
Morgan 1993).   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr's hardy trees and shrubs: An 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.   
 
Kurz, D. 1997.   Shrubs and woody vines of Missouri .  
Missouri Dept. of Conservation, Jefferson City, 
Missouri.   
  
Lea, S.M. & P. Morgan 1993 .  Resprouting response 
of ninebark (Physocarpus malvaceus) shrubs to 
burning and clipping .  Forest Ecol. Management. 
56:199-210.   
 
USDA, NRCS 1993.   Northeast wetland flora: Field 
office guide to plant species .  Wetland Science 
Institute, Laurel, Maryland. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.