PROSO MILLET  
Panicum miliaceum  L.  
Plant Symbol = PAMI2  
Photograph of ‘Dove’ proso millet . Photo by  USDA -NRCS Jimmy 
Carter Plant Materials Center,  hosted by the USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
Alternate Names  
Common Names:  broomcorn millet , proso, wild millet, 
black seeded  proso millet, panic millet, broom corn, hog 
millet, common millet  
 
Scientific Names:  Panicum miliaceum var.  aureum  Alef.; 
Panicum miliaceum  var.  flavum  Schur;  Panicum 
miliaceum  var. sanguineum  Alef.  
Description  
General :  Proso millet ( Panicum miliaceum ) is an 
introduced , warm-season  annual  grass that grows 1 –3½ ft  
tall. Stems are light green, erect, sometimes  branched at 
the base,  and grow 20– 60 in (0.5 –1.5 m)  tall. L eaves 
alternate along the stem and are covered with short , stiff 
hairs.  The wide -spreading or arching  leaves may reach 
approximately 1 ft ( 30 cm) long, have a short ligule 
(outgrowth at junction of grass leaf and blade) and no 
auricles (ear -like appendage at the base of leaf)  
(Baltensperger, 1996) . Plants have  shallow , fibrous  root 
system s and produce few tillers.  Proso  millet has a 
drooping, branched, compact inflorescence 4 –18 in (10–
45 cm) long made of  many stalked, ovoid spikelets. The 
panicles may be spreading, loose and one -sided, or erect 
depending on the variety (McDonald et al., 2003). Proso 
millet  reproduces by  seed s, which are  shiny, yellow to 
brown , smooth , oval  and 0.09- 0.11 in ( 2.4–3 mm)  long.  
There is both a weedy wild -proso millet and a 
domesticated proso millet. Domestic proso millet has 
yellow or light brown seeds, while the weedier wild -proso  has brown to black seeds.  
Proso millet can be easily 
confused with young corn seedling s, fall panicum 
( Panicum dichotomiflorum ), and witch grass (Panicum 
capillare ).
 A distinguishing feature of the plant is that the 
seed husk (palea and lemma) remains attached to t he roots 
of seedlings (Bough et al., 1986). 
 
 
Distribution :  It is thought that p roso millet was originally 
cultivated in eastern Asia, later spreading to India, Russia, 
the Middle East, an d Europe (Baltensperger, 1996). 
Today p roso millet is produced in I ndia, China, Russia, 
the Middle East (Baltensperger, 1996).  In the United 
States,  it is mainly grown in the Great Plains states of 
Nebraska, South Dakota, and Colorado,  with limited 
production in Kansas, Wyoming, and Minnesota. US 
production has increased in the past 10 years (McDonald 
et al., 2003).  The weedier wild -proso millet  is thought to 
have escaped from domesticated varieties, and can be 
found throughout the United States. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Proso millet grows best in full sun, moist to dry 
conditions, and can perform well in many soil types.  It is 
found in croplands, fallow fields, roadsides, waste sites, 
and disturbed soils.   
 
Adaptation  
Proso mille t has been grown for thousands of yea rs in 
many types of soils and in many climates. It is both heat 
and drought -tolerant  and is widely grown  in the tropics 
and sub -tropics.  Proso millet is a C4 plant  with a low 
transpiration ratio;  its high water use effi ciency allows it 
to  grow in water -limited environments (Baltensperger, 
1996; Lyon et al., 2008). It can be grown farther north 
than other millets and is adapted to high  elevation  
plateaus  and poor soil  (Baltensperger, 1996) . H owever, 
due to its shallow roo t system, it does not grow well under 
water stress (Baltensperger, 1996). It is not frost- tolerant 
and does not grow well in soils with a pH greater than 7.8. 
It has p oor tolerance to high salinity.  
Uses  
Forage /Feed: Similar to several other millets, proso  
millet is grown for livestock and birdseed in the United 
States.  Substituting  proso millet for half the food ration 
for cattle and swine is considered similar to using 
sorghum or corn (Baltensperger, 1996; Lyon et al., 2008). 
Turkeys gained  more weight on  a diet of proso millet than 
on corn or sorghum, however broiler  chickens  did not 
significantly gain more weight (Baltensperger, 1996). 
Proso millet  fed to swine and poultry should be 
supplemented  with lysine (Lyon et al., 2008).  
 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Cover crop/green manure:  Proso millet can be used as a 
quick growing catch crop planted into corn and sorghum 
stubble fields. It does well planted in combination with 
cowpea or soybeans (Schonbeck and Morse, 2006).  It has 
one of the lowest water requirements of any cereal 
(Balten sperger, 1996; Lyon et al., 2008), and could be 
useful in low -input sustainable systems.  Earlier  summer 
(June) plantings produce the greatest biomass (Schonbeck 
and Morse, 2006). It can be terminated by mowing or 
disking.  Winter wheat has been successfully  no -till 
planted into proso millet s tubble  in the fall in the Great 
Plains (Lyon et al., 2008) . 
 
Filter Strips/Field Borders:  Proso  millet has been used in 
mixes for herbaceous conservation buffers/filter strips in 
USDA Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program  (WHIP) 
applications (USDA -NRCS, 2009).  
 
Wildlife:   Proso millet  seed is eaten by bobwhite quail, 
mourning doves, pheasants, turkeys, and a variety of 
songbirds. It  is  also  the host plant for several g enera of 
skipper (Hilty, 2014).  
Ethnobotany  
Proso  millet contains greater protein and iron than wheat 
or rice (Millet Network of India et al., 2009) . It was one 
of the earliest domesticated cereals and  is  still widely 
used for human consumption in India, the Middle East, 
China, and parts of Russia (Bough  et al., 1986).   
Status  
Weedy or Invasive
:   Wild -proso millet is the escaped form 
of the cultivated proso millet, and can be weedy or 
invasive throughout the United States . It  is considered a 
noxious weed in Colorado and Oregon. It is  a rapidly 
growing, vigorous, prolific seed producer  that has  
developed some herbicide resistance. Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its  status and use .
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Proso millet  will germinate  between 50 –113°F (10– 45° 
C)  (Baltensperger, 1996).  The optimum soil temperature 
for planting is 55– 65°F (13 -18°  C) (McDonald et al., 
2003).  It is typically drilled at 30 –40 lb/ac for forage or 
feed, ½ –  ¾ inches deep, on 7, 10, or 12  inch rows 
(McDonald, 2003). A lower rate of 20 lb/ ac can be used 
for producing seed  (Baltensperger et al., 1995 ). It is 
planted as a warm -season cover crop in the Great  Plains 
in late May to early June (Lyon et al., 2008) . It has been 
successfully grown as a dryland crop with little or no 
supplemental irrigation. It is used in rotation with winter 
wheat and can help to reduce disease and insect  pressure  (Lyon et al., 200
8). Planting after winter wheat may lead 
to N deficiency, so fertilizer applications of nitrogen and 
additional nutrients may be required. Fertilizer additions 
should be based on soil test results and the 
recommendations of the local county extension servi ce. 
Management  
Proso millet  does not seem to benefit from high- input 
additions of nutrients o r water (Baltensperger, 1996). Like 
foxtail millet ( Setaria italica), there will be little regrowth 
after being cut  (Baltensperger, 1996) . Proso  millet has 
been  used in a winter wheat/sunflower/proso/fallow 
rotation in the Great Plains (Lyon et al., 2008).  In 
September it is cut and gathered  into windrows to dry and 
cure. Proso millet is not direct -combined because the seed 
shatters easily, the straw moisture is t oo high at harvest, 
and it tends to lodge (McDonald et al., 2003).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There  are few if any disease or insect problems.  European 
corn borer moths will lay eggs on millet, and  thrips and 
grasshoppers will  occasionally feed on it (McDonald et 
al., 2003).  In order to reduce weed pressure, wheat –proso 
millet rotations should not be continued past three 
consecutive years.  
Environmental Concerns  
Weedy biotypes of proso millet can produce a long -term 
seed bank . Nevertheless , proso millet v arieties used as 
crops have little ability to survive dormancy or maintain 
viable seed banks (Bough et al., 1986). Rotations are one 
way of avoiding weedy characteristics.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Proso millet ma tures 60–90 days after planting. Seeds 
ma ture  from the top of the inflorescence to the bottom, 
and may shatter before har vesting (Baltensperger, 1996). 
Proso millet is self -pollinating , but some cross -pollination 
may occur by the wind (Baltensperger, 1996).  Plants 
remain in bloom for only a week (Hilty, 2014). Seeds are 
smaller  (80,000 seed/lb) than pearl millet and may be 
white , cream, yellow, orange, red, or black to brown. It 
can produce 2,000 lb/ac of seed (NRCS, 2012) . 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
‘Dove’ p roso millet is a cultivar developed by the USDA -
NRCS Plant Materials Center in Americus, GA in 1972. 
White -seeded varieties are most often grown in the major 
production areas. ‘Sunrise’ and ‘Huntsman’ are white -
seeded varieties  co -released by the Universit y of 
Nebraska and the USDA.  ‘Earlybird’ and ‘Horizon’ are 
shorter season varieties.  Cultivars should be selected 
based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and 
intended use. Consult with your local land grant 
university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office 
for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area.  
 
Literature Cited

Baltensperger, D.D. 1996. Foxtail and proso millet. p. 
182– 190. In J. Janick (ed.) Progress in new crops. 
ASHS Press, Alexandria, VA.  
Baltensperger, D., D.  Lyon, R. Anderson, T. Holman, C. 
Stymiest, J. Shanahan, L. Nelson, K. DeBoer, G. 
Hein, and J. Krall.1995. Producing and marketing 
proso millet in the high plains.  Univ. of Neb. Coop. 
Ext. EC 95 -137- C. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/ 
(accessed 07 Oct. 2014)  
Bough, M., J.C. Colosi, and P.B. Cavers. 1986. The major 
weedy biotypes of proso millet ( Panicum miliaceum) 
in Canada. Can. J. Bot. 64: 1188– 1198.  
Hilty, J. 2014. Proso millet. Illinois Wildflower.  http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/grasses/plants/pr
oso_millet.html  (accessed 06 Oct. 2014)  
Lyon, D.J., P.A. Burgener, K.L. DeBoer, R.M. Harveson, 
G.L. Hein, G.W. Hergert, T.L.Holman, L.A. Nelson, 
J.J. Johnson, T. Nleya, J.M. Krall, D.C. Nielsen, M.F. 
Vigil. 2008. Proso millet in the Great Plains. 
Publication # EC137. Univ. of Nebraska Ext. Serv. 
Lincoln, NB.  
McDonald, S. K., L. Hofsteen, and L. Downey. 2003. 
Crop profile for proso millet in Colorado. USDA 
Crop Profiles, Regional IPM Centers. 
http://www.ipmcenters.org/CropProfiles/  (accessed 
07 Oct. 2014)  
Millet Network of India, Deccan Development Society, 
and FIAN, India. 2009. Millets: future of food & 
farming. MINI and DDS, Andhra Pradesh, India; 
FIAN, India, Hiedelberg, Germany. 
http://www .swaraj.org/shikshantar/millets.pdf.  
(accessed 06 Oct. 2014)  
NRCS. 2012. Release brochure for ‘Dove’, proso millet 
(Panicum miliaceum  L.). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Jimmy Carter PMC. Americus, 
Georgia. 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/F SE_PLANTMA
TERIALS/publications/gapmcrb11224.pdf. (accessed 
06 Oct. 2014)  
Schonbeck, M. and R. Morse. 2006. Cover crops for all  seasons. Virginia Assoc. for Biological Farming. 
Lexington, VA. Information Sheet  #3-06. 
USDA  NRCS. 2009. Evaluation of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture farm bill conservation practices for 
wildlife.  USDA NRCS Agricultural Wildlife 
Conservation Center (AWCC).  www.nwtf.org 
 
Citation  
Sheahan, C.M. 2014.  Plant guide for proso  millet 
( P anicum miliaceum ). USDA- Natural Resources  Conserv
ation Service, Cape May Plant Materials Center. 
Cape May, NJ.  
Published   10/2014  
 
Edited:  30Oct2014 aym ; 02Feb2015 rg 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER