BLUEBUNCH 
WHEATGRASS 
Pseudoroegneria spicata 
(Pursh) A. Löve 
plant symbol = PSSP6 
 Loren St. JohnUSDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center; USDA ARS 
Forage & Range Laboratory 
 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron spicatum, Elytrigia spicata 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife: Bluebunch wheatgrass 
can be used for native hay production and will make 
nutritious feed, but is better suited to grazing use.  
Bluebunch wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It is preferred forage for cattle 
and horses year-round, but it is considered coarse in 
summer.  It is preferred forage for sheep, elk, deer, 
and antelope in spring.  It is considered desired 
forage for elk in summer.  It is desirable forage for 
sheep in summer, desirable feed for sheep, elk, deer, 
and antelope in fall and desirable forage for sheep, 
elk, and deer in winter.  In spring, the protein levels 
can be as high as 20 percent decreasing to about 4 
percent protein as the forage matures and cures.  
Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 percent 
throughout the active growth period.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation: Bluebunch wheatgrass 
is very drought resistant, persistent and adapted to 
stabilization of disturbed soils.  It is very compatible 
with slower developing native species, such as 
thickspike wheatgrass (Elymus lanceolatus), western 
wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii), and needlegrass 
species (Achnatherum spp., Nassella spp., and 
Hesperostipa spp.).  It does not compete well with 
aggressive introduced grasses.  Its drought tolerance, 
combined with extensive root systems and good 
seedling vigor, make this species ideal for 
reclamation in areas receiving 10 to 20 inches annual 
precipitation.  'Secar' competes well in areas as low 
as 8 inches annual rainfall.  This grass can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited and to 
stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and roadsides as a 
component of a mix. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Bluebunch 
wheatgrass is a perennial native bunchgrass.  
Bluebunch wheatgrass is highly variable and grows 
to 1.5 to 4 feet tall with seed spikes 3 to 8 inches 
long.  The auricles are pointed and semi-clasping to 
nearly lacking.  Leaves are lax, cauline, flat to in-
rolled, 4-6 mm wide, and green to blue in color.  The 
sheath is generally glabrous.  Reproductive stems are 
erect, slender, and sometimes wiry with a wavy 
rachis.  The lemma awns range from being short to 
prominent and divergent except on the beardless type 
where the awn is lacking. 
 
Distribution 
Bluebunch wheatgrass is common to the northern 
Great Plains and the Intermountain regions of the 
western United States.  It is a long-lived cool-season 
native grass with an extensive root system with 
strong tillers.  Bluebunch wheatgrass spreads by 
seed; except in high rainfall zones where some short 
rhizomes may occur.  For current distribution, consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.

Adaptation  
Bluebunch wheatgrass does best on medium to 
coarse-textured soils and can be found on heavy to 
medium to coarse-textured soils over 10 inches deep 
including fairly sandy sites.  It can be seeded on 
clayey sites.  It can be fo und on thin, rocky sites and 
on very steep slopes.  It will tolerate weakly saline 
conditions. It does not grow on very acidic sites.  It is 
cold tolerant, moderately shade tolerant, and highly 
fire tolerant.  It is intolerant of high water tables, poor 
drainage, and periods of extended inundation. 
 
On native sites, bluebunch wheatgrass is most 
abundant in the 8 to 20 inch annual precipitation 
zones.  Seeded varieties do best with 12 to 20 inches 
of precipitation (exception 'Secar' 8 to 18 inches and 
'Anatone' 10 to 20 inches - estimated) and will 
tolerate up to 35 inches on very well drained soils 
with southerly aspects.  The elevation range is from 
500 to 10,000 feet above sea level.  It is a major 
component of many native plant communities and 
generally occupies 20 to 60 percent of the overall 
composition by weight. 
 
Species often associated with bluebunch wheatgrass 
include the following: the big sagebrush complex, 
juniper, ponderosa pine, needlegrasses, bluegrass 
complex, bottlebrush squirreltail, prairie junegrass, 
thickspike wheatgrass, Idaho fescue, arrowleaf 
balsamroot, and tapertip hawksbeard. 
 
Establishment 
Planting : This species should be seeded with a drill at 
a depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium-textured soils, 
1/4 inch on fine-textured soils and 3/4 inch or less on 
coarse-textured soils.  Single-species seeding rate 
recommended for this grass is 7 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) per acre or 21 PLS per square foot.  If 
used as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of 
mix desired.  For mine lands and other harsh critical 
areas, the seeding rate should be doubled to 42 PLS 
seeds per square foot.  Seedlings are weaker than 
most introduced wheatgrasses and a clean, firm, 
weed-free seedbed is required for establishment 
(cheatgrass and other annual weed competition can 
cause stand failure). 
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium-textured soils 
and in late fall on medium to light-textured soils.  
Late summer (August - mid September) seeding is 
not recommended unless irrigation is available. 
Dormant fall seedings will pre-chill seed and reduce 
seed dormancy.  
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly for a 
native grass and stands should be given 2-3 years to 
ensure establishment.  It is compatible with other 
native species and should be used in seeding 
mixtures.  It should not be seeded with strongly 
competitive introduced species. 
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass makes good spring growth, 
fair summer growth, and good fall regrowth if 
moisture is available.  Seedling vigor is fair to good, 
but less than crested wheatgrass. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six-leaf 
stage.  Mow weeds at or pr ior to their bloom stage.  
Grasshoppers and other insects may also damage new 
stands and pesticides may be needed. 
 
Management 
Bluebunch wheatgrass has good palatability to 
livestock and wildlife.  Established stands cannot 
withstand heavy continuous grazing. 
 
Stands of bluebunch wheatgrass should not be grazed 
until they have firmly established (usually two 
growing seasons) and have headed out.  Six inches of 
new growth should be attained in spring before 
grazing is allowed in established stands.  The 
growing point of bluebunch wheatgrass is fairly high 
and thus stands can easily be overgrazed.  It is 
recommended that this grass be grazed under a 
deferred, rotational grazing system to ensure plants 
remain healthy.  Spring grazing should occur no more 
than one out of three years and no more than 40 
percent utilization should occur during rapid growth.  
Heavy early spring grazing  is especially damaging 
and grazing should be delayed until at least mid-boot 
stage.  No more than 60 percent utilization should 
occur after seed ripens.  
 
Once established, bluebunch wheatgrass is 
competitive with weedy species, but it can be 
crowded out by aggressive introduced species.  
 
Environmental Concerns : Bluebunch wheatgrass is 
long-lived and spreads primarily via seed 
distribution, but it can slowly spread vegetatively in 
precipitation zones above 18  inches annual rainfall.  
It is not considered a "weedy" or invasive species, but 
can spread into adjoining vegetative communities 
under ideal climatic and environmental conditions. 
Most seedings do not spread from original plantings.  
It is a cross-pollinating species and is known to cross 
with other ecotypes of bluebunch wheatgrass, 
quackgrass, thickspike wheatgrass and bottlebrush

squirreltail.  These natural crosses broaden the gene 
pool, do not generally dominate a site or crowd out 
the native ecotypes, and in many cases are sterile.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of bluebunch wheatgrass has been 
very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row 
spacing of 24 to 36 inches are recommended under 
irrigation and 36 inches under dryland conditions.  
Seeding rates of 3 to 4 PLS per acre are 
recommended.  Cultivation will be needed to 
maintain rows and weed-free conditions.  
Seed fields are productive for three to four years.  
Average production of 75 to 100 pounds per acre can 
be expected under dryland conditions.  Average 
production of 150 to 250 pounds per acre can be 
expected under irrigated conditions.  Harvesting is 
best completed by swathing, followed by combining 
of the cured rows.  The seed heads readily shatter and 
require close scrutiny of maturing stands.  If direct 
combined, harvest at 30  percent moisture and dry 
seed down to 12 percent moisture (if stored in bins) 
or 15 percent moisture (if stored in sacks).  
Debearding may be required during processing.  Seed 
is generally harvested from mid-July to mid- August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
‘Anatone’ bluebunch wheatgrass ( P. spicata spp. 
spicata) was selected from seed originating near 
Anatone, Washington by the Forest Service Shrub 
Sciences Laboratory. It was released by the Forest 
Service Shrub Science Labo ratory, BLM, Aberdeen 
Plant Materials Center, Idaho-Utah AES, ARS and 
the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources in 2003.  Its 
full range of adaptation is not fully understood at this 
time, but it is expected to have rapid establishment, 
high forage production, and the ability to survive and 
thrive under dry conditions at or above 10 inches 
rainfall. It is intended for use on valley and foothill 
rangelands for re-establishment of native plant 
communities, vegetative firebreaks, and critical area 
stabilization and reclamation purposes.  Certified 
seed will be available in 2004 and Breeder and 
Foundation seed is maintained by Aberdeen PMC. 
 
'Goldar'  bluebunch wheatgrass ( P. spicata spp. 
spicata) was selected from seed collected on Mallery 
Ridge of the Umatilla National Forest in Asotin 
County, Washington by the Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center.  It was released by Idaho-Utah AES, ARS 
and the PMC in 1989.  'Goldar' is noted for rapid  establishment, high forage production, and the ability 
to survive and thrive under dry conditions at or above 
12 inches rainfall.  It is intended for use on foothill 
and mountain rangelands for re-establishment of 
native plant communities, vegetative firebreaks, and 
critical area stabilization an
d reclamation purposes.  
Certified seed is ava ilable and Breeder and 
Foundation seed is maintained by Aberdeen PMC. 
 
P-7 Selected Germplasm  bluebunch wheatgrass (P. 
spicata spp. spicata ) was generated by open- 
pollinating 25 native populations of bluebunch 
wheatgrass from Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, 
Washington and British Columbia resulting in high 
genetic diversity. ARS and the Utah Agricultural 
Experiment Station released P-7 in 2001. Its full 
range of adaptation is not fully understood, but it is 
expected to survive and thrive under dry conditions at 
or above 12 inches rainfall and perhaps down to 10 
inches rainfall. It is intended for use on valley, 
foothill and mountain rangelands for re-establishment 
of native plant communities, vegetative firebreaks, 
and critical area stabilization and reclamation 
purposes. Certified seed is available and Breeder seed 
is maintained by USDA-ARS, Logan, Utah. Certified 
seed production is allowed through Generation 4. 
 
'Secar'  is a cultivar of Snake River wheatgrass 
( Elymus wawawaiensis ) originally mistakenly 
identified as bluebunch  wheatgrass prior to the 
original description of Snake River wheatgrass.  The 
original collection site is along the Snake River 
Gorge near Lewiston, Id aho. The Idaho-Oregon-
Montana-Wyoming AES, Washington Agriculture 
Research Center, and Pullman Plant Materials Center 
released ‘Secar’ in 1980.  It is one of the most 
drought-tolerant native perennial grasses presently 
available and can survive down to 8 inches rainfall.  
It is a bunchgrass with fair to good seedling vigor and 
establishes well under dro ughty conditions.  'Secar' is 
intended for use on rangeland for re-establishment of 
native-plant communities.  Certified seed is available 
and Breeder seed is maintained by Pullman PMC. 
 
'Whitmar'  beardless wheatgrass ( P. spicata spp. 
inermis ) is the awnless form of bluebunch wheatgrass 
and was selected by Pullman PMC from seed native 
to the Palouse grasslands near Colton, Washington.  
Idaho-Oregon-Washington AES and Aberdeen-
Corvallis-Pullman PMCs released ‘Whitmar’ in 
1946.  It performs best above 12 inches rainfall in 
high winter-low summer precipitation areas.  
'Whitmar' was selected for forage quality, seedling 
vigor, and good seed production and is intended for 
use on rangeland for re-est ablishment of native plant 
communities and for reclamation.  Certified seed is

USDA, Forest Service 1996.  Fire effects information 
system.  Version: 000413.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
available and Breeder seed is maintained by Pullman 
PMC. 
 Jeanne R. Janish© The New York Botanical GardenCronquist et al. (1977)
 
USDA, NRCS 2003.  The PLANTS database.  
Version: 030213.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Dr. Thomas A. Jones 
USDA ARS Forage and Range Laboratory, Logan, 
Utah 
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited 05dec00 jsp; 15aug02 lsj; 30spet02 taj; 30sept02 dgo; 13feb03jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS <http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 
the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
Carlson, J.R. & M.E. Barkworth 1997.  Elymus 
wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Triticeae, Poaceae).  
Phytologia 83:312-330.  
  Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Reveal, & P. K. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora.  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  
Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.   Hitchcock, A. S. 1950.  Manual of the grasses of the 
United States.  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
Miller, R.P., J.M. Seufert, and M.R. Haferkamp.  
1987.  The ecology and management of bluebunch 
wheatgrass (Agropyron spicatum): A review.  Oregon 
Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 669. 
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.  Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas.  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas.