Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CURLY PONDWEED 
Potamogeton crispus L. 
Plant Symbol = POCR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Curly pondweed tends to increase oxygen 
levels and produce substantial organic material in 
aquatic environments (Guard 1995).  This pondweed 
shelters small fish and aquatic insects that provide 
food for larger fish and amphibians (Ibid.).   
 
Status 
Introduced into the U.S.  Considered a pest by several 
sources.  Please consult th e PLANTS Plant Profile 
for this species and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s cu rrent status, such as, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Pondweed family (Potamogetonaceae).  
Curly pondweed is an introduced, fast growing 
perennial.  The stems are flattened and somewhat 
branching, forty to eighty centimeters long and 
mostly one to two millimeters wide (Guard 1995).  
The leaves are simple, long, narrow and attached 
directly to the stem.  Th e flowers are brownish and 
inconspicuous and usually occur from May to 
October.   
© Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution: Curly pondweed has been introduced  
from Massachusetts to Minnesota, south to Virginia 
and Missouri (Tiner 1987).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
This species has invasive qualities.  Curly pondweed 
is commonly found in ponds, lakes, canals, pools and 
slow moving water of rivers and streams.  This plant 
grows well in sandy, loamy and clay soils.  It prefers 
acid, neutral and basic soil and can grow in very 
alkaline and saline soils.  This species is not shade 
tolerant.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Curly pondweed seeds should 
be sown as soon as they are ripe, in summer or early 
autumn (Heuser 1997).  The seeds lose viability 
quickly if they are allowed  to dry out (Ibid).  Prick 
out the seedlings when they are large enough to 
handle and increase the depth of water around the pot 
until the plants are covered by a few centimeters of 
water.  Grow the plants in a sunny position in the 
greenhouse for their first winter, increasing the depth 
of water, as the plants grow larger.  Plant them out 
into their permanent positions in early summer.   
 
Management 
Curly pondweed is an aquatic plant that can be used 
as an oxygenator of ponds.   This species sometimes 
becomes a pest in waterways, lakes and reservoirs 
(Guard 1995).  It is a fast growing plant in need of 
constant checking to make sure it does not overrun 
ponds, pools or canals.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Materials are available from wetland plant vendors.    
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office

for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brickell, C. 1990.  The RHS gardener’s encyclopedia 
of plants and flowers .  Dorling Kindersley, London. 
 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.   An illustrated flora 
of the Northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Guard, J.B. 1995.   Wetland plants of Oregon and 
Washington .  Lone Pine Publishing, Redmond, 
Washington. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C. Bell 1968.   Manual 
of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Tiner, R.W., Jr. 1987.   A field guide to the coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States .  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 08apr02 ahv; 25feb03 ahv; 060808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.