Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHUMARD’S OAK 
Quercus shumardii Buckl. 
Plant Symbol = QUSH  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Shumard red oak, southern red oak, swamp red oak, 
spotted oak, Schneck oak   
 
Uses 
Conservation: High survival rates and steady growth 
make Shumard oak a valuable contributor to 
rehabilitation and reforestation of bottomlands and 
upland sites, including minespoils.  Shumard oak also 
provides an excellent shade or specimen tree – to be 
used in lawns, parks, alon g streets, and in buffer 
strips and median plantings.  The leaves remain green 
long into the fall and then turn a deep orange-red.  
The trees are strong, long- lived, and grow relatively 
quickly.  They potentially grow to a large size and  should be planted with this in mind.   The species has 
been successfully grown in
 urban areas where air 
pollution, poor drainage, compacted soil, and/or 
drought are common.  Co mpared to the similar 
northern red oak ( Q. rubra), Shumard oak tolerates a 
broader range of soil moisture, and its more southern 
distribution provides stock better suited for that area.  
Shumard also apparently is little affected by 
chlorosis, which often is a problem for other oaks in 
high pH soils.   
 Noble Foundation Plant Image Gallery ©  Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation 
 
Industry : The wood of Shumard oak is close-grained, 
hard, strong, and heavy.  It is generally marketed 
with other red oak lumber for flooring, furniture, 
interior trim and veneer, cabinetry, and lumber.  
Numerous species of songbirds, wild turkeys, 
waterfowl, white-tailed deer, squirrels, and other 
mammals eat the acorns, which are produced in 
abundance. 
 
Ethnobotanic : The acorns are bitter, but edible, if the 
tannins are leached out.  They have been ground and 
used as flour, roasted and ground to make coffee, and 
eaten whole.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Native tree 
growing to 25 m  tall, with an open, rounded-
spreading crown.  Bark dark gray, smoothish, 
furrowed into ridges on lower trunk and older 
branches, the trunk sometimes buttressed on older 
trees.  Leaves are alternate,  elliptic, 8–18 cm long, to 
12 cm wide, deeply divided into 5–9 bristle-tipped 
lobes broadest toward the tip, the sinuses thumb-
shaped, dark green above, with tufts of hairs in vein 
axils below, commonly turning red in fall.  Male and 
female flowers are borne in separate catkins on the 
same tree (the species monoecious) on the current 
year's branchlets.  Acorns maturing in the second 
year, egg-shaped, 1.5–3 cm  long, with a flattened, 
more or less shallow cup.  This species is named for 
Benjamin Franklin Shumard (1820-1869), state 
geologist of Texas.

Shumard oak belongs to the red oak group (subgenus 
Erythrobalanus) and hybridizes with species of  that 
group:  
Q. hypoleucoides , Q. imbricaria, Q. marilandica , Q. 
nigra,  Q. nuttallii , Q. palustris , Q. phellos, Q. rubra , 
and  Q. velutina .    
 
Variation within the species:   
Trees known as  Q. shumardii var. texana (Q. texana, 
Q. rubra  var. texana , Q. nuttallii ; Texas red oak, 
Nuttall's oak) are now recognized as  Q. buckleyi Dorr 
& Nixon (Dorr & Nixon 1985).   Quercus shumardii 
var. schneckii  (Britt.) Sarg. is now generally regarded 
as within limits of typical variation for the species.  
Quercus shumardii  var. stenocarpa  Laughlin 
(Laughlin 1969), with very narrow acorns and 
shallow acorn cups, has been described from 
Missouri and Illinois.   
  
Distribution 
Shumard oak occurs on the Atlantic and Gulf coastal 
plains from North Carolina to northern Florida and 
west to central Texas.  Northward, it is common in 
Missouri, western Tennessee and Kentucky, southern 
Illinois, Indiana, and western Ohio.  Occurrences 
further north are more local and sporadic.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Adaptation  
Shumard oak occurs on moist, well-drained loamy 
soils of stream and river terraces and adjacent ridges 
and bluffs as well as mesic slopes and poorly drained 
upland sites, at elevations of 0–500 meters.  It is 
intolerant or only weakly tolerant of flooding and 
does not usually occur on the lowest river bottoms.  
Shumard oak is intolerant of shade but rare in early 
successional stands, probably colonizing gaps in 
mature forests.   It usually occurs as scattered trees 
with more prominent southern oak species of the oak-
hickory forest region.   
 
Flowering occurs from March-April (June) and 
fruiting from September-October.    
  
Establishment 
Shumard oak begins to produce fruit at about 25 
years, with optimum production at about 50 years and 
good crops every 2–3 years.  Germination occurs at 
high frequencies; full light is required for good 
seedling establishment and growth.  Shumard oaks 
are known to have r eached at least 480 years of age.   
 
Management 
Shumard oak can be successf ully direct seeded or 
planted as seedlings, but it is difficult to propagate by  cuttings.  Seed dormancy is broken by stratification 
for 60-90 days at 1-5°
 C.  Seed can be stored moist 
and cool overwinter but is best sown outdoors as 
soon as ripe.  Best growth is from seed sown in situ.  
Young trees from deep pot s are relatively easily 
transplanted, but those left in a nursery bed for more 
than two growing seasons without being moved will 
have problems because of the deep taproot.   
 
Reforestation of agricultural lands to bottomland 
hardwoods has been successful with Shumard oak 
direct-seeded to otherwise unprepared sites.  Soil 
fertilization does not improve success in early 
establishment.   
 
Shumard oak is probably moderately resistant to 
immediate fire damage, because it persists in some 
communities that are maintained by periodic fire.  
Young trees, however, are relatively thin-barked and 
basal wounding by fire usually results in at least top-
kill of such trees, either by girdling the tree or by 
creating avenues for infection by wood-rotting fungi.  
Top-killed Shumard oak produces root sprouts.   
 
Initial pruning to develop a central leader will 
provide better shaped street trees.  Pruning in the 
dormant season or in summer is best, but pruning 
should be avoided in late spring and early summer in 
areas where oak wilt is present.    
 
Oak wilt   
Shumard oak is highly susceptible to oak wilt 
infection, a fungal disease that invades the water-
conducting vessels and plugs them.  As water 
movement is slowed, the leaves wilt and rapidly drop 
off the tree.  The disease begins with a crinkling and 
paling of the leaves, followed by wilting and 
browning from the margins inward.  Necrosis may be 
strongest along the veins or between them.  The 
symptoms move down branches toward the center of 
the tree and the tree may die within 1–3 months, 
although some diseased tr ees may survive up to a 
year.  The disease may be spread by insects 
(primarily beetles) or pruning tools, but most of the 
tree loss in oak wilt centers  results from transmission 
through root spread betw een adjoining trees.  A 
trench (dug and then immediately filled) between 
neighboring trees severs the roots and prevents 
fungus spread.  Dead and infected trees must be 
destroyed – once a tree has be come infected, there is 
little chance to save it.  The wood may be used for 
firewood provided it is debarked or covered and 
sealed during the spring and summer (Johnson and 
Appel 2000; Roberts 2000; Wisconsin Dept. of 
Natural Resources 2000; City of Austin 2000).

Oak wilt most seriously infects species of the red oak 
group (including black and live oaks).  Overcup oak, 
bur oak, white oak, and other members of the white 
oak group are not as susceptible and can be planted in 
oak wilt centers.  This disease has reached epidemic 
proportions in Texas and in the mid-West from Iowa 
and Minnesota through Michigan and Wisconsin into 
Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
City of Austin 2000.  The oak wilt suppression 
program .  Austin Parks and Recreation, Austin, 
Texas.  SEP00.  
<http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/oakwilt/> 
 
Dorr L.J. & K.C. Nixon 1985.   Typification of the oak 
(Quercus) taxa described by S.B. Buckely (1809-
1884) .  Taxon 34:211-228.   
 
Edwards, M.B. 1990.   Quercus shumardii Buckl.  
Shumard Oak .  Pp. 734-737, IN: R.M. Burns and 
B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  
Hardwoods .  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  SEP00.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Volume
_2/quercus/shumardii.htm> 
 
Johnson, J. & D. Appel 2000.  Eight step program to 
oak wilt management .  Department of Plant 
Pathology & Microbiology, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, Texas.  SEP00.  
<http://cygnus.tamu.edu/Texlab/oakwilt.html> 
 
Laughlin, K. 1969.   Quercus shumardii var. 
stenocarpa Laughlin: Stenocarp Shumard oak .  
Phytologia. 19:57–64.  
 
Nixon, K.C. et al. 1993.   Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, IN: 
Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3 .  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
  
Roberts, D.L. 2000.   Oak wilt: A threat to red oaks .  
Michigan State University Extension Website.  
SEP00.  <http://www.msue.msu.edu/reg_se/oakwilt/> 
 
Samuel Roberts Nobel Foundation 1999.   Noble 
foundation plant image gallery .  Ardmore, 
Oklahoma.  29nov2000.  
<http://www.noble.org/imagegallery/index.html> 
 
Sullivan, J. 1993.   Quercus shumardii .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Database].  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory.  Misso ula, Montana.  SEP00.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/datab ase/feis/plants/tree/quesh
u/> 
 
Waldron, G.E., S.W. Aboud, J.D. Ambrose, & G.A. 
Meyers 1987 .  Shumard oak, Quercus shumardii, in 
Canada .  Canad. Field-Nat. 101:532-538.    
 
Wisconsin Dept. of Natural Resources 2000.   Oak 
wilt in Wisconsin: Biology and management .  
Wisconsin DNR Website.  SEP00.  
<http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/forestry/fh/dise
ases/oakwilt.htm>  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.