Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COAST LIVE OAK 
Quercus agrifolia Nee 
Plant Symbol = QUAG  
 
Contributed by: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden & 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
 
Use 
Erosion: Coast live oaks stabilize soil on slopes, 
provide an organic-rich litter, and contribute to a 
habitat for a diversity of insects, birds, and mammals.   
 
Wildlife : Acorns are an important food source for 
birds, small mammals, and deer.  Deer may browse 
the young foliage.  
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used acorns as an 
important food staple and  early European colonists 
found that its wood made a superior charcoal for use 
in a variety of industries, including baking and 
preparing mortar. 
 
Landscape and beautification:  Coast live oak is an 
important element in both natural and man-made 
landscapes, providing shade and an aesthetic quality. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General:  Oak Family (Fagaceae).  Coast live oak, an 
evergreen tree 10 to 25 m tall, has a broad, dense 
crown and widely spreading branches.  The lower 
limbs of ungrazed trees ofte n recline on the ground.  
Mature bark is gray and sh allowly furrowed.  Leaves 
are oblong to oval, 2 to 6 cm in length, cupped, with 
entire to toothed margins.  The upper surface is 
strongly convex, deep green and smooth, but the 
lower surface is paler, with  hairy-tufted vein axils.  
Like all oaks, coast live oak is monoecious and wind-
pollinated.  Acorn cups are composed of thin, flat 
scales.  The one-seeded nuts are 2 to 4 cm long, 
narrowly conical, and mature in one year.  On 
average, trees have high  acorn production once every 
2 to 3 years.  Flowering ta kes place from February to 
April.  Fruits mature between August and October. 
 
Distribution:  Coast live oak occurs in the coast 
ranges from north central California southward to 
northern Baja California. For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It grows in well-drained soils on bluffs, 
gentle slopes, and canyons, and can be found up to 
1400 m in elevation.  This species is adapted to 
relatively warm, wet winters and dry summers 
moderated by fog and cool temperatures, but does not 
occur where the ground freezes .  Although tolerant of 
various soil types, live oak prefers a deep loam.  
Common associates include species of sumac, 
lemonade berry, and toyon.  Coast live oak is 
particularly well adapted to fire.  Branches may 
produce new shoots after having been lightly burned.  
Trunks exposed to moderate fires often resprout from 
the base.  Like most oaks, it has an obligate 
relationship with mycorrhizal fungi, which provide 
critical moisture and nutrients 
 
Propagation  by seeds: Oak seeds do not store well 
and consequently seeds should be planted soon after 
maturity.  Nuts are considered ripe when they 
separate freely from the acorn cap and fall from the 
tree.  Care should be taken to collect local fruits, 
because they may be adapted to local environmental 
conditions.  Viable nuts are green to brown and have 
unblemished walls.  Nuts with discoloration or sticky 
exudates, and small holes caused by insect larvae, 
should be discarded.

Propagation of coast live oak is highly successful by 
direct seeding at the beginning of winter.  Once a site 
is chosen, prepare holes that are 10 inches in 
diameter and 4 to 5 inches deep.  One gram of a 
slow-release fertilizer should be placed in the bottom 
and covered by a small amount of soil.  Place 6 to 10 
acorns in each hole at a depth of 1 to 2 inches.  
Temporary enclosures should be used to minimize 
herbivory by rodents or birds.  A simple enclosure 
can be constructed from a 1 quart plastic dairy 
container with the bottom removed and a metal 
screen attached.  Near the end of the first season, 
seedlings should be thinned to 2 or 3 per hole and to 
1 seedling by the second season.  Supplemental 
watering may be necessary if a drought of 6 weeks or 
more occurs during the spring. 
 
Container Planting: Seeds may be planted in one-
gallon containers, using well-drained potting soil that 
includes slow-release fertilizer.  Tapered plastic 
planting tubes, with a volume of 10 cubic inches, also 
may be used.  Seeds should be planted 1 to 2 inches 
deep and the soil kept moist.  Seedlings should be 
transplanted as soon as the first true leaves mature.  
Planting holes should be at least twice as wide and 
deep as the container.  Seedlings may require 
watering every 2 to 3 weeks during the first season.  
Care should be taken to weed and mulch around 
young plants until they are 6 to 10 inches tall. 
 
Management 
Natural live oak regeneration from seeds tends to 
occur sporadically during wi nters with above average 
precipitation that falls evenly throughout the season.  
Seedlings are especially sensitive to trampling and 
too herbivory by rodents, deer, and cattle.  Common 
insects include moth larvae and tent caterpillars.  
Mature trees are especially susceptible to oak crown 
and root rot fungi (e.g., Inonotus , Ganoderma , and 
Laetiporus ) which decay wood in trunks and roots.  
Activities that disturb or compact soil around trees, 
including construction and livestock grazing need to 
be avoided or carefully managed within the near the 
zone of leaf canopy.  Summer irrigation near oaks 
should also be avoided, especially in urban 
landscapes, because it promotes oak root and crown 
rot.  When desirable, mature trees consumed by fires 
may be allowed to recover from stump sprouts if 
replanting on large tracts is uneconomical.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
It is best to plant species from your local area, 
adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown.  This species is available from 
most native plant nurseries within its range.  Contact  your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departm
ent of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bleier, C. 1993.  A planner’s guide for oak 
woodlands .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  94 p. 
 
Griffin, J. 1977.   Oak woodland.  Pages 383-415.  IN 
M. Barbour and J. Major (eds.).  Terrestrial 
vegetation of California.  Wiley Interscience, New 
York, New York. 
 
Pavlik, B.M., P.C. Muick,  S. Johnson, & M. Popper 
1991.   Oaks of California.   Cachuma Press and the 
California Oak Foundation, Los Olivos, California.  
184 p. 
 
Schettler, S. & M. Smith 1980.   Nursery propagation 
of California oaks .  Pages 242-245. IN T. Plumb 
(ed.).  Proceedings of th e symposium on the ecology, 
management, and utilization of California oaks.  
USDA, Forest Service, Paci fic Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station.  Technical Report 44. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken  & Julie Burgher  
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 18sep00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.