Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE OAK 
Quercus douglasii Hook. & 
Arn. 
Plant Symbol = QUDO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Blue oaks had and continue to have 
significant meaning to native cultures.  The most 
significant use of blue oak was for its highly 
desirable acorns for food.  Acorns were shelled, 
dried, pounded into  flour, sifted for fineness, leached 
of bitter tannins, and mixed with other acorn types 
such as black oak ( Quercus kelloggii) and prepared 
as mush, soup, paddies, or bread.  Called "acorn" by 
contemporary gatherers, this  food is still relished for 
ceremonies, festivals, dances, and family gatherings.  
 
California's blue oak provided many resources to 
California Indian people including medicine, dyes, 
utensils, games, toys, and construction materials.  
The inner bark of the blue oak was boiled and the 
brew drank for relief of arthritis by the Kawaiisu.  
Acorns served as bait in traps and snares to catch 
pigeons, flickers, quail, and jays by the Gabrielino, 
Sierra Miwok and other tribes.  California blue oaks 
grow new sprouts vigorously after a fire and these 
young shoots exhibit highly desirable qualities for 
manufacturing products.  These characteristics 
include flexibility, length, no lateral branching, easily 
split, and straightness.  These shoots were used for  basketry and oak sprouts were reputed to have great 
strength.  Types of baskets included Miwok, Pomo, 
and Maidu cradleboards with frameworks of oak 
shoots, and Kawaiisu twined work-baskets made with 
rims of blue oak branches.  The Salinan along the 
central coast made seed-beater
s with a looped stick of 
oak.  The Yana used an oak paddle in cooking and 
the Achomawi made spoons of oak.  The Kawaiisu 
made a ladle about a foot long that was carved from 
the wood of blue oak.  Forked oak sticks, darkened 
by charring, were used as fake antlers on deer masks 
of the Sierra Miwok for hunting purposes.  The 
Maidu of Chico Rancheria constructed their houses 
with posts of oak.  The Western Mono also used 
young oak switches as construction materials for 
certain structures such as  acorn granary frameworks.  
Digging sticks were made of blue oak by the Western 
Mono for roasting yucca bulbs, blue oak was 
preferred as firewood by the Kawaiisu and the pith of 
the oak was used for starting fires.  Fallen oak limbs 
make excellent firewood, because the coals retain 
heat and the Shasta, Sierra  Miwok, and many other 
tribes used the wood.  Acorns were utilized by many 
tribes in the manufacture of toys including acorn 
buzzers and acorn tops.  Split acorns often formed 
dice, which could be rolled upon a flat, coiled 
basketry tray.  The Miwok, the Western Mono, 
Pomo, Sinkyone, and other cultural groups used 
these.  
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Wildlife : It is well known that bears ( Ursus 
americanus ), ground squirrels (Spermophilus scrofa), 
jays (Cyanocitta steller i), band-tailed pigeons 
( Columba fasciata ), acorn woodpeckers ( Melanerpes 
formicivorus ), pocket gophers ( Thomomys bottae), 
deer mice (Peromyscus  spp.) and black-tailed deer 
( Odocileus hemionus ), among many other animals 
find acorns a favorite food source. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Oak Family (Fagaceae).  Blue oak is a 
deciduous tree that is endemi c to California.  It has a 
rounded crown and grows from 6-20 m. high.  The 
gray bark is shallowly checke d into small thin scales.  
The leaves are shallowly lobed and blue-green above.

The acorns mature in one year, are oval, and have 
slightly tubercled scales.  
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Blue oak woodlands cover 3 million 
acres in California, one-half of all oak covered lands.  
It is the most abundant hardwood forest type in the 
state.  Blue oak may occur in near pure stands in 
dense woodland or savanna.  It may also occur as a 
dominant in mixed stands that include foothill pine 
( Pinus sabiniana ), interior live oak ( Quercus 
wislizenii ), valley oak ( Quercus lobata ), and/or coast 
live oak (Quercus agrifolia ), or as a minor 
component in mixed stands of oaks and other 
hardwoods. 
 
If possible, gather acorns from many different trees 
locally, to maintain genetic diversity of blue oak and 
to ensure that the plants are adapted to the site.  The 
seeds of most oaks are short-lived and must be sown 
or refrigerated quickly, otherwise they lose their 
ability to germinate.  They are best gathered directly 
from the tree or from the ground within a short time 
of their dropping, usually within several days.  To 
test their ripeness, select an acorn that is still in its 
cap and twist it lightly.  If it pops out of the cap, the 
acorn is ripe.  Store the seeds without their caps in a 
grocery sack until ready to plant.  The seeds can be 
sown in autumn outdoors (see under direct seeding), 
or if the seeds are started in pots in the greenhouse in 
the early spring, they should be stratified for one and 
one-half months between 33 and 40 degrees in a 
refrigerator in a mix. 
 
Fill a gallon Ziploc™ bag about half full with acorns, 
and then add about a cup of dry perlite and a little bit  of vermiculite (3:1 mixture).  Shake the bag to 
distribute the perlite around the acorns, label the bag, 
and place it in the refrigerator.  Check the bag weekly 
and discard moldy acorns.  Any acorns that have 
germinated need to be taken out of the bag and sown.  
Plant the seeds on their sides directly in long, deep 
pots (2 in. in diameter by 10 inches long) with potting 
soil and a slow release fertilizer.  Water the tubes and 
place them in diffused light in the nursery or outside, 
making sure to keep each tube suspended off the 
ground or bench so the large air holes at the bottom 
of the tube are exposed.  When the tree roots hit the 
air, they'll stop growing.  Water the pots when the 
surface of the soil is dry to 
the touch.  Do not over-
water. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Plant the seedlings the following winter in a sunny 
location and water the transplants to ensure sufficient 
moisture and eliminate air pockets.  Be careful to 
keep the soil from falling of f of the roots.  Place the 
seedlings in the ground such that the top of the soil 
from the container is even with the ground line.  Use 
a pick mattock for planting, which has a pick on one 
surface and a triangular wedge on the other surface.  
Break up the soil, which w ill foster root growth.  
Protect the seedlings from weeds, drying winds, 
grasshoppers, and small and large mammals that 
might feed on the roots, leaves, or trunks.  Also, 
water the seedlings deeply the first summer.  A good 
seedling protector is essential and can be a simple 
wire window screen mesh and wooden stake.  Bend 
the mesh into a cylinder that is about 6-8 inches in 
diameter and 3 feet tall.  Attach the mesh cylinder 
onto the wooden stake with st aples or carpet tacks.  
Place the tube over the seedling and pound the stake 
into the ground.  Seedlings should be kept free of 
vegetation for 2 to 3 feet surrounding each seedling. 
 
Direct Seeding : Pick acorns without insect exit holes 
or diseases.  Store acorns for one and one half months 
in a sealed plastic bag in the refrigerator.  Dig a hole 
with the trowel, shovel, or hoe and be sure to break 
up the soil much deeper (one to two feet) than the 
acorn is planted and backfill with loosened soil to 
accommodate the growing of  roots.  Plant the acorns 
on their sides, one to two inches deep in the fall of 
the year.  Plant several acorns in each hole and thin 
multiple seedlings down to a single most vigorous 
plant.  Water the acorns deeply the first summer.  
Weed several feet around each seedling for several 
years.  Protect the seedlings from animals until well 
established. 
 
Management 
Keep lawns and plants that require a lot of moisture 
away from the oaks.  Blue oak should not be irrigated

accept in years of unusually low rainfall.  If a drought 
year, supplemental watering can take place in the 
spring to complement natural rainfall.  Water the soil 
from halfway between the trunk and the drip line to 
10-15 feet beyond, allowing water to penetrate the 
soil to a depth of 18 to 24 inches.  It may be 
necessary to water for 4 to 6 hours to get water to this 
depth.  Keep water at least 10 feet away from the 
trunk.  Native plants that are drought-tolerant and 
shade-tolerant and require no summer water can be 
planted under the oaks, such as California brome 
( Bromus carinatus ), deergrass (Muhlenbergia 
rigens ), sego lily ( Calochortus  spp.), and bluedicks 
( Dichelostemma  spp.), among others.  Light pruning 
can be done in the winter on mature oaks to remove 
weak, diseased, and dead branches, but never top 
oaks. 
 
Once established, blue oak is quite fire-tolerant.  
Many tribes in California set frequent light-surface 
fires in areas of blue oak to ensure continual yields of 
high-quality acorn.  Major reasons for their burning 
included the following: 1) facilitating acorn 
collection; (2) increasing the quality and quantity of 
acorn production through decreasing diseases; (3) 
increasing the quality and quantity of acorn 
production through decreasing acorn pests; 4) 
stimulating the production of straight shoots 
(epicormic) for the making of cultural items; 5) 
decreasing the likelihood of major conflagrations that 
would destroy the oaks; 6) burning for mushrooms; 
and 7) increasing edible grasses and other seed-
bearing herbaceous plants under the oaks and within 
the surrounding woodlands.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Readily available from most native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
CalPhotos 2000.   Quercus douglasii . Version: 
000229. CalFlora, Inc., Berkeley, California. 
<http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?seq_num
=11938&one=T>.  
Dagit, R. 1998.   Transplanting oak trees .  Growing 
Native 9(6):1-24. Editor, L. Lacy.  The Newsletter of 
the Growing Native Research Institute. 
 
Hagen, B.W. 1990.   Keeping native California oaks 
healthy .  Tree Notes #7.  California Department of 
Forestry and Fire Protection. 
 
Hagen, B.W., B.D. Coate, & K. Oldham 1991.  
Compatible plants under and around oaks .   
 
Hill, D. 1978.  The Indians of Chico Rancheria.  
State of California, the Resources Agency. 
Department of Parks and Recreation, Sacramento, 
California.  108 pp. 
 
Keator, G. 1998.   The life of an oak: an intimate 
portrait .  Heyday Books and California Oak 
Foundation.  Berkeley, California. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, &A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Mason, J.A. 1912.   The ethnology of the Salinan 
Indians . University of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology.  Vol. 10(4). 
pp. 97-240. 
 
McDonald, P.M. 1990.   Silvics of North America .  
Volume 2, Hardwoods.  Burns, R.M. and B.H. 
Honkala, tech. coords.  Agriculture Handbook 654. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. 
 
Schulz, P.E. 1988.   Indians of Lassen Volcanic 
National Park and vicinity .  Loomis Museum 
Association. Lassen Volcanic National Park, Mineral, 
California.  160 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 000229.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.