Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
OREGON OAK 
Quercus garryana  Dougl. ex 
Hook. 
Plant Symbol = QUGA4  
 
Contributed by: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden and 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Oregon white oak, Garry oak, Brewer’s oak, chêne de 
Garry; three varieties are recognized for this species: 
Quercus garryana var. garryana , Quercus garryana  
var.  breweri , and Quercus garryana  var. semota 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Oregon oak is a valuable source of food and 
cover for wildlife.  Gray sq uirrels, deer, and livestock 
eat acorns and the leaves of young shoots and 
sprouts. 
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used Acorns as a 
food staple. 
 
Construction : In the Pacific Northwest, large trees 
were preferred for shipbu ilding, railroad ties, and 
construction.  Resistance to  decay also contributed to  its use as fence posts.  The wood continues to be 
important to cottage furniture and cabinet industries. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Oak Family (Fagaceae).  
Quercus garryana, 
a native deciduous tree up to 30 m tall throughout 
much of its range in the Pacific Northwest, has an 
open, rounded crown.  However, in the southern part 
of its range, including interior California, it also is a 
shrub up to 5 m tall, which is treated as var.  breweri 
(Engelm.) Jepson.  The mature bark is brownish gray 
and shallowly fissured in  a checker-like pattern.  
Leaves are oblong to obovate, 8-15 cm long, and 
deeply lobed (5-7 rounded lobes).  The upper 
surfaces are shiny and da rk green, but the lower 
surfaces are pale green.  Like all oaks, Oregon oak is 
monoecious and wind-pollinated.  The acorn cups are 
composed of thick, tubercled scales.  The one-seeded 
nuts are 2-3 cm long, ovoid, and mature in one year.  
Flowering takes place from March to May.  Fruits 
mature between August and November.  Color 
images, line drawings, and a  description can be found 
in Farrar (1995). 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
This species is known from California, Washington, 
Oregon, and British Columbia.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Oregon oak is best developed as a tree on 
slopes and valleys below 1500 m where annual 
rainfall exceeds 30 inches.  The range in climate is 
considerable, extending from the relatively cool, 
moist Fraser Valley of British Columbia to the 
summer-dry Coast Ranges north of San Francisco 
and the foothills of the Sierra Nevada in California.  
Oregon oak takes the form of a shrub on nutrient-
poor soils (e.g., serpentin e) and drier sites, often 
forming clonal thickets.  It is tolerant of freezing 
conditions and also has a broad tolerance of 
substrates, which vary from rocky, thin soils of ridges 
to the deep loams and clays of valley bottoms.  
Common associates in mixed forests include 
madrone, Douglas fir, tanbark oak, and yellow pines.

In the coastal mountains and in the absence of fire, 
Douglas fir gradually replaces Oregon oak.  
Throughout much of its range, Oregon oak 
reproduces extensively by basal sprouts, which often 
develop after fires.  Thus, Oregon Oak is often 
associated with local grasslands maintained by fire.  
In some areas seedlings develop into multi-stemmed 
plants, which may live up to 10 years, until a single 
shoot becomes dominant.  Like most oaks, Oregon 
oak has an obligate relationship with mycorrhizal 
fungi, which provide additional moisture and 
nutrients. 
 
Seed Preparation : Oak seeds do not store well and 
consequently seeds should be planted soon after 
maturity.  Nuts are considered ripe when they 
separate freely from the acorn cap and fall from the 
tree.  Care should be taken to collect local fruits, 
because they may be adapted to local environmental 
conditions.  Viable nuts may be green to brown, and 
have unblemished walls.  Nuts with discoloration or 
sticky exudates, and small holes caused by insect 
larvae, should be discarded. 
 
Direct Seeding : Seeds may be planted at the 
beginning of the winter.  Once the site is chosen, 
prepare holes that are 10 in ches in diameter and 4-5 
inches deep.  One gram of a slow-release fertilizer 
should be placed in the bottom and covered by a 
small amount of soil.  Place  6-10 acorns in each hole 
at a depth of 1-2 inches.  Rodents or birds should use 
temporary enclosures to minimize herbivory.  A 
simple enclosure can be constructed from a one-quart 
plastic dairy container with the bottom removed and 
a metal screen attached.  To wards the end of the first 
season, seedlings should be thinned to 2 or 3 per hole 
and to one seedling by the second season.  
Supplemental watering may be necessary if a drought 
of 6 weeks or more occurs during the spring. 
 
Container Planting: Seeds may be planted in one-
gallon containers, using well-drained potting soil that 
includes slow-release fer tilizer.  Tapered plastic 
planting tubes, with a volume of 10 cubic inches, 
may also be used.  Seeds should be planted 1-2 
inches deep and the soil kept moist and aerated.  
Seedlings should be transplanted as soon as the first 
leaves open and become firm, which generally occurs 
in spring.  Planting holes should be at least twice as 
wide and deep as the container.  Seedlings may 
require watering every 2-3 weeks during the first 
season.  Care should be taken to weed and mulch 
around young plants until they are 6-10 inches tall. 
 
Management 
Natural regeneration, through sprouting and seed 
germination, is promoted by fire, which contributes 
to expansion and persistence of Oregon oak stands.  
Continued disturbance by fire may result in pure 
stands that are often associat ed with an understory of 
grasses or scattered shrubs.  Oregon oak is not as 
susceptible to oak crown and root rot fungi (e.g., 
Inonotus , Ganoderma , and Laetiporus ) as other oaks, 
unless disturbed by changes that include irrigation.  
Activities that disturb or compact soil around large 
trees, especially in urban settings, should be avoided. 
 Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species can be acquired from nurseries 
throughout its range that deal in native plants.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
CalPhotos 2000.  Quercus garryana .  Version: 
000502.  <http://www.calflora.org>.  CalFlora, Inc., 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995 .  Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa.  502 pp. 
 
Franklin, J. & C. Dyrness 1973.   Natural vegetation 
of Oregon and Washington .  USDA, Forest Service, 
General Technical Report PNW 8.  417 pp. 
 
Griffin, J. 1977.   Oak woodland.  pp. 383-415.  IN M. 
Barbour and J. Major (eds.).   Terrestrial vegetation of 
California .  Wiley Interscience, New York, New 
York.  1002 pp.

Olson, D. 1974.  Quercus L. oak.  pp. 692-703.  IN C. 
Schopmeyer (ed.).   Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 450.  
USDA, Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 
 
Thilenius, J. 1968. The  Quercus garryana forests of 
the Willamette Valley, Oregon. Ecology 49: 1124-
1133. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000502.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Dieter Wilken & Julie Burgher 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 02may00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.