Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN RED OAK 
Quercus rubra  L. 
Plant Symbol = QURU 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and the Biota of North America Program 
Alternate Names 
Red oak, common red oak, eastern red oak, mountain 
red oak, gray oak  
 
Uses 
Industry: Northern red oak is an important source of 
hardwood lumber.  The wood is close-grained, heavy, 
and hard; it machines well and accepts a variety of 
finishes.  It is used for furniture, veneer, interior 
finishing, cabinets, paneling, and flooring as well as 
for agricultural implements, posts, and railway ties.   
 
Wildlife : Northern red oak provides good cover and 
nesting sites (including cavities) for a wide variety of 
birds and mammals.  Deer, elk, moose, and rabbits 
commonly browse leaves and young seedlings and 
the acorns are eaten by a wide variety of large and 
small mammals and birds.   
 
Ethnobotanic : The acorns of red oak (and other oak 
species) were an important food source for Native 
Americans.  To remove bitter tannins, they were 
boiled, leached with ashes, soaked for days in water, 
or buried over winter.  Some tribes used red oak bark 
as a medicine for heart troubles and bronchial 
infections or as an astringent, disinfectant, and 
cleanser.    
 
Conservation : Northern red oak is commonly planted 
as a landscape tree in eastern North America and 
Europe -- used as a shade tree on lawns, parks, 
campuses, golf courses, etc, where space is sufficient.  
It is fast growing, easy to transplant, tolerant of urban 
conditions (including dry and acidic soil and air 
pollution), the abundant nuts attract wildlife, and the 
leaves develop a brick-red fall color.  It has been used 
in various rehabilitation projects, including 
revegetation of coal mine spoils in states of the east 
central United States (Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, 
Kentucky, and Pennsylvania).  
 ©  Mike Hogan Trees of Alabama and the Southeast Auburn University 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Native trees 
often reaching 20–30 m tall, less commonly up to 50 
m; bark dark gray or black, shallowly furrowed into 
broad hard scaly ridges, inner bark reddish to pink; 
generally developing a strong taproot and network of 
deep, spreading laterals.  Leaves are deciduous, 
alternate, elliptic, 10–25 cm long and 8–15 cm wide, 
divided less than halfway to midvein into 7–11 
shallow wavy lobes with a few irregular bristle-
tipped teeth, sinuses usually extending less than 1/2 
distance to midrib, glabrous and dull green above, 
light dull green below with tufts of hairs in vein 
angles.  Male and female flowers are borne in 
separate catkins on the same tree (the species 
monoecious),  the staminate  catkins in leaf axils of 
the previous year's growth, the pistillate in 2–many-
flowered spikes in the leaf  axils.  Acorns maturing in 
the second year, about 15–30 cm long, with a broad 
usually shallow cup, borne singly or in clusters of 2–
5.  The common name is in reference to the red fall 
foliage color, red petioles, and reddish interior wood.  
This is a different species from “southern red oak” 
( Q. falcata ).  
 
Northern red oak is a member of the red oak 
subgroup (subg.  Erythrobalanus = sect.  Lobatae ).  It 
hybridizes with related species, including scarlet oak 
( Q. coccinea ), northern pin oak (Q. ellipsoidalis ), 
shingle oak ( Q. imbricata), scrub oak ( Q. ilicifolia), 
blackjack oak ( Q. marilandica), swamp oak (Q. 
palustris ), willow oak ( Q. phellos), Shumard oak ( Q. 
shumardii ), and black oak ( Q. velutina).

Variation within the species: There are different 
interpretations of variation patterns among trees of 
northern red oak.  A single species without formally 
variants is sometimes recognized, or two varieties 
may be recognized.   
 
Quercus rubra  var. ambigua (A. Gray) Fernald   
    SY= Q. borealis  Michx. f. 
    SY= Q. rubra var. borealis (Michx. f.) Farw.  
 
Quercus rubra  var. rubra  
    SY= Q. maxima  (Marsh.) Ashe   
    SY= Q. borealis  var. maxima  (Marsh.) Ashe   
 
Var. rubra has a shallow cup, to 3 cm wide, 
enclosing 1/4–1/5 of the nut.  Var.  ambigua has a 
deeper cup, to 2 cm wide, enclosing 1/3 of the nut.  
McDougal and Parks (1984, 1986) found evidence of 
correspondence between  morphological types and 
flavonoid chemotypes but the evolutionary status and 
geographic distribution of these have not been 
worked out in detail.   
 
Distribution  
Northern red oak is widely distributed throughout 
much of the eastern United States and southeastern 
Canada.  It grows from Quebec, Ontario, Nova 
Scotia, and New Brunswick southward to 
southwestern Georgia, Alabama, northern 
Mississippi, northern Arkansas, and eastern 
Oklahoma.  Northern red oak extends westward 
through Minnesota and Iowa, south through eastern 
Nebraska and Kansas to eastern Oklahoma.  It occurs 
locally in eastern and southwestern Louisiana and 
western Mississippi.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Northern red oak commonly grows on 
mesic slopes and well-drained uplands, less 
commonly on dry slopes or poorly drained uplands, 
at (0-) 150–1800 meters in elevation.  It typically 
grows on lower and middle slopes, in coves, ravines, 
and on valley floors, most commonly on N- and E-
facing slopes and on clay, loam, and sandy or 
gravelly soils.  Best growth is in full sun and well 
drained, slightly acidic, sandy loam.  It occurs as a 
dominant in many natural communities, including 
mixed mesophytic and pine-oak.    
 
Northern red oak is intermediate in shade tolerance 
but generally unable to establish beneath its own 
canopy.  Seedlings usually do not reach sapling or 
pole size unless gaps are created in the canopy.   Northern red oak is often replaced by more shade-
tolerant species such as sugar maple and American 
basswood.   
 
Flowering occurs in April–May, during or before leaf 
development, while fruiting (August–) September–
October. 
 
General
: Northern red oak generally first bears fruit 
at about 20–25 years, although most trees do not 
produce acorns in abundance until 40–50 years.  
Good crops are produced every 2–5 years.  In most 
years, birds, mammals, and insects commonly 
destroy up to 80% of the  crop and nearly the entire 
crop can be eliminated in  poor years.  Seeds on the 
soil surface are particularly vulnerable to rodent 
predation, and germination frequencies are much 
higher when a layer of leaf litter covers acorns.  
Under natural conditions, acorns generally germinate 
in the spring after over-wintering breaks dormancy.   
 
Germination and seedling establishment may be 
successful in full and partia l shade, but early growth 
is reduced by shade, poor soil, and competing 
herbaceous vegetation.  Seedlings in mature stands 
may be present in large  number, but few survive 
more than a few years or grow to more than 15–20 
cm in height.  Under optimal conditions, northern red 
oak is fast growing and trees may live up to 500 
years.    
 
Seedlings, saplings, and small poles of northern red 
oak can sprout if cut or burned.  Although young 
oaks typically stump sprout readily, older and larger 
individuals also may sprout.    
 
Management 
The tight, relatively thin bark of northern red oak 
makes the trees more susceptible to fire damage than 
in species of oak with rou gher, corkier bark.  Apart 
from immediate mortality, damaged basal cambial 
tissue permits the entry of  insects and heart-rot decay 
that may ultimately kill the tree.  Even so, northern 
red oak is adapted to periodic fire, which is integrally 
associated with oak forests.  Older, larger individuals 
often survive fire and seedlings, saplings, and pole-
sized individuals commonly sprout vigorously from 
the stumps or root collar after being top-killed by 
fire.  Increased fire suppression has favored more 
shade-tolerant hardwoods and resulted in a decrease 
in oaks.   
 
Acorns can maintain viability in controlled storage 
for up to 2–3 years.  They should be stratified at 1-3 ° 
C for several months; those from northern 
populations require the longer period.  Growth is best

when sown as soon as ripe into permanent position or 
in an outdoor seedbed protected from predation.  
Cuttings obtained from young trees can be rooted if 
treated with hormones.  Transplants of bare root 
stock are best done in spring.  Because of its 
usefulness and popularity, northern red oak is 
commonly available in ball-and-burlap and in 
containers.   
 
The gypsy moth and numerous other insects can 
attack northern red oak, occasionally causing serious 
damage.  Numerous caterpillars enjoy oak foliage, 
but feeding damage is usually not severe.  Oak 
decline is a serious disease of northern red oak and 
has affected the species  throughout much of the 
central Appalachian region.   
 
Oak wilt   
Northern red oak is susceptible to oak wilt, a fungal 
disease that invades the water-conducting vessels and 
plugs them.  As water movement is slowed, the 
leaves wilt and rapidly drop off the tree.  The disease 
begins with a crinkling and paling of the leaves, 
followed by wilting and browning from the margins 
inward.  Necrosis may be strongest along the veins or 
between them.  The symptoms move down branches 
toward the center of th e tree and the tree may die 
within 1–3 months, although some diseased trees 
may survive up to a year.  The disease may be spread 
by insects (primarily beetles) or pruning tools, but 
most of the tree loss in oak wilt centers results from 
transmission through root spread between adjoining 
trees.  A trench (dug and  then immediately filled) 
between neighboring trees severs the roots and 
prevents fungus spread.  De ad and infected trees must 
be destroyed – once a tree has become infected, there 
is little chance to save it.  The wood may be used for 
firewood provided it is debarked or covered and 
sealed during the spring and summer (Johnson and 
Appel 2000; Roberts 2000; Wisconsin Dept. of 
Natural Resources 2000; City of Austin 2000).   
 
This disease most seriously  infects species of the red 
oak group (including black and live oaks).  Overcup 
oak, bur oak, white oak, and other members of the 
white oak group are not as susceptible and can be 
planted in oak wilt centers.  Oak wilt has reached 
epidemic proportions in Texas and in the mid-West 
from Iowa and Minnesota through Michigan and 
Wisconsin into Ohio, West Virginia, and 
Pennsylvania.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural  Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Auburn University 1999.  
Trees of Alabama and the 
southeast web site .  001207.  School of Forestry and 
Wildlife Science, Auburn, Alabama.  
<http://www.forestry.auburn.edu/samuelson/dendrolo
gy/> 
 
City of Austin 2000.   The oak wilt suppression 
program .  Austin Parks and Recreation, Austin, 
Texas.  <http://www.ci.au stin.tx.us/oakwilt/>  
Accessed September 2000.   
 
Johnson, J. & D. Appel 2000.  Eight step program to 
oak wilt management .  Department of Plant 
Pathology & Microbiology, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, Texas.  
<http://cygnus.tamu.edu/Texlab/oakwilt.html>  
Accessed September 2000.    
 
McDougal, K.M. & C.R. Parks 1986.   Environmental 
and genetic components of flavonoid variation in red 
oak,  Quercus rubra .  Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 14:291–
298.   
  
McDougal, K.M. & C.R. Parks 1984.   Elevational 
variation in foliar flavonoids of Quercus rubra L. 
(Fagaceae) .  Amer. J. Bot. 71:301–308.   
  
Nixon, K.C. and others 1993.   Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, 
IN:  Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3 .  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>  Accessed 
September 2000.   
 
Roberts, D.L. 2000.   Oak wilt: A threat to red oaks .  
Michigan State University Extension Website.   
<http://www.msue.msu.edu/reg_se/oakwilt/>  
Accessed September 2000.    
 
Sander, I.L. 1990.   Quercus rubra L.  Overcup Oak .  
Pp. 727-733, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.  
Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  Hardwoods .  
USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, 
Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Volume
_2/quercus/rubra.htm>  Accessed September 2000.

Tirmenstein, D.A. 1991.  Quercus rubra.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system [database].   USDA Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory.  Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/queru
b/>  Accessed September 2000.   
  
Wisconsin Dept. of Natural Resources 2000.   Oak 
wilt in Wisconsin: Biology and management .  
Wisconsin DNR Website.  
<http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/forestry/fh/dise
ases/oakwilt.htm>  Accessed September 2000.    
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 Revised: 19jun02 jsp;  29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.