Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA WHITE OAK 
Quercus lobata Nee 
Plant Symbol = QULO  
 
Contributed by: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden & 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
 
Uses 
General: White oak is a dominant species of valley 
oak savanna and low elevation riparian forests in 
California, providing a critical habitat for many 
animal and plant species, stabilizing soils in flood 
plains, and contributing an aesthetic value to the 
natural landscape.   
 
Wildlife:  California white oak acorns are an 
important food source for deer, California ground 
squirrels, band-tailed pigeons, and acorn 
woodpeckers. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used acorns as a 
food staple. 
 
Economic : White oak was a source of timber by early 
settlers.  However, because older trees are especially 
susceptible to fungal d ecay, their wood was not 
widely preferred. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Oak Family (Fagaceae).  California white 
oak, sometimes referred to as valley oak, is a  
 
deciduous tree, 12 to 30 m tall, with a rounded 
spreading crown.  The mature bark is gray, scaly, and 
often vertically fissured in  a checker-like pattern.  
Leaves are oblong to obovate,  5 to 10 cm long, with 7 
to 11 deep lobes.  The upper surface is green and 
shiny; the lower surface is grayish green.  Like all 
oaks, white oak is monoecious and wind-pollinated.  
The acorn cups are composed of thick, tubercled 
scales.  The one-seeded nuts are 3 to 5 cm long, 
oblong to ovoid, and mature in one year.  Flowering 
takes place from March to April.  Fruits mature 
between August and October.  Good acorn 
production has been reported to occur annually, but 
high acorn numbers occur episodically.  Trees of this 
species may be among the largest oaks in North 
America. 
Gary A. Monroe 
@ PLANTS 
 
Distribution 
Although once widespread  in much of the northern 
Great Central Valley of California, California white 
oak now occurs primarily in the inner Coast Ranges 
and bordering foothills.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : It grows in deep, fertile soils of flats and 
bottomlands below 1200 m.  The climate is typically 
dry and hot, especially during the summer, with an 
average rainfall of 15 to 40 inches.  Like most oaks, 
California white oak has an obligate relationship with 
mycorrhizal fungi, which provide critical moisture 
and nutrients.  Some common associates in riparian 
habitats include coast live oak, sycamore, and 
cottonwoods, but sedges, grasses, and other 
herbaceous species are the dominant understory 
elsewhere. 
 
Propagation by Seed:  Oak seeds do not store well 
and consequently seeds should be planted soon after 
maturity.  Nuts are considered ripe when they 
separate freely from the acorn cap and fall from the 
tree.  Care should be taken to collect local fruits, 
because they may be adapted to local environmental 
conditions.  Viable nuts are green to brown and have 
unblemished walls.  Nuts with discoloration or sticky 
exudates, and small holes caused by insect larvae, 
should be discarded.

Direct Seeding: Unlike most other western oaks, 
white oak seeds germinate immediately following the 
first rains.  Consequently, seeds should be planted 
soon after harvest to ensure establishment.  Once a 
site is chosen, prepare hole s that are 10 inches in 
diameter and 4 to 5 inches deep.  One gram of a 
slow-release fertilizer should be placed in the bottom 
and covered by a small amount of soil.  Place 6 to 10 
acorns in each hole at a depth of 1 to 2 inches.  
Rodents or birds should use temporary enclosures to 
minimize herbivory.  A simple enclosure can be 
constructed from a 1-quart plastic dairy container 
with the bottom removed and a metal screen attached.  
Near the end of the first season, seedlings should be 
thinned to 2 or 3 per hole and to 1 seedling by the 
second season.  Supplemental watering may be 
necessary if a drought of 6 weeks or more occurs 
during the spring. 
 
Container Planting: Seeds may be planted in one-
gallon containers, using well-drained potting soil that 
includes slow-release fer tilizer.  Tapered plastic 
planting tubes, with a volume of 10 cubic inches, also 
may be used.  Seeds should be planted 1 to 2 inches 
deep and the soil kept moist.  Seedlings should be 
transplanted as soon as the first true leaves mature.  
Planting holes should be at least twice as wide and 
deep as the container.  Seedlings may require 
watering every 2 to 3 weeks during the first season.  
Care should be taken to weed and mulch around 
young plants until they are 6 to 10 inches tall. 
 
Management 
General:  Based on historic records, valley oak 
woodland has declined as a result of woodcutting, 
agriculture, and urban development, primarily in the 
Great Central Valley of California and in foothill 
bottomlands.  Seedlings are especially sensitive to 
trampling and herbivory by cattle.  Mature trees are 
susceptible to oak crown and root rot fungi (e.g., 
Inonotus , Ganoderma , and Laetiporus ), that decay 
wood in trunks and roots.  Consequently, activities 
that disturb or compact so il around trees, including 
construction and livestock grazing, need to be 
avoided or carefully managed within or near the zone 
of leaf canopy. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
It is best to plant species from your local area, 
adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown.  Available from most native 
plant nurseries within its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more  information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen
t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bleier, C. 1993.  A planner’s guide for oak 
woodlands .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  94 pp. 
 
Griffin, J. 1977.   Oak woodland.  Pages 383-415.  IN 
M. Barbour and J. Major (eds.).  Terrestrial 
vegetation of California.  Wiley Interscience, New 
York, New York. 
 
Pavlik, B., P. Muick, S. Johnson, & M. Popper 1991.  
Oaks of California .  Cachuma Press and the 
California Oak Foundation, Los Olivos, California.  
184 pp. 
 
Schettler, S. & M. Smith 1980.   Nursery propagation 
of California oaks .  Pages 242-245.  IN T. Plumber 
(ed.).  Proceedings of th e symposium on the ecology, 
management, and utilization of California oaks.  
USDA, Forest Service, Paci fic Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station.  Technical Report 44. 
 
Prepared by and species coordinator 
Dieter Wilken & Julie Burgher 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 18sep00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.