Plant Guide
BUR OAK  
Quercus macrocarpa 
Michx. 
Plant Symbol = QUMA2 
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas, Kansas State University, Manhattan, 
Kansas, and USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center & 
the Biota of North America Program  
 
 Figure 1.  Bur oak planted as a yard tree. 
John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Manhattan, KS 
Alternate Names 
Blue oak, mossycup oak, mossy-overcup oak, scrub oak 
Uses 
Industry: Bur oak wood is used for railroad ties, 
cabinetry, and tight cooperage --barrels, hardwood 
flooring, and fence posts.   Main sources of trees for 
timber are Iowa and Illinois bottomlands.  The wood is 
sometimes marketed as ‘white oak’ (Panshin and 
deZeeuw 1980). 
       
Wood characteristics:  The wood of bur oak is heavy to 
very heavy, hard to very hard (specific gravity 0.55-0.64 
green and 0.66-0.79 ovendry), without odor or taste, and 
straight grained; tight cooperage (good for barrels).  
Sapwood is whitish and heartwood light reddish (Panshin 
and deZeeuw 1980).  It is susceptible to breakage at the 
crotch due to poor collar formation (Gilman and Watson 
1994).  
Ornamental:  Probably too large for the average home 
landscape; however bur oak makes for an excellent park 
or large area tree (Dirr 1998). 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General:  A member of the Beech Family (Fagaceae), bur 
oak is a medium-sized to large tree, typically grows from 
70 to 80 feet in height but can grow to 100 feet or more 
on better sites, with a massive trunk 2 to 3 feet in 
diameter and a broad, rounded crown of stout branches 
(Dirr 1998; Fowles 1965).  The national Registry of Big 
Trees reports a specimen in Kentucky that is 99 feet tall 
and has a circumference of 295 inches and a crown spread 
of 127.5 inches (American Forests 2012).  Shrubbier 
forms are found on bluffs and hillsides in the northwest 
part of the tree’s range (Nixon 1993); branches and 
branchlets with corky-winged projections.  
 
The leaves are variable on the plant, alternate, deciduous, 
2 to 6 inches wide and 4 to 10 inches long; shape is ovate 
to oblong; mostly obovate, shaped like a fiddle, tapering 
to a wedge-shaped base, widest above the middle, with 2–
3 rounded lobes on upper half of leaf and 5–7 deeper 
lobes on lower half of leaf, dark green above, gray-green 
below, turning yellow or brown in fall (Barkley 1986; 
Harlow et al. 1979; Stephens 1969). 
 
  Figures 2 and 3.  Leaves deciduous, alternate, obovate, and 
shaped like a fiddle, tapering to a wedge-shaped base; 
branches and branchlets with corky-winged projections. 
Ohio Division of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry 
    
The stout twigs, yellowish brown, usually pubescent after 
the second year with conspicuous, corky branches after 
the first year on some trees.  Bark light gray-brown, thick, 
rough, low ridges separated by shallow furrows into scaly 
plates, and vertical flattened ridges (Dirr 1998; Stephens 
1969).

The inconspicuous flowers emerge shortly after the leaves 
appear, late April to mid-June.  Male and female flowers 
are borne in separate catkins on the same tree on the 
current year's branchlets.  Male catkins have greenish-
brown flowers; female are with green scales and tinged 
with red.  Even though bur oak is monoecious, pollen 
from one tree appears to germinate better on the stigmas 
of another favoring cross pollination (Fowells 1969; 
Johnson 1990).  
      
Fruit is solitary and variable in size.  The acorn matures in 
the first year and is ¾ to 1 ½ inch long and ½ is enclosed 
with a deep cup which is conspicuously fringed on the 
margin (Dirr 1998).  The common name (bur) is in 
reference to the cap-covered acorn.  It has the largest 
acorns of all native oaks.  Acorns mature in one growing 
season and drop from the tree August through November.  
Acorns germinate shortly after seedfall and require no 
cold stratification.  Acorns on more northern trees may 
remain dormant and germinate the following spring 
(Johnson 1990). 
   
Figure 4. The 
acorn enclosed in a 
deep cup 
conspicuously 
fringed on the 
margin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 John M. Row, USDA NRCS 
    
Variation within the species:  Two varieties are 
commonly recognized within the species.    
     
   Var. depressa (Nutt.) Engelm. (Q. mandanensis Rydb.) 
– mostly along the western margin of the Great Plains; 
small trees or shrubs with smaller and less fringed cups 
and corky twigs.    
      
   Var. macrocarpa   – over most of the species range; 
trees with large thick cups.     
       
Bur oak is a member of the white oak subgroup (subgenus 
Lepidobalanus) and hybridizes with various related 
species, including white oak (Q. alba), swamp white oak 
(Q. bicolor), overcup oak (Q. lyrata), swamp chestnut oak 
(Q. michauxii), chinkapin oak (Q. muehlenbergii), post 
oak (Q. stellata), live oak (Q. virginiana), and Gambel’s 
oak (Q. gambelii) (Johnson 1990).    
 
 
Ethnobotany 
Native Americans used the inner bark to make decoctions 
with astringent properties to treat various maladies such 
as cramps, diarrhea, wounds and sores, hemorrhoids, 
heart and lung trouble, suppress menses caused by a cold, 
poison oak, and insect bites.  A compound containing 
wood and inner bark was used to expel pinworms.  The 
large acorns were often roasted in ashes or boiled to 
remove the bitter taste and prepared in various ways for 
human consumption.  Young growths were used by a 
number of tribes to make popgun pistons (Moerman 
1998).     
      
Wildlife: The acorns are eaten by many birds and 
mammals, including squirrels, rabbits, ground squirrels, 
mice, deer, black bear, wild turkey, wood ducks, flickers, 
woodpeckers, and blue jays.  They are dispersed by 
rodents and blue jays, which frequently cache the acorns 
for later use.  Bur oak is browsed by deer, elk, moose, and 
cattle.  Red-tailed hawks, screech owls, fox squirrels, and 
flying squirrels nest in large trees of bur oak (Fowells 
1965; Johnson 1990; Gucker 2011).   
    
Conservation: Bur oak is tolerant of city smoke and other 
air pollutants and of soils that are compacted, sandy, 
and/or of high pH – it is commonly planted as a shade tree 
in many urban areas of the United States.  The trees 
become large and are suited for lawns and other open 
areas, including golf courses, parks, large islands, and 
fields.  They also are useful in rehabilitation of degraded 
strip-mine sites and have been widely planted in 
windbreak and shelterbelt systems because of their 
drought tolerance.  A deep tap root system penetrates to 
lowered water tables during the dry periods.  They are 
used in riparian forest plantings (Johnson 1990). 
    
According the National Register of Big Trees, removal of 
a bur oak tree 60 feet tall and 105 feet wide with a 
circumference of 322 inches would cost $3456.39 to 
replace the storm water control service it provides. This 
same tree removes 19.56 lbs. of nitrogen, sulfur, ozone 
and particulate matter every year (American Forests 
2007). 
             
Distribution:  Bur oak grows naturally throughout much 
of the north-central United States and the eastern Great 
Plains.  It occurs from extreme southeastern 
Saskatchewan, southern Manitoba, southwestern and 
southeastern parts of Ontario, to New York’s Finger 
Lakes Region and southwestern Quebec, to central Maine 
and New Brunswick, scattered regions in New England, 
most of Ohio, southern half of Michigan westward to the 
Dakotas and extreme northeastern Wyoming, central 
Nebraska and Kansas, south to Tennessee, Arkansas, and 
the central prairies of Texas – with rare outliers in 
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama (Fowells 1965).  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.

Habitat:  Bur oak grows in a range of habitats and 
moisture regimes – from prairies to valley floors and 
upland woods.  It is a pioneer or early seral species at 
prairie margins, and savannas.   
Figure 5.  The light gray-brown bark is thick and rough. 
John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Manhattan, KS 
Adaptation 
The trees are slow-growing but long-lived and may reach 
ages of 300 to 400 years old with some trees to 450. It is 
classified as intermediate in tolerance to shade (Fowells 
1965).      
Bur oak has declined on savannas and prairies due to 
grazing and fire suppression.  It is not resistant to flooding 
(Johnson 1990), although mature bur oak in the Missouri 
and Mississippi flood plains withstood up to 8 weeks 
inundation during the Great Flood of 1993.  Young trees 
planted in the Missouri River Flood Plain in 2000-2001, 
were approximately 9 feet tall when inundated by up to 8 
feet of water during the 2008 Flood (Cordsiemon 2012). 
    
It grows quickly on moist, rich bottomlands, but is 
relatively intolerant of flooding during the growing 
season; bur oak can only survive flooding or saturated 
soils 30 consecutive days (Tang and Kozlowski 1982).  At 
the north and west ends of its range, where bur oak occurs 
on rocky bluffs with thin soil and where repeated fire also 
may be common, it commonly grows as small trees or 
thickets of low shrubs.  Young plants grow well in full 
sun to partial sun.  It is one of the most drought resistant 
of the North American oaks (Johnson 1990).  It is often 
associated with calcareous soils.  It has high aerosol salt 
tolerance and good soil salt tolerance (Gilman and 
Watson 1994). 
 
Bur oak is hardy in USDA Winter Hardiness Zones 4 to 8. 
Establishment 
Most natural seed germination occurs during the fall 
(directly after maturation) and unless germination is rapid, 
few seeds survive predation by insects, small birds, and 
mammals.  Litter-covered acorns appear to be more 
vulnerable to rodents, insects, and fungus.   
     
One-year old, bare root seedlings, 12 to 18 inches tall are 
used in plantings.  Survival is generally good.  Initial 
growth is centered on root development.  Two to three 
years after planting, top growth should average 8 to 12 
inches annually with good weed control. Planting in 
windbreak rows should be spaced 10 to 18 feet apart and 
20 to 24 feet between adjacent rows (Kansas Forest 
Service 2010). 
      
Although strong and rapid development of the taproot 
contribute to difficulty in transplanting, bur oak saplings 
can be obtained in ball-and-burlap and they may be 
transplanted as young plants from containers.  Transplants 
are best made in spring.    
      
The taproot of young bur oaks rapidly penetrates into the 
soil, sometimes growing more than 4 ½ feet deep in the 
first growing season.  This early root development, along 
with high water-use efficiency, may explain why bur oak 
can pioneer on droughty sites and can successfully 
establish itself in competition with prairie shrubs and 
grasses (Fowells 1965).      
Management 
Bur oak bark is thick and fire-resistant and larger trees 
often survive fire.  Grass fires often kill only seedlings 
and young trees, but even seedlings may survive unless 
fires occur at short intervals or with enough intensity of 
heat.  Top-killed smaller trees (or those mechanically 
damaged) sprout vigorously from the stump or root crown 
after fire.  In areas of frequent fire and strong herbivore 
browsing, the underground portions may be much older 
and more extensive than the continually resprouting aerial 
portions.  Where fire suppression is prevalent, bur oak 
communities may be replaced by more shade-tolerant 
maple-basswood forests (Gucker 2012).      
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few insects or diseases cause serious damage to bur oak.  
Reported insect problems include oak webworm (Archips 
fervidana), oak skeletonizer (Bucculatrix ainsliella), 
solitary oak leafminer (Cameraria hamadryadella) and 
gregarious oak leafminer (C. Cincinnatiella), variable 
oakleaf caterpillar (Heterocampa manteo), and June 
beetles (Johnson 1990).  Oak lacebug (Corythucha 
arcuata) may heavily defoliate bur oaks in shelterbelt 
plantings, especially during dry weather.   
Acorn-inhabiting curculionid weevils of the genera 
Conotrachelus and Curcurlio cause the most damage to

acorns.  Two species of Conotrachelus, C. naso and C. 
posticatus infest bur oak acorns (Gibson 1971). 
Oak wilt (Ceratocystis fagacearum) is a less serious 
problem in bur oak than in species of red oak, but the 
disease sometimes spreads through root grafts of adjacent 
trees, and entire groves have been killed by the gradual 
expansion of the disease from one center of infection.  
Bur oak is susceptible to attack by the cotton root rot 
(Phymatotrichum omnivorum) and Strumella canker 
(Strumella coryneoidea).  Other pathogenic fungi have 
been recognized (Johnson 1990). 
Environmental Concerns 
None known 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Trees as young as 5 years of age began producing acorns 
in a spaced plant nursery where 20% of the trees from 20 
different sources.  Acorn production ranged from heavy to 
light in the provenance test at Manhattan, Kansas (USDA 
NRCS, Unpublished Data).  For forest trees the minimum 
seed-bearing age is 35, with optimum seed production 
occurring between 75–150 years, and trees are known to 
produce seed up to 400 years.  Abundant acorns are 
produced every 2–3 years, with light crops in the intervals 
(Fowells 1965).  
 Figure 6. Five year old ‘Lippert’ bur oak produced some 40 
acorns.  John M. Row, USDA NRCS, Manhattan, KS 
     
Bur oak may be transplanted or it is easily propagated 
from seed.  Seed should be stored over winter in a cool, 
moist place at 1–4°C.  Germination frequency may be 
enhanced by stratifying 30–60 days at 1–5°C but 
stratification is not required for germination, except for 
var. oliviformis, which typically germinates during the 
spring.  Most natural seed germination occurs during the 
fall (directly after maturation) but seed may be planted in 
either the spring or fall.  Seeds should be planted ½ to 1 ¼ 
inches deep, in groups of 2–3, spaced at roughly 6 foot 
intervals (Kansas Forest Service 2010). 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Boomer’ bur oak was released in 1994 by the James E. 
“Bud” Smith PMC.  Collected from Custer Co., 
Oklahoma, Boomer was selected for its growth rate and 
habit under windbreak conditions.  It performs well in dry 
areas. 
     
‘Lippert’ bur oak, released in 1993 by the Manhattan, 
Kansas PMC, is a seed propagated cultivar.  It is 
recommended for conservation use in multi-row 
windbreaks, reforestation for watershed protection, and 
wildlife habitat plantings.  Lippert’s deeply furrowed bark 
and bright green foliage make it an attractive tree for 
farmsteads. 
        
Ekalaka Germplasm bur oak is a Selected Class pre-
varietal selection of bur oak released by the Bridger, 
Montana PMC in 2009.  It was selected for more rapid 
growth in height, higher percentage seedling survival, and 
better vigor.  It is recommended for various conservation 
applications such as windbreaks, shelterbelts, riparian 
forest buffers, Xeriscapes®, woody draw restoration 
projects, and wildlife plantings.   
    
Bur oak seed is readily available through commercial seed 
sources in the central and western US.  Seedlings can be 
purchased from both state and commercial nurseries.  
Foundation seed of Plant Materials program selections is 
available by contacting the releasing PMC or respective 
Plant Materials Specialist. 
References 
American Forests, National Register of Big Trees: bur 
oak, Quercus macrocarpa [online:cited January 
2007]. 
American Forests, National Register of Big Trees: 
Quercus macrocarpa 
(http://americaforests.org/resources/bigtrees/quercus-
macrocarpa-5/). [online:cited April 2012]. 
Barkley, T. ed. 1986. Flora of the Great Plains. 1986. 
Univ. Press of Kansas. Lawrence. 1392p. 
Cordsiemon, R.  2012. Personal Communication. USDA 
NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials Center. 
Dirr, M. A. 1998. Manual of Woody Plants: Their 
identification, Ornamental Characteristics, Culture, 
Propagation and Uses.  821-822. Stipes Publishing 
L. L. C. Champaign IL. 
Fowells, H. A.  1965.  Silvics of Forest Trees of the 
United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 271. 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. 
Gibson, L. P. 1971. Insects of bur oak acorns. Annals of 
the Entomological Society of America. 
Gilman, E. F. and D. G. Watson. 1994. Quercus 
macrocarpa.  Fact Sheet ST-551. U.S. Forest 
Service. Southern Group. 
Gucker, Corey L. 2011. Quercus macrocarpa. In: Fire 
Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(Producer). Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [online:cited 
November 2012].

Harlow , W. H. , E. S. Harrar, and F. M. White. 1979. 
Textbook of Dendrology . Sixth Edition. McGraw-
Hill Book Co. 510p. 
Johnson, P. S. 1990.  Quercus macrocarpa Michx.  Bur 
Oak.  Pp. 686-692, IN: R. M. Burns and B. H. 
Honkala.  Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  
Hardwoods.  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.     
Kansas Forest Service. Bur oak. (http//www. 
Kansasforests.org/pubs/conservation/index.shtml). 
[online: cited July 2010]. 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American Ethnobotany. 
Timber Press. Portland. London. 927pp. 
Nixon, K.C. and others 1993.  Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, IN: 
Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3.  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York, New York.   
Ohio Division of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry 
Bur oak (Quercus macrocarpa). 
http://www.ohiodnr.com/forestry/trees/oak_bur/tabid/
5390/Default.aspx [online: cited July 2010]. 
Panshin, A. J. and C, deZeeu. 1980. Textbook of wood 
technology, 4th Edition. McGraw-Hill Series in Forest 
Resources. McGraw-hill Book Co., New York. 722p. 
Stephens, H.A. 1969. Trees, shrubs, and woody vines in 
Kansas. Univ. of Kansas Press. Lawrence.  250p. 
Tang, Z. C. and T. T. Kozlowski 1982. Some 
physiological and morphological responses of 
Quercus macrocarpa seedlings to flooding. Can. J. 
For. Res. Vol. 12: 196-202. 
USDA NRCS. Unpublished Data.  Bur oak (Quercus 
macrocarpa Michx.) seed source study. Manhattan 
Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, KS. 
    
Prepared By:   
John M. Row, Plant Materials Specialist 
NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, KS 66502 
 
Wayne A. Geyer, Professor 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University 
Manhattan, KS 66506 
    
Guy Nesom, Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical 
Garden, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599 
Citation 
Row, J. M., W. A. Geyer, and G. Nesom. 2012.  Plant 
Guide for bur oak (Quercus macrocarpa Michx.). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Manhattan, KS 66502. 
Published November 2012 
Edited:  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
Keywords:  bur oak, Quercus, Quercus macrocarpa,  
fire-resistant, large tree, long-lived tree, drought tolerant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER