Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
OVERCUP OAK 
Quercus lyrata Walt. 
Plant Symbol = QULY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Swamp post oak, swamp white oak, water white oak 
 
Uses 
Wood of overcup oak is brownish, hard, heavy, and 
strong; it is marketed as white oak primarily for 
lumber and cooperage but is not consistently valued 
for quality products becaus e of fire damage and 
defects from wood borers and heartwood decay 
following fire injuries.  Checking during drying and 
seasoning often prevents general use even as ties and 
timbers.  In some areas, this species has been avoided 
in cutting and has increased in dominance at cut-over 
sites.   
 
Overcup oak is planted to improve wildlife habitat 
and for bottomland restoration.   Ducks, wild turkeys, 
hogs, white-tailed deer, squirrels, and smaller rodents 
eat the acorns.    
 
Overcup oak also is planted as an ornamental.  The 
trees can withstand signifi cant flooding and poorly 
drained soils and are tolerant to drought and cold.  In 
spite of its natural occurrence where periodical 
flooding is typical, overcup oak grows best on sites 
with better drainage and soil texture.    
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Native trees 
commonly growing to 18–30 m tall, often with a 
short trunk and open, irregularly rounded crown; bark 
light gray, becoming furrowed into scaly plates and 
ridges.  Leaves are deciduous, alternate, generally 
obovate to elliptic-oblong in outline but highly 
variable, 13–21 cm long and 4–10 cm wide, basally 
wedge-shaped, with 5–9 deep, rounded lobes, shiny 
dark green above, usually paler gray-green below and 
variably hairy, turning red, yellow, or brown in fall.  
Male and female flowers are borne in separate 
catkins on the same tree (the species monoecious) on 
the current year's branchlets.  Acorns maturing in the 
first year, nearly round, nearly globose to broadly 
ovoid (broadest near the base), 12–25 mm long, with 
a warty gray cup almost enclosing 2/3 to nearly all of 
the acorn, with acute scales.  Common name from the 
acorn almost entirely enclosed in the spherical cup.   
  
Overcup oak is a member of the white oak subgroup 
(subgenus  Quercus) and hybridizes with other related 
species, including white oak ( Q. alba), swamp white 
oak ( Q. bicolor ), Durand oak ( Q. durandii), bur oak 
( Q. macrocarpa ), swamp chestnut oak ( Q. 
michauxii ), post oak ( Q. stellata), and live oak (Q. 
virginiana ).    
  
Variation within the species:  Variants within the 
species are not recognized.

Distribution 
This plant is native to the Atlantic and Gulf coastal 
plains from southeastern Virginia to panhandle 
Florida and westward to east Texas, north in the to 
Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana, with scattered 
populations in northern Alabama, central Tennessee, 
Delaware, and Maryland.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Adaptation : Overcup oak usually occurs on clay or 
silty-clay flats in first bottoms and terraces of larger 
streams and rivers.  It is also common on the edges of 
swamps and bayous and in poorly drained 
depressions or sinkholes.  Overcup oak may be 
dominant and climax in stands with water hickory 
( Carya aquatica ) on low, backwater flats and other 
sites commonly flooded for 30–40% of the growing 
season.  Tolerance to late spring floods results partly 
from its phenology -- it leafs out a month or more 
later than most species.  Many stands of overcup oak 
owe their development to tolerance of early season 
flooding that kills off earlier flushing species.    
 
Overcup oak is relatively intolerant of shade.  
Suppressed young trees respond strongly to release 
when the canopy is opened by disturbance.   
 
The heavy, wet, clay soils where overcup oak 
typically grows restrict root development to relatively 
shallow depths.  Seedlings initially produce taproots, 
but these are soon replaced by a shallow, lateral root 
system.    
 
Flowering occurs in (March–)April–May, with 
appearance of new leaves, sometimes as long as a 
month after sympatric species and it fruits in 
September–October.   
 
General : Overcup oak begins to produce seed at 
about 25–30 years; good crops are produced every 3–
4 years.  Overcup oak acorns have a unique spongy 
shell that renders them buoyant.  They are 
disseminated primarily by water, buoyed by a spongy 
shell.  After winter dorman cy, they germinate in the 
spring after floodwaters recede.  Good germination 
occurs on moist soils when acorns are covered by 
leaves.  Seeds germinate profusely beneath complete 
canopy, but the seedlings  succumb or at least die 
back to the root collar with in 3 years unless released.  
Flooding during the first few growing seasons also 
produces high mortality of seedlings.   
  
Height growth of overcup oak is slower than many 
associated species, causing  it to be overtopped easily.  
Maximum age is about 400 years.   
 
Stumps of small trees sprout vigorously but not 
consistently after top-kill.   
 
Management 
Prolonged drought in bottomlands may lead to 
surface fires that kill overcup oak seedlings and 
saplings and damage bark of larger trees.  Such minor 
injuries open trees to infection by heart rot fungi.  
Young overcup oak trees may sprout after top-kill by 
fire.   
 
Natural reforestation of bottomland oldfields now 
favors tree species that tolerate dry soils because a 
large proportion of formerly wet sites are subject to 
flood control.  Since overcup oak is dependent on 
overflow or floodwaters for seed dispersal, it has to 
be planted on these sites if its presence is desired.  
Nuttall oak ( Quercus nuttallii ) is often used to 
replace overcup oak on sites that have reduced 
flooding or stream flow.    
  
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Nixon, K.C. & others 1993.   Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, 
IN:  Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3 .  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>  Accessed 
September 2000.   
  
Solomon, J.D. 1990.   Quercus lyrata Walt.  Overcup 
Oak .  Pp. 681-685, in R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.  
Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  Hardwoods .  
USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 654, 
Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Volume
_2/quercus/lyrata.htm>  Accessed September 2000.   
 
Sullivan, J. 1993.   Quercus lyrata.  IN: W.C. Fischer 
(compiler).   The fire effects information system 
[database] .  USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station, Interm ountain Fire Sciences

Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/quelyr
/>  Accessed September 2000.   
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 06dec00 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.