Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWAMP WHITE OAK
Quercus bicolor Willd. 
Plant Symbol = QUBI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and the Biota of North America Program 
 
Uses 
Industry: The wood of swamp white oak is light 
brown, close-grained, heavy, and hard.  It is similar 
to that of white oak ( Q. alba) and usually is cut and 
sold under that name, but the amount of lumbered 
swamp white oak is a small fraction of the total for 
‘white oak.’  Also, because the lateral branches of 
swamp white oak tend to persist (compared to white 
oak), the wood is knottier and less valuable.  The 
wood is used for furniture, cabinets, veneers, interior 
finishing, and flooring, as well as for boxes, crates, 
fence posts, railroad ties, and beams and boards for 
general construction.  As in white oak, the wood 
provides tight cooperage  and was once widely used 
in making barrels and kegs.  
 
Conservation : Swamp white oak is planted on 
highway rights-of-way and is frequently used as a 
shade tree for large lawns,  golf courses, parks, and 
naturalized areas.  The crown shape and bi-colored 
leaves (dark above, lighter  beneath) are attractive 
features; fall color is ye llow, with occasional red-
purple.  The trees can grow well in areas that are dry, 
poorly drained and wet, or  even occasionally flooded, 
and they will tolerate significant soil compaction.    
 
Wildlife : Trees of swamp white oak provide cover for 
birds and mammals.  The acorns are sweet and are an  important food for wildlife su
ch as squirrels, mice, 
white-tailed deer, beaver, black bear, and a variety of 
birds, including ducks and turkey.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans and pioneers have 
eaten the acorns raw or cooked.  They have been 
ground into a powder and used as a thickening in 
stews etc or mixed with cereals for making bread.  
Roasted acorns have been ground and used as a 
coffee substitute.  Bitterness of the tannins is 
removed by leaching in running water.    
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Oak galls, caused by the activity of the larvae of 
various insects, can be used as a source of tannin and 
dye.  They also are strongly astringent and can be 
used in the treatment of hemorrhages, chronic 
diarrhea, and dysentery.  Some Native Americans 
used swamp white oak to treat cholera, broken bones, 
and consumption.  Mulch of the dead leaves is 
reported to repel slugs, grubs, and various insects.      
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description  
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Native trees 
commonly growing to 15–20 m, sometimes to 30 m, 
the lateral branches relatively persistent (slow in self-
pruning), with an open, irregularly shaped crown; 
bark dark gray, scaly or flat-ridged, often peeling off 
in large, ragged, papery curl s.  Leaves are deciduous, 
alternate, obovate to narrowly elliptic or narrowly 
obovate, (8–)12–18(–21) cm long, (4–)7–11(–16) cm 
wide, usually with regularly spaced, shallow, rounded 
teeth, or toothed in distal half only, or moderately to 
deeply lobed, upper surfaces  dark green and glossy, 
lower surfaces lighter green to  whitish, softly hairy.  
Male and female flowers are borne in separate 
catkins on the same tree (the species monoecious) on 
the current year's branchlets.  Acorns maturing the 
first year, ovoid-ellipsoid or oblong, mostly 1.5–3 cm 
long, single or clustered in groups of 2–4, on a stalk 
(peduncle) 3-8 cm long; cup enclosing 1/3–1/2 of the 
acorn, scales closely appressed, finely grayish 
tomentose, those near rim of cup often with a short, 
stout, irregularly recurved spinose tip.  The common 
name is from its typical habitat and its membership in 
the white oak subgroup.

Swamp white oak is a member of the white oak 
subgroup (subgenus Quercus) and hybridizes with 
related species, including white oak ( Q. alba), 
overcup oak ( Q. lyrata), and bur oak ( Q. 
macrocarpa ).  Swamp white oak is distinguished 
from all similar native species by its long-stalked 
acorns.   
 
Variation within the species : Formal variants are not 
recognized.  
 
Distribution 
Swamp white oak occurs mainly in the Midwestern 
states from Iowa, Missouri, eastern Kentucky, and 
southern Wisconsin east to New York, Pennsylvania, 
Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Isolated 
populations occur northward in Minnesota, other 
New England states, and Quebec and Ontario, and 
southward to Tennessee, Virginia, and North 
Carolina.  For current dist ribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Swamp white oak occurs in a variety of 
soils (from silty clay to silt and sandy loams) in 
swamp forests of river  bottoms, streamsides, 
depressions, borders of ponds, lakes and swamps, and 
moist peaty flats.  It also occurs on moist slopes and 
poorly drained uplands, at elevations of 0-1000 
meters.  Swamp white oak grows best in full sun in 
moist to wet, deep, acidic soils.  Development of a 2-
layer root system allows it to grow well in areas that 
are flooded in spring but markedly dry in summer.    
 
Young trees of swamp white oak are tolerant of light 
shade but become more characteristic of full sun with 
maturity.  Swamp white oak usually is a minor 
component of the forests in which it occurs, perhaps 
depending on local disturbance for release into the 
canopy.  Stands of elm-ash-cottonwood will convert 
to oak-dominated stands that include swamp white 
oak.  White oak forests (of which swamp white oak is 
a component) will progress towards hickory and 
beech forests if undisturbed.   
 
Flowering occurs in May–June, during early 
development of the leaves, while fruiting occurs in 
August–October.   
General : Seed production in swamp white oak begins 
at 20–30 years.  The gr eatest production occurs 
between 75–100 years; good seed crops are produced 
every 3–5 years.  The acor ns have no dormancy and 
may germinate the same season as ripening and 
falling.  The maximum age for trees of swamp white 
oak is 300–350 years.   
 
Swamp white oak can sprout from the stump or root 
crown if damaged or top-killed.   
 
Swamp white oak can be transplanted or propagated 
from seed.  Young plants from containers and young 
trees in ball-and-burlap are best planted in early 
spring.  Bare-root transplants also are best done in the 
spring, but these may be difficult because of the 
strong and rapid development of the taproot.   
 
Acorns are capable of germination as soon as ripe 
and must be collected for storage shortly after falling 
from the tree.  They retain viability in storage for 
only a few months, especially if allowed to dry, and 
should be stored over winter in a cool, moist place at 
1–4°  C.  Germination frequency may be enhanced by 
stratifying 30–60 days at 1–5 ° C., but stratification is 
not required for germination.  Acorns planted in the 
fall in permanent positions give the best results.    
 
Management 
Swamp white oak is susceptible to various insect 
pests, fungi, cankers, and wilts but none are serious.  
It is relatively resistant to oak wilt but may be 
affected by "oak decline;" anthracnose may 
sometimes be a problem.  Growth in alkaline soils 
(with pH above 7.2) may cause iron chlorosis.   
 
Because of the slow self-pruning habit of swamp 
white oak, lower branches may require pruning in 
areas where high clearance is necessary.    
 
Severe fires can top-kill mature trees of swamp white 
oak.  Fire-damaged surv ivors are susceptible to 
disease and insect attack.  Moderate fires may kill 
seedlings and saplings, but young individuals can re-
sprout following fire.  Acorns are easily destroyed by 
fire because of high moisture content.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anonymous 1998.   1998 Urban tree of the year: 
Swamp white oak .  IN: City Trees, The Journal of 
The Society of Municipal Arborists .  Vol. 34, No. 1.  
<http://www.urban-

forestry.com/citytrees/v34n1a07.html>  Accessed 
October 2000.   
 
Nixon, K.C. & others 1993.  Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, 
in Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3.  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395>  Accessed 
September 2000.   
 
Rogers, R. 1990.   Quercus bicolor Willd.  Swamp 
white oak.  Pp. 614-624, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America. Volume 2.  
Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Volume
_2/quercus/lyrata.htm>  Accessed September 2000.    
 
Snyder, S.A. 1992.   Quercus bicolor.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system [database] . USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/databas e/feis/plants/tree/quebic
/>  Accessed September 2000.   
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001106.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.