Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA BLACK OAK 
Quercus kelloggii  Newberry 
Plant Symbol = QUKE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & UC Davis Arboretum 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: California black oak provided a 
fountain of resources  to Native Americans of 
California and Oregon including food, medicine, 
dyes, utensils, games, toys, and construction 
materials.  Large quantities of young, supple sprouts 
were utilized for myriad items.  An abundance of 
acorns were gathered and  formed a staple food 
throughout much of California--eaten in the form of a 
soup, mush, bread, or patties.  Today, acorns are still 
gathered by people of many different tribes in 
California and southern Oregon and relished as food.  
The tree and its uses are important touchstones for 
maintaining tribal ethnicity.   
 
Wildlife : It is well known that bears ( Ursus 
americanus ), ground squirrels (Spermophilus scrofa), 
jays (Cyanocitta stelleri ), band-tailed pigeons 
( Columba fasciata ), acorn woodpeckers ( Melanerpes 
formicivorus ), pocket gophers ( Thomomys bottae), 
deer mice (Peromyscus  spp.) and black-tailed deer 
( Odocileus hemionus ), among many other animals, 
find acorns a favorite food source.  Studies have 
shown that birds can harvest significant amounts of 
acorn from tree canopies within a short duration and 
bears will also sometimes harvest acorns before the 
crop has dropped. 
 
Building Materials : California black oak is currently 
utilized for high-grade lumber and pallets, industrial 
timbers, sawdust for mulching, and fuel wood.  Its  hardness and finishing characteristics make it suitable 
for industrial flooring an
d its grain characteristics 
make it desirable for paneling and furniture. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
General : Oak Family (Fagaceae).  California black 
oak is a deciduous, hardwood tree with a broad 
rounded crown from 10-25 m. high.  It is the largest 
mountain oak in the West and surpasses all other 
California oaks in volume, distribution, and 
altitudinal range.  The trunk bark is dark and covered 
with small plates.  The bright green leaves are 
distinctly six-lobed ending in one to four bristle-
tipped teeth, and the leaves are 7 to 20 cm. long.  The 
acorns are 2.5 to 3.5 cm. in length and mature in the 
second year.  The nut is deeply set in the cup and the 
cup is covered with thin, flat and imbricate scales. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The tree ranges from Baja, California on the 
south up into southwestern Oregon.  Mountain ranges 
where it is found include the San Bernardino, San 
Jacinto, Agua Tibia Mount ains, and the Tehachapi 
Mountains in southern California, the Santa Cruz and 
Santa Lucia Mountains in central California, the 
Sierra Nevada, and the Klamath and Cascade 
Mountains of northern California and southern 
Oregon.  It spans an elevation of 200 to 2400 m. and 
takes a shrubby form at higher elevations.  It can be 
found in northern oak woodlands, mixed conifer 
forests and mixed evergreen forests. 
 
Establishment 
If possible, gather acorns from many different trees 
locally, to maintain genetic diversity of California 
black oak and to ensure that the plants are adapted to 
the site.  The seeds of most oaks are short-lived and 
must be sown or refrigerated quickly, otherwise they 
lose their ability to germinate.  They are best 
gathered directly from the tree or from the ground 
within a short time of their dropping, usually within 
several days.  To test their ripeness--take an acorn 
that's still in its cap and twist it lightly.  If it pops out 
of the cap, the acorn is ripe.  Store the seeds without

their caps in a grocery sack until ready to plant.  The 
seeds can be sown in autumn outdoors, or if the seeds 
are started in pots in the greenhouse in the early 
spring, they should be stratified for two months 
between 33 and 40 degrees in a refrigerator. 
 
Fill a gallon Ziploc™ bag about half full with acorns, 
and then add about a cup of dry perlite and a little bit 
of vermiculite (3:1 mixture).  Shake the bag up to 
distribute the perlite around the acorns, label the bag, 
and place in the refrigerator .  Check the bag weekly 
and discard moldy acorns.  Any acorns that have 
germinated need to be taken out of the bag and sown.  
The acorns can be placed in the refrigerator in 
October or November and taken out two to five 
months later. Then plant the seeds on their side 
directly in long, deep pots (2 in. in diameter by 10 
inches long) with potting soil and a slow release 
fertilizer.  Water the tubes and place them in diffused 
light in the nursery or outside, making sure to keep 
each tube suspended off the ground or bench so the 
large air holes at the bottom of the tube are exposed.  
When the tree roots hit the air, they'll stop growing.  
Water when the surface of the soil is dry to the touch, 
but don't over-water. 
 
Out-plant the seedlings the following winter in a 
sunny location, and water the transplants to ensure 
sufficient moisture and eliminate air pockets.  Be 
careful to keep the soil from falling off the roots.  
Place the seedlings in the ground such that the top of 
the soil from the container is even with the ground 
line.  Studies have shown that California black oak 
seedlings planted in the fall or winter grow and 
survive better than seedlings planted in the spring.  
Use a pick mattock for planting, which has a pick on 
one surface and a triangular wedge on the other 
surface.  Protect the seedlin gs from weeds, drying 
winds, grasshoppers, and mammals that might feed 
on the roots, leaves, or tr unks.  Also water (deeply) 
the seedlings the first summer.  A good seedling 
protector is essential and can be a simple wire 
window screen mesh and wooden stake.  Bend the 
mesh into a cylinder that is about 6-8 inches in 
diameter and 3 feet tall.  Attach the mesh cylinder 
onto the wooden stake with st aples or carpet tacks.  
Place the tube over the seedling and pound the stake 
into the ground.  Seedlings should be kept free of 
vegetation for 2 to 3 feet surrounding the seedling. 
 
Direct seeding: Pick acorns without insect exit holes 
or diseases.  Store acorns for one month in a sealed 
plastic bag in the refrigerator.  Dig a hole with the 
trowel, shovel, or hoe and be sure to break up the soil 
much deeper (one to two f eet).  Plant the acorns on 
their sides, one to two inches deep in the fall of the  year and backfill with loosened soil to accommodate 
the growing of roots.  Pl
ant several acorns in each 
hole and thin multiple seedlings down to a single 
most vigorous plant.  Wate r (deeply) the acorns the 
first summer.  Weed several feet around each 
seedling for several years.   Protect the seedlings from 
animals until well established. 
 
Management 
Keep grasses and other plan ts that require a lot of 
moisture away from the oaks.  California black oak 
should not be irrigated except in years of unusually 
low rainfall.  If a drought year, supplemental 
watering can take place in the spring to complement 
natural rainfall.  Water the soil from halfway between 
the trunk and the drip line to 10-15 feet beyond, 
allowing water to penetrate the soil to a depth of 18 
to 24 inches.  It may be n ecessary to water for 4 to 6 
hours to get water to this depth.  Native plants that 
are drought tolerant and shade tolerant and require no 
summer water can be planted under the oaks, such as 
California brome (Bromus carinatus ), deergrass 
( Muhlenbergia rigens ), Calochortus  spp., and 
Dichelostemma  spp. among others.  Light pruning 
can be done in the winter on mature oaks to remove 
weak, diseased, and dead branches but never top 
oaks. 
 
Once established, California black oak is quite fire-
tolerant.  Many tribes in California set frequent light-
surface fires in areas of California black oak to 
ensure continual yields of high quality acorn.  Major 
reasons for burning included: 1) facilitate acorn 
collection; 2) increase the quality and quantity of 
acorn production through decreasing diseases and 
decreasing acorn pests; 3) stimulate the production of 
straight shoots (epicormic) for the making of cultural 
items; 4) decrease the likelihood of major 
conflagrations that would destroy the oaks; 5) 
burning for mushrooms in the oak/ponderosa pine 
forests; and 6) increase edible grasses and other seed 
bearing herbaceous plants.  Fires were typically set in 
the fall or early winter of the year, as families were 
leaving the higher elevations to over-winter below 
the snow line. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available from most native plant nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.”

References 
Anderson, M.K. 1993.  The mountains smell like fire .  
Fremontia.  Journal of the California Native Plant 
Society.  Vol. 21:4(15-20). 
 
Dagit, R. 1998.   Transplanting oak trees .  Growing 
Native 9(6):1-24. Editor, L. Lacy.  The Newsletter of 
the Growing Native Research Institute. 
 
Hagen, B.W. 1990.   Keeping native California oaks 
healthy .  Tree Notes #7.  California Department of 
Forestry and Fire Protection. 
 
Hagen, B.W., B.D. Coate, & K. Oldham 1991.  
Compatible plants under and around oaks .   
 
Keator, G. 1998.  The life of an oak: an intimate 
portrait .  Heyday Books and California Oak 
Foundation, Berkeley, California. 
 
McDonald, P.M. 1990.   Silvics of North America .  
Volume 2, Hardwoods.  Burns, R.M. and B.H. 
Honkala (tech. coords.)  Agriculture Handbook 654.  
USDA, Washington, D.C. 
 
McDonald, P.M. & W.E. Sundahl 1967.  California 
black oak: a general bibliography on an increasingly 
valuable species .  USDA, Forest Service Research 
Note 134.  Pacific Southwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Berkeley, California. 
 
Pavlik, B., P.C. Muick, S. G. Johnson & M. Popper 
1991.   Oaks of California .  Cachuma Press, Los 
Olivos, California. 
 
Roberts, T.A. & C.H. Smith 1982.  Growth and 
survival of black oak seedlings under different 
germination, watering, and planting regimes .  Tree 
Planters' Notes pp. 10-12. 
 
Schettler, S, & M.N. Smith 1980.   Nursery 
propagation of California oaks .  IN: T.R. Plumb, ed. 
Proceedings of the symposium on the ecology, 
management, and utilization of California oaks .  
Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-44.  Berkeley, CA. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station; 368 
p. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1974 .  Seeds of woody plants 
in the United States .  USDA Agricultural Handbook 
No. 450.  U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 416 pp. 
 
Young, B. 1998.   How to propagate an oak from an 
acorn .  Growing Native 9(6):1-24. Editor, L. Lacy.  
The Newsletter of the Growing Native Research 
Institute. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Warren Roberts 
UC Davis Arboretum, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.