Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHERRYBARK OAK 
Quercus pagoda Raf. 
Plant Symbol = QUPA5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Brian Lockhart USDA Forest Service www.forestryimages.org 
 
Uses 
Commercial use: The cherrybark tree has heavy 
strong wood that makes it an excellent timber tree for 
furniture and interior finish.  This tree is also a 
pleasant shade tree and is a fast growing oak tree. 
 
Wildlife use:  Many wild animals and birds use the 
acorns of the cherrybark as food.  Within the range of 
this oak, animals and birds include acorns as a 
substantial part (10 percent or more) of their diets. 
Among these the heaviest eaters are the gray squirrel, 
wild turkey, and blue jay, followed by the wood 
duck, red-bellied woodpecker, redheaded 
woodpecker, white-breasted nuthatch, common  grackle, raccoon, white-tailed deer, and eastern fox 
squirrel  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
The cherrybark oak’s dark gray bark is broken by 
narrow ridges into small s cales.  Its twigs are rather 
stout, reddish brown to gray, usually hairy when 
young, becoming smooth as the tree matures.  
 Its leaves are alternate, simple,  pinnately divided into 5-11 pointed 
lobes, the sinuses cut no more th an half-way to the mid-vein, 
smooth and shiny on the upper surfa ce, paler and with star-shaped 
hairs on the lower surface, not U- shaped at the base, up to 10 
inches long, up to 7 inches wide.  
 
Male and female flowers borne separately on the 
same plant, appearing when the leaves begin to 
unfold; male flowers crowded into slender, drooping 
spikes; female flowers few together.  
 
Flower: Cherrybark oak is monoecious; unisexual 
flowers of both sexes are borne on the same tree. 
Flowering occurs during April and May throughout 
most of the range. The stam inate flowers are borne in 
naked aments (catkins) while pistillate flowers are 
green, solitary, very small, and borne on a short stalk. 
 
Fruit: Acorns are orange -brown nuts about 13 mm 
(0.5 in) long, globular or hemispheric. with up to 
one-third of their length enclosed in a shallow thin 
cap. This cap when young is scaly, and somewhat 
pubescent. It takes two years for the fruit to mature. 
 
Twig: The twigs are orange to reddish brown, often 
very pubescent with older twigs becoming glabrous; 
multiple terminal buds (1/8 to 1/4 inch) are pointed, 
reddish brown and have some pubescence on the 
upper half.  
 
Bark: The bark appears initially smooth, but quickly 
developing small scaly ridges, later becoming dark, 
scaly and quite rough. At times resembling black 
cherry bark.  
 
Distribution : Cherrybark oak is widely distributed on 
the best loamy sites on first bottom ridges and on 
well-drained terraces and colluvial sites. These sites 
occur along both large and small streams of the

Southeastern Coastal Plain and the Mississippi 
Valley north into Missouri and Illinois, although the 
tree is rare in the lower Mississippi Delta. 
 
Cherrybark oak develops best on a loamy well-
drained soil. Although uncommon on clay soils, it is 
generally of good form and quality on such soils if 
the drainage is good but very inferior where drainage 
is poor. Cherrybark oak is grows mostly in humid, 
temperate climate characterized by hot summers and 
mild winters where surface soil pH is acid to medium 
acid. It is a lowland tree but is seldom numerous on 
wet or swampy soils. 
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Cherrybark oak is found in the Atlantic and 
Gulf Coastal Plain, from southeastern Virginia to 
northwestern Florida; west  to eastern Texas; and 
north in the Mississippi Valley to extreme 
southeastern Oklahoma, southeastern Missouri, 
southern Illinois and southwestern Indiana. 
 
Adaptation  
Cherry bark oak is a tree for poor, dry, acidic 
uplands, especially upper slopes in the Appalachians. 
It is found mixed with other upland, poor site oaks, 
especially scarlet, black,  white and post oaks, and 
with hickories and pines. 
 
Establishment 
.The fruit is solitary or paired; the nut is enclosed 
one-third or less in a thin, shallow cup. The fruit 
ripens in September and October, the second season 
after flowering, and seedfall occurs during these 
months. 
 
Seed production usually begins when a tree is about 
25 years of age, but maximum production is usually 
between the ages of 50 and 75 years. Cleaned seeds 
average 1,190/kg (540/lb). Fall seeding of oaks is 
preferred to spring seeding in the nursery. To obtain 
the highest first-year survival, it is recommended the 
acorns be planted not less than 1/2 inch deep and at 
seedbed densities of 12 to 15 evenly spaced sound 
seed per square foot. Fall beds should be mulched 
with leaves or straw held in place by hardware cloth 
covers or other effective materials. The covering also 
serves as a protection against rodents. It is usually not 
necessary to produce seedlings older than 1-0 for 
field planting, but 2-0 seedlings are planted 
occasionally to obtain larg er, vigorous stock with 
more extensive root systems. 
 
In natural stands, dissemination of acorns by gravity 
is important on steep slopes. The hoarding habit of 
squirrels is also important in the dispersal of seed of 
oaks. 
 
It germinates under natural  conditions in the spring 
following seedfall. Cool, moist stratification is 
required for best results. Germination is hypogeal. 
 
Cherrybark oak sprouts vigorously from the stump 
when the top has been killed or cut back. Sprouting is 
most prevalent on young stems 25.4 cm (10 in) or 
less in diameter. With well-established root systems, 
growth of sprout-origin stands is rapid, regardless of 
site quality, for about 20 years. Equations have been 
developed using sprout height at age 5 which predict 
the diameter growth and competition success of 
coppice-regeneration at ages 12 and 30. Clones of 
southern red oak can be propagated from cuttings of 
rooted stump sprouts and mature branches. Cuttings 
from branches root better than cuttings from stump 
sprouts. Root initiation is increased when cuttings are 
treated with the growth hormone IBA and the 
fungicide folpet, and when cuttings 6.4 mm (0.25 in) 
or larger are taken from the first flush after it hardens 
off and just before second flush bud break. Survival 
after rooting is also increased when larger cuttings 
are used. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Wood-boring insects often cause much damage in 
fire-scarred cherrybark oaks and in over mature trees. 
Moreover, on poorly drained clay flats or other poor 
sites, the mature trees are often infested with borers 
or the wood is mineral streaked. Fires and hurricane 
winds seem to be instrumental in introducing the 
borers and mineral streaks. 
 
Trunk boring insects found in cherrybark oak are the 
carpenterworm  (Prionoxystus robiniae),  red oak 
borer  (Enaphalodes rufulus),  oak clearwing borer 
(Paranthrene simulans),  and the living-beech borer 
(Goes pulverulentus)  (34,35). Oak twig galls 
(multiple species) are a common occurrence in the 
loessial hills and coastal plain sites. Insects identified 
as attacking southern red  oak probably also attack 
cherrybark oak; these are the defoliating Anisota oak 
worms (Anisota  spp.), the two lined chestnut borer 
(Agrilus bilineatus),  Columbian timber beetle 
(Corthylus columbianus), and pecan carpenterworm 
(Cossula magnifica).  Other probable cherrybark oak 
insects are the hickory spiral borer  (Agrilus arcuatus 
var. torquatus)  and the oak-stem borer 
(Aneflormorpha subpubescens).

Hispidus canker (Polyporus hispidus)  is common on 
cherrybark oak. Rot fungi attacking southern red oak 
and possibly cherrybark oak are  Hericium erinaceus, 
Laetiporus sulphureus, and  Daedalea quercina. Leaf 
blister caused by  Taphrina caerulescens  occurs 
frequently. Cherrybark oak is susceptible to oak wilt 
(Ceratocystis fagacearum).  Heart rot in standing 
cherrybark oak trees generally  is greater on poor sites 
than on good sites .  
 
As in most of the oaks, the acorn is subject to damage 
by nut or acorn weevils, such as  Curculio baculi, C. 
longidens, C. pardalis,  and Conotrachelus posticatus, 
and the filbertworm  (Melissopus latiferreanus.   
 
Pine voles have destroyed cherrybark oak seedlings 
in out plantings in the loess hills. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under “United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Applequist, M. B. 1959.  Growth of planted 
cherrybark oak in southeastern Louisiana.  Louisiana 
State University Forestry No tes 26. Baton Rouge.2 p.  
 
Baker, James B., and W. M. Broadfoot. 1979.  A 
practical field method of site evaluation for 
commercially important southern hardwoods.  USDA 
Forest Service, General Technical Report SO-26. 
Southern Forest Experiment Station, New Orleans, 
LA. 51 p.  
 
Barham, Richard 0. 1980.  Effects of seedbed density 
on nursery-grown cherrybark oak.  Tree Planters' 
Notes 31(4): 7-9.  
 
Bollin, Frederick S. 1966.  Direct seeding of red and 
white oaks in southeastern Louisiana.  Thesis (M.F.), 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.  
 
Bonner, F. T. 1971.  Storage of acorns and other 
large hardwood seeds-problems and possibilities. In 
Proceedings, Southeastern Nurserymen's Conference. 
p. 77-82. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Southeastern Area State  and Private Forestry, 
Atlanta, GA.  
 
Bonner, F. T. 1974 , Maturation of acorns of 
cherrybark, water and willow oaks . Forest Science 
20(3): 238-242.  
 
Broadfoot, W. M. 1969.  Problems in relating soil to 
site index for southern hardwoods . Forest Science 
15(4): 354-364.  
 
Broadfoot, W. M., B. G. Blackmon, and J. B. Baker. 
1972.  Soil management for hardwood production. In 
Proceedings, Symposium on Southeastern 
Hardwoods, September 15-16, 1971, Dothan, 
Alabama.  p. 17-29. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Southeastern Area State  and Private Forestry, 
Atlanta, GA.  
 
Clark, R. H. 1958.  Direct seeding of cherrybark oak. 
In Proceedings, Seventh Annual Forestry Symposium,  
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.  p. 5-9.  
 
Kormanik, P. P., R. P. Belanger, and E. W. Belcher. 
1976.  Survival and growth of containerized and bare 
root seedlings of cherrybark oak . Tree Planters'Notes 
27(3): 9,10,23.  
 
Langdon, 0. Gordon, and Kenneth B. Trousdell. 
1978. Stand manipulation: effects on soil moisture 
and tree growth in southern pine and pine-hardwood 
stands. In Proceedings, Soil Moisture and Site 
Productivity Symposium. p. 221-236. William E. 
Balmer, ed. USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Area 
State and Private Forestry, Atlanta, GA.  
 
Little, Elbert L., Jr. 1971. Atlas of United States 
trees, vol. 1. Conifers and important hardwoods. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Miscellaneous 
Publication 1146. Washingt on, DC. 9 p., 313 maps. . 
  
McCracken, F. 1. 1978. Canker-rots in southern 
hardwoods.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Insect and Disease Leaflet 33. Washington, DC. 4 p.  
 
McKnight, J. S. 1968.  Ecology of four hardwood 
species. In Proceedings, S eventeenth Annual Forestry 
Symposium , Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge. p. 99-116.  
 
Solomon, J. D. 1972. Biology and habits of the living 
beech borer in red oaks. Journal of Economic 
Entomology 65:13071310.  
 
Solomon, J. D., and R. C. Morris. 1966. Clearwing 
borer in red oaks. USDA Forest Service, Research 
Note SO-39. Southern Forest Experiment Station, 
New Orleans, LA. 3 p.

Toole, E. R. 1963. Site affects rate of decay in 
cherrybark oa k. Plant Disease Repo rter 47(6): 568.  
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
1972. Insects and diseases of trees in the South . 
USDA Forest Service, So utheastern Area State and 
Private Forestry, Atlanta, GA.  81 p.  
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Jeffrey D. Walker Wilson 
Earth Team Volunteer, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.