Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANYON LIVE OAK 
Quercus chrysolepis Liebm. 
Plant Symbol = QUCH2  
 
Contributed by: Santa Barbara Botanic Garden & 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
 
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
Erosion: Canyon live oaks contribute to reducing soil 
loss on steep slopes, 
 
Wildlife : Canyon live oak habitat is critical to a 
diversity of insects, birds, and mammals.  Their 
acorns are an important food source to birds, rodents, 
and deer.  
 
Other uses:  Pioneers for manufacturing implements 
such as wagon wheels and axles prized the dense 
hard wood of canyon live oak.  It was also used to 
make wedges or hammerheads for splitting redwood 
railroad ties. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Canyon live oak is an evergreen tree with a 
rounded, dense crown, growing from 6 to 20 m tall.  
It also may be a low shrub in dry, open habitats.  The 
mature bark is gray and scaly.  Like all oaks, it is  monoecious and wind-pollinated.  Leaves are oblong 
to elliptic, 2 to 3 cm long, flat, firm, with entire to 
toothed margins.  Although dark green and shiny 
above, their lower surfaces 
are paler, grayish, and 
covered with a yellow “felt.”  Like all oaks, it is 
monoecious and wind-pollinated.  Acorn cups are 
composed of thick, tubercled scales.  The one-seeded 
nuts are 2 to 6 cm long, oblong to elliptic, and mature 
in less than 2 years.  On average, trees have high 
acorn production once every 2 to 3 years.  Flowering 
takes place from March to May.  Fruits mature 
between August and October. 
 
Distribution 
Canyon live oak occurs in the mountains of southern 
Oregon, California, eastw ard to Arizona and New 
Mexico.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Canyon live oak often occurs on moderate to steep 
slopes and is a common element in the mixed 
evergreen and conifer forests of California, ranging 
in elevation from 200 to 2700 m.  It also is somewhat 
resistant to sporadic fires,  often re-sprouting from the 
base or re-establishing from seedlings. 
 
Establishment 
Like most oaks, it has an obligate relationship with 
mycorrhizal fungi, which provide critical moisture 
and nutrients.  Seedlings  and saplings are shade 
tolerant and often occur under the canopy of older 
trees. 
 
Propagation by seed : Oak seeds do not store well and 
consequently seeds should be planted soon after 
maturity.  Nuts are considered ripe when they 
separate freely from the acorn cap and fall from the 
tree.  Care should be taken to collect local fruits, 
because they may be adapted to local environmental 
conditions.  Viable nuts are green to brown and have 
unblemished walls.  Nuts with discoloration, sticky 
exudates, or small holes caused by insect larvae 
should be discarded. 
 
Direct Seeding : Seeds may be planted at the 
beginning of the winter.  Once a site is chosen, 
prepare holes that are 10 in ches in diameter and 4 to 
5 inches deep.  One gram of a slow-release fertilizer 
should be placed in the bottom and covered by a 
small amount of soil.  Place 6 to 10 acorns in each

hole at a depth of 1 to 2 inches.  Rodents or birds 
should use temporary enclosures to minimize 
herbivory.  A simple enclosure can be constructed 
from a 1-quart plastic dairy container with the bottom 
removed and a metal screen attached.  Near the end 
of the first season, seedlings should be thinned to 2 or 
3 per hole and to 1 seedling by the second season.  
Supplemental watering may be necessary if a drought 
of 6 weeks or more occurs during the spring. 
 
Container Planting: Seeds may be planted in one-
gallon containers, using well-drained potting soil that 
includes slow-release fer tilizer.  Tapered plastic 
planting tubes, with a volume of 10 cubic inches, also 
may be used.  Seeds should be planted 1 to 2 inches 
deep and the soil kept moist.  Seedlings should be 
transplanted as soon as the first true leaves mature.  
Planting holes should be at least twice as wide and 
deep as the container.  Seedlings may require 
watering every 2 to 3 weeks during the first season.  
Care should be taken to weed and mulch around 
young plants until they are 6 to 10 inches tall. 
 
Management 
General : Canyon live oak is not perceived as 
declining throughout much of its natural range.  
Significant loss of habitat is unlikely since this 
species occurs primarily  on mountain slopes and 
canyons on public lands.  Nevertheless, where fuel 
loads are high, fire may  cause local extirpation.  
However, regeneration by seeds appears to be one of 
the highest reported for western oaks. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
It is best to plant species from your local area, 
adapted to the specific site conditions where the 
plants are to be grown.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bleier, C. 1993.   A planner’s guide for oak 
woodlands .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California.  94 p. 
 
Griffin, J. 1977.   Oak woodland.  Pages 383-415.  IN 
M. Barbour and J. Major (eds.).  Terrestrial 
vegetation of California.  Wiley Interscience, New 
York, New York. 
 
Pavlik, B.M., P.C. Muick,  S. Johnson, & M. Popper 
1991.   Oaks of California.   Cachuma Press and the 
California Oak Foundation, Los Olivos, California.  
184 p. 
 
Schettler, S. & M. Smith 1980.   Nursery propagation 
of California oaks .  Pages 242-245. IN T. Plumb 
(ed.).  Proceedings of th e symposium on the ecology, 
management, and utilization of California oaks.  
USDA, Forest Service, Paci fic Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station.  Technical Report 44. 
 
Prepared By 
Dieter Wilken & Julie Burgher 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dieter Wilken 
Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa Barbara, 
California 
Email: dwilken@sbbg.org 
 
Edited 18jan01 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.