Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN PIN OAK
Quercus ellipsoidalis E.J. Hill 
Plant Symbol = QUEL 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Hill's oak, jack oak, upland pin oak 
 
Uses 
The heavy wood of northern pin oak is used for 
furniture, flooring, and interior finishing as well as 
for posts, railroad ties, shingles, fuel, and some 
hardwood pulp.  
  
Northern pin oak acorns are eaten by a variety of 
wildlife species including gray squirrels, white-tailed 
deer, and blue jays.  Trunk cavities are utilized as 
nesting sites by wood ducks, eastern kingbirds, and 
the federally endangered Kirtland's warbler.   
 
Northern pin oak is useful for rehabilitating disturbed 
sites.  It has a deep root system and successfully 
maintains growth even on nutrient-poor soils and 
during drought.  It is rarely planted in landscapes but 
has long-persistent leaves with outstanding fall color 
(orange and red to reddish brown) and should be 
considered for dry sites.   
 
Status 
 Baileys Nurseries, Inc. 
©  Northern States Power Company 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status such as  state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Beech Family (Fagaceae).  Native trees 
growing to 21 m tall, with an irregularly rounded 
crown and low-hanging lower  branches that persist as 
dead stubs, giving a ragged  appearance to the trunk; 
bark dark gray, smoothish, furrowed into narrow 
ridges on lower trunk and older branches.  Leaves 
alternate, elliptic-obovate to elliptic-oblong, 8–12(–
17) cm long, 6-15 cm wide, with 5–7 bristle-tipped 
lobes broadest toward the tip, the sinuses rounded or 
elliptic and thumb-shaped, cut nearly 3/4 to the 
midvein, bright green above, with tufts of hairs in 
vein axils below, commonly turning red in fall.  Male 
and female flowers are born e in separate catkins on 
the same tree (the species monoecious); staminate 
flowers develop from leaf buds of axils of the 
previous year, the pistillate flowers from buds formed 
during the current year.  Acorns maturing in the 
second year, elliptic to broadly ovate, 1.2–2 cm long, 
the finely hairy cup enclosing 1/3–1/2 of the acorn 
and tapering to a stalk-like base.  The common name 
from the close similarity to pin oak ( Q. coccinea), but 
with a more northern distribution.  Use of ‘Hill’s oak’ 
as the common name avoids confusion with ‘pin oak’ 
( Q. coccinea ), which is closely similar.   
  
Northern pin oak is in the red oak subgroup 
(subgenus Erythrobalanus ) and hybridizes with  Q. 
rubra  (northern red oak) and  Q. velutina (black oak).   
 
Northern pin oak is distinguished from pin oak by its 
more tapering and elongated acorns and its 
preference for drier habitats.  The leaves are shed in 
the autumn, whereas those of pin oak persist into the 
winter.    
 
Variation within the species :  There are no 
recognized varieties.

Distribution 
Northern pin oak is distributed primarily in the 
middle and western parts of the Great Lakes region -- 
from central Michigan east to noth-central 
Wisconsin, eastern Iowa, northern Illinois, and 
northern Indiana.  Disjunct populations occur in 
northern Ohio, Arkansas, and extreme southeastern 
North Dakota.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Northern pin oak is an upland species that commonly 
grows on dry, acid, sandy soils with a thin organic 
layer.  It most often occurs on sandy plains and 
sandstone hills, and develops into pure populations 
only on such sites (an edaphic climax).  It is the most 
droughts tolerant of all black oaks.  It occasionally 
grows on moderately mesic slopes or uplands in 
varying mixtures with white oak (Q. alba), black oak 
( Q. velutina ), scarlet oak ( Q. coccinea), bur oak (Q. 
macrocarpa ), and northern red oak ( Q. borealis). 
 
Flowering happens from March through May and 
fruiting from late August to early December.  
 
Establishment 
Seed production begins at about 20 years of age.  
Good seed crops are produced every 2–3 years.  
Predation by weevils may greatly reduce 
reproduction potential even in mast years.   Northern 
pin oak reproduces vegetatively by sprouting from 
the root collar or stump if top-killed or cut. 
 
Management 
The thick bark of mature trees (greater than 25 cm 
d.b.h.) minimizes fire damage.  Smaller trees are 
easily damaged by surface fires but commonly sprout 
vigorously from the root collar or stump after top-
kill.  Repeated annual burns kill smaller diameter 
stems.  Leaves of Northern pin oak may become 
chlorotic in high pH soils. 
 
Northern pin oak is not easily  transplanted because of 
the rapid development of a deep taproot.  Nor is it 
widely available in the nursery trade.  Seeds 
germinate after dormancy is broken by stratification 
for 30-45 days at 1-5°  C. 
 
Oak wilt  
Northern pin oak is susceptible to oak wilt infection, 
a fungal disease that invades the water-conducting 
vessels and plugs them.  As water movement is 
slowed, the leaves wilt and rapidly drop off the tree.  
The disease begins with a crinkling and paling of the  leaves, followed by wilting and browning from the 
margins inward.  Necrosis may be strongest along the 
veins or between them.  The symptoms move down 
branches toward the center of the tree and the tree 
may die within 1–3 months, although some diseased 
trees may survive up to a year.  The disease may be 
spread by insects (primarily beetles) or pruning tools, 
but most of the tree loss in oak wilt centers results 
from transmission through root spread between 
adjoining trees.  A trench (dug and then immediately 
filled) between neighboring trees severs the roots and 
prevents fungus spread.  De
ad and infected trees must 
be destroyed – once a tree has become infected, there 
is little chance to save it.  The wood may be used for 
firewood provided it is debarked or covered and 
sealed during the spring and summer (Johnson and 
Appel 2000; Roberts 2000; Wisconsin Dept. of 
Natural Resources 2000; City of Austin 2000). 
 
This disease most seriously  infects species of the red 
oak group (including black and live oaks).  Overcup 
oak, bur oak, white oak, and other members of the 
white oak group are not as susceptible and can be 
planted in oak wilt centers.  Oak wilt has reached 
epidemic proportions in Texas and in the mid-West 
from Iowa and Minnesota through Michigan and 
Wisconsin into Ohio, West Virginia, and 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Coladonato, M. 1993.  Quercus ellipsoidalis. IN: 
W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Database]. USDA,  Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory.  Missoula, Montana. 
 
City of Austin 2000.   The oak wilt suppression 
program .  Austin Parks and Recreation, Austin, 
Texas.  SEP00.  
<http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/oakwilt/> 
 
Johnson, J. & D. Appel 2000.  Eight step program to 
oak wilt management.  Department of Plant 
Pathology & Microbiology, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, Texas.  
<http://cygnus.tamu.edu/Texlab/oakwilt.html>  
Accessed September 2000.

Nixon, K.C. et al. 1993.  Quercus.  Pp. 445-506, IN: 
Flora of North America, North of Mexico.  Vol. 3 .  
Oxford Univ. Press, New York, New York.  SEP00.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
  
Roberts, D.L. 2000.   Oak wilt: A threat to red oaks .  
Michigan State University Extension Website.  
SEP00.   
<http://www.msue.msu.edu/reg_se/oakwilt/> 
 
Samuel Roberts Nobel Foundation 1999.   Noble 
foundation plant image gallery .  Ardmore, 
Oklahoma.  29nov2000.  
<http://www.noble.org/imagegallery/index.html> 
 
Wisconsin Dept. of Natural Resources 2000.   Oak 
wilt in Wisconsin: Biology and management .  
Wisconsin DNR Website.  SEP00.  
<http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/forestry/fh/dise
ases/oakwilt.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13nov00 jsp; 13feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.