Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INTERIOR LIVE OAK
Quercus wislizeni A. DC. 
Plant Symbol = QUWI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Quercus parvula, Quercus shrevei ; dwarf interior live 
oak, scrub interior live oak, Highland live oak Sierra 
live oak; this species is recognized as having two 
varieties: Qu ercus wislizeni  var. frutescens  and 
Quercus  wislizeni  var. wislizeni  
 
Uses 
Wildlife Use: Interior live oak provides important 
food and cover for a wide variety of birds and 
mammals: black-tailed jackrabbit, Audubon 
cottontail, brush rabbit, Beechy ground squirrel, 
Sonoma chipmunk, beaver, porcupine, and elk.  It is 
important for winter browse by Columbian black-
tailed deer.  Acorns are a valuable food source for 
deer and other wild ungulates, birds, and small 
mammals in the fall. 
 
Ethnobotanic : After leaching away the bitter tannins, 
Native Americans used the acorns of many oaks 
( Quercus  spp.) for cooking oils, soups, stews, or 
breads after leaching away the tannins.  Interior live 
oak also has a high value for fuel wood and is also 
used for landscaping. 
 
Status 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Interior live oak is a slow-growing, variable 
evergreen, which grows as a  large shrub or small tree.  
Plants may reach 30 to 75 fe et in height or assume a 
shrub-like growth form with heights of only 8 to 10 
feet.  Leaves, which persist for 2 years, are mostly 
oblong-to-elliptic or lanceolate, and spiny-toothed to 
entire.  Both leaf surfaces  are shiny green but the 
upper surface is darker.  Interior live oak is 
monoecious.  Male flowers are borne in catkins 1 to 3 
inches in length, whereas  female flowers grow in 
clusters of two to four in the upper leaf axils. 
 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  This plant is native to California 
and Mexico.  Interior live oak occurs from northern 
California in Siskiyou and Shasta counties, south 
along the foothills of the Sierra Nevada and inner 
Coast Ranges, plus the Channel Islands.  Adapted to 
the following zones in California: Douglas-fir,

Ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, redwood, western 
hardwoods, and chaparral - mountain shrub. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: This species is generally found on soils 
with a pH range between 5.6 and 7.5, with depths of 
20 to 40 inches.  Interior live oak grows particularly 
well on dry, shallow, well-drained loams, clay loams, 
gravelly loams, or gravel.  Interior live oak is tolerant 
of shade, particularly when young.  Interior live oak 
appears to be well-adapted to  persist with or without 
fire.  For more information, consult the FEIS 
database. 
 
Propagation/Regeneration : Interior live oak 
regenerates vegetatively after disturbance and also 
reproduces through seed.  Cleaned acorns average 
approximately 125 per pound (275/kg).  Annual seed 
production appears to be somewhat variable, 
although each interior live oak tree generally 
produces good seed crops at 5- to 7-year intervals.  
Acorns generally ripen after mid-August.  Research 
indicates that the acorns of interior live oak can 
germinate without exposure  to low temperatures.  
However, exposure to temperatures of 32 to 41° F 
can effectively stratify seed  and enhance germination. 
 
Management 
Interior live oak sprouts vigorously after fire or 
mechanical disturbance. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available from nurseries specializing in native plants 
within California.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.W. 1980.  Indians and fire.  Western 
Wildlands 6(3):17-21. 
 
Bartolome, J.W. 1987.   California annual grassland 
and oak savannah .  Rangelands. 9(3):122-125. 
 
Block, W.M. & M.L. Morrison 1990.   Wildlife 
diversity of the Central Sierra foothills .  California 
Agriculture 44(2):19-22. 
 
Brophy, W. 1973.  Evolution and ecology in 
Quercus: A study of hybridization and introgression 
between Quercus agrifolia Nee. and Q. wislizenii A.  DC
.  Thesis.  California State University, Hayward, 
California.  97 p. 
 
Griffin, J.R. 1977.   Oak woodland.  pp. 383-415.  IN: 
Barbour, M.G. & J. Major, eds.   Terrestrial 
vegetation of California .  John Wiley and Sons, New 
York, New York. 
 
Myatt, R.G. 1980 .  Canyon live oak vegetation in the 
Sierra Nevada .  pp. 86-91.  IN: Plumb, T.R. technical 
coordinator.   Proceedings of the symposium on the 
ecology, management and utilization of California 
oaks .  1979 June 26-28; Claremont, California.  Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PSW-44.  USDA,  Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Plumb, T.R. & A.P. Gomez 1983.   Five southern 
California oaks: Identification and postfire 
management .  Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-71.  USDA, 
Forest Service, Pacific So uthwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Berkeley, California.  56 p. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1990.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 990928.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/databas e/feis/>.  Prescribed 
Fire and Fire Effects Research Work Unit, Rocky 
Mountain Research Statio n, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database .  
Version: 990928.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Van Dersal, W.R. 1938.   Native woody plants of the 
United States, their erosion-control and wildlife 
values .  USDA, Washington, D.C.  362 p. 
 
Prepared By: 
J. S. Peterson , USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all

prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.