Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH SUMAC 
Rhus glabra L. 
Plant Symbol = RHGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Scarlet sumac 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  This was a widely used species 
among Native American tribes.  The uses included 
the making of a root and l eaf tea to treat diarrhea, 
dysentery, and mouth/throat  ulcers.  The leaves of the 
plant were smoked for asthma.  The blossoms were 
used by the Chippewa in a mouthwash for teething 
children.  Comanche children enjoyed the sour acid 
taste of the fruits and leav es were added to tobacco 
for smoking by adults.  Dy e was also created from 
various parts of the smooth sumac.  The fruits were 
used to make red dyes and the inner bark used to 
make yellow dyes. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or  agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
General : Sumac Family (Anacardiaceae).  Smooth 
sumac can be a shrub or small tree growing up to 3 
meters in height.  Smooth sumac forms thickets from 
root suckers.  The stems and branches are hairless 
and covered with a whitish waxy coating.  The leaves 
are alternate and pinnately compound (3-5 dm long).  
Smooth sumac has 11-31 leaflets that are lanceolate 
to oblong-lanceolate (7-9 cm long).  The leaflets 
taper to a point at the tip and are rounded at the base.  
The margins are sharply serrated.  The upper surface 
is dark green and lustrous.  The lower surface is 
covered with a whitish waxy coating.  Smooth sumac 
has a branched, racemose inflorescence with flowers 
maturing from the bottom up (10-25 cm long).  The 
flowers have a greenish color.  The drupes have a 
flattened-globe shape (3.5-4.5 mm long) and are 
covered with red, sticky hairs.  The seeds are 
yellowish in color and smooth (3-3.5 mm long). 
 © Paul L. Redfearn Jr. Ozarks Regional Herbarium
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Smooth sumac is found in open woodlands, 
prairies, on dry rocky hillsides, and in canyons. 
 
Adaptation 
Smooth sumac vigorously resprouts from rhizomes 
following fire.  The rhizomes are usually located 
between 3 and 12 inches below the soil surface and 
this may provide protection from heat during a fire.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation of smooth sumac can occur by use of 
seeds or root cuttings.  Seeds germinate best when 
exposed to continuous light and alternating warm and 
cool temperatures.  Smooth sumac grows best in 
poor, well-drained soils, with  partial to full sun.  
However, smooth sumac is a hardy species and will 
tolerate many soil types including soil that is slightly 
saline.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
If grown in its native habitat and using a local seed 
stock, the smooth sumac should not be prone to 
debilitating pests or problems.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial plant sources.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones. 1940.  Some notes on 
uses of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Papers of 
the Michigan Acad emy of Science, Arts, and Letters 
25:517-542. 
 
Correl, D.S. & M.C. Johnston. 1970.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner.   
 
Corley, W., J. Midcap, M. Garber, & G. Wade. 2001. 
A compilation of low-maintenance plants for Georgia 
landscapes. (
http://www.ces.uga.edu/Agriculture/horti
culture/low-maintenance.html). The University of 
Georgia, College of Agricultural and Environmental 
Sciences Cooperative Extension Service, Athens. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.  How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts . Dover Publications Inc., 
New York.   
 
Foster, S. & J.A. Duke. 2000. A field guide to 
medicinal plants and herbs of eastern and central 
North America . 2
nd edition.  Houghton Mifflin Co., 
Boston. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association. 1986.  Flora of the 
Great Plains.   University Press of Kansas, Lawrence. 
 
Gilmore, M. 1977.  Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri river region . University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln. 
 
Harlow, W.M., E.S. Harrar, J.W. Hardin, & F.M. 
White. 1996.  Textbook of dendrology .  8th edition.  
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie .  University Press of Kansas, Lawrence. 
 
Meyer, M.H. & M.E. Zins. 1998. 
(
http://www.extension.umn.edu/distribution/horticult
ure/DG1114.html) University of Minnesota 
Extension Service, St. Paul. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American ethnobotany 
database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American peoples . 
(
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb).The 
University of Mich igan, Dearborn.   
 
Redfearn, P.L. Jr. 2001.   Rhus glabra. 
(
http://biology.smsu.edu/Herbarium/Plants%20of%2
0the%20Interior%20Highlands/Flowers/Rhus%20gla
bra.jpg). Ozarks Regional Herbarium, Department of 
Biology, Southwest Missouri State University, 
Springfield. 
 
Rydberg, P.A. 1932.  Flora of the prairies and plains 
of central North America .  The Science Press Printing 
Company, Lancaster. 
 
USDA Forest Service. 2001.  Fire effects information 
system .(
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/shru
bs/rhugla/index.html). Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Boise.   
 
Prepared By:   
Matthew D. Hurteau  
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center  
c/o Plant Sciences Department 
University of California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 30May2002 jsp, 20Dec2004 rln; 060815 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.