Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SALMONBERRY 
Rubus spectabilis Pursh 
Plant Symbol = RUSP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Oregon Plant Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: Salmonberry fruits are edible, but 
are considered too soft to dry.  Both the large, 
raspberry-like fruit and the young shoots were widely 
eaten by coastal peoples of British Columbia and 
western Washington.  Fruits were an important food 
source for Native Americans and are still collected 
today.  The berries are among the first to ripen, and 
are a beautiful salmon color that stand out in the 
generally rainy weather of spring.  Large quantities of 
fresh berries were picked and were often served at 
feasts, usually with oil or ooligan grease, said to 
prevent constipation.  Today salmonberries are 
frozen, canned, or made into jams and jellies. 
 
The young growing sprouts are harvested from April 
to early June.  They are sn apped off with the fingers 
before they become woody, then peeled, and eaten 
raw or, more commonly cooked by steaming or 
boiling.  Sprouts are also tied in bundles and pit-
cooked.  They were usually eaten with seal oil or 
ooligan grease, and, more recently, with sugar, often 
as an accompaniment to dried salmon or meat.  Some 
Nuu-chah-nulth  people boiled the leaves with fish as 
a flavoring.  The Kaigani Haida used the leaves to 
line baskets, wipe fish, and cover food in steaming 
pits. 
 
The Makah dry and peel a branch of salmonberry, 
remove the pith, and use it for a pipe stem.  The 
Quileute plug the hair seal float used in whaling with 
the hollow stem of elderbe rry wood, then insert a 
piece of salmonberry wood as a stopper.  This 
salmonberry plug can be removed for further 
inflation of the float. 
 
Salmonberry has an astringent  quality in the bark and 
leaves.  The Quileute chew the leaves and spit them 
on burns, and in winter when the leaves are not 
obtainable they use the bark instead.  The Makah 
pound the bark and lay it on an aching tooth or a 
festering wound to kill the pain.  The Quinault boil 
the bark in seawater, and the brew is drank to lessen 
labor pains and to clean in fected wounds, especially 
burns. 
Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Wildlife : Salmonberry fruits, ripe from June to 
August, rank at the very top of foods for wildlife.  
The early blooming flowers, blossoming from March 
to June, are an important nectar source for bees, 
butterflies, various other insects, and hummingbirds.  
The berries are relished by songbirds, bears, and 
small mammals a much as they are enjoyed by 
humans.  Leaves, twigs, and stems are grazed by 
browsers, such as deer, elk, and rabbits.  The dense 
thickets provide excellent escape habitats for birds 
and small mammals, and nesting sites for songbirds. 
 
Restoration: Salmonberry is a useful shrub in created 
wetlands because it transplants easily, with good soil-
binding qualities once it is established, and is well 
adapted to eroded or disturbed sites.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Salmonberry is a 
deciduous rhizomatous shrub, usually 1-4 m tall, with 
erect or arching stems.  The stems are often densely 
prickly on the upper portions of new growth.  The 
twigs in winter tend to have a distinctive golden-
brown to rust-red color.  The flowers are large (about 
1.5 inches across) and borne singly.  Salmonberry 
blooms in early spring with beautiful deep pink rose-
like flowers.  The leaves are pinnately compound.

The fruits are raspberry-like, round, and yellow to 
orange to deep red. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Salmonberry grows in moist places and 
wetlands, and is especially abundant along 
streamsides and riparian ar eas at elevations below 
1400 m.  It can form dense thickets or grow 
individually.  The range is from Alaska south to 
northwestern California, from the coast to the 
Cascades.  
 
Establishment 
Salmonberry grows well in full or partial shade.  
Cultivars are available in the horticultural trade.  
These shrubs are good for stabilizing or restoring 
degraded sites, and for slope stabilization and erosion 
control.  Salmonberry shrubs may become invasive 
one they are established. 
 
Live Plant Collections : Salmonberry is easily grown 
from layering, basal sprouting, rhizomes, root 
cuttings, and hardwood cuttings.  Small offshoots 
growing from the parent plant under four feet tall are 
easily transplanted.  Branches that touch the ground 
tend to root, and they can be separated from the 
parent plant.  Pull the rooted tips of larger plants and 
plant into one-gallon pots. 
 
Hardwood cuttings should be 1-2.5 cm in diameter 
and 45 cm or more in length with at least three nodes.  
Rooting invariably occurs at the base of a cutting and 
at nodes with leaf buds.  Store hardwood cuttings 
over winter in damp sawdust of peat moss; this 
promotes callusing and prevents desiccation.  As with 
hardwood cuttings of other species, vigorous rooting 
can be enhanced in  Rubus species by using a liquid 
rooting hormone and burying the cuttings in damp 
wood shavings. 
 
Seed Collections : Salmonberry can be grown from 
fresh seed.  Collect the fruits when ripe (they are 
orange or red).  Generally salmonberry fruits ripen 
from June through August, and can be collected by 
hand.  Extract seeds by macerating in water and 
floating off the pulp and empty seeds.  Seed should 
be planted in the fall.  If seeds are to be stored, they 
should be dried.  Seeds will keep for several years at 
5°C.  A warm stratification of 20-30°C is necessary 
for spring-sown seeds, although fall sowing provides 
best germination.  Germination is improved if seeds 
are scarified with sulfuric acid for 20-60 minutes or 
with a 1% solution of sodium hyperchlorite for seven 
days prior to cold stratification.  Seeds need 90 days  of cold stratification at 
36° - 41°F to break seed 
dormancy.  Sow in ground in drills, cover lightly with 
soil, and mulch over winter.  Seeds per kilogram: 
315,255 
 
Management 
Traditional Resource Management: This includes the 
following: 1) Occasional burning to stimulate new 
growth; 2) pruning the branches after picking the 
berries to stimulate new growth and fruit production 
the next growing season; and 3) ownership of 
salmonberry shrubs provides the basis for careful 
tending and sustainable yield of valued resources.  
This plant grows very rapidly in moist, shady 
conditions.  If summer drought occurs, the plants 
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available from some native plant nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Albright, M. 1996.  Greenhouse manager .  USDI, 
National Park Service, Olympic National Park, Port 
Angeles, Washington.  Personal communication. 
 
Angier, B. 1974.   Field guide to edible wild plants .  
Stackpole Books.  256 pp. 
 
Brinkman, K.A. 1974.   Rubus L. blackberry, 
raspberry . IN: Schopmeyer, C.S. (tech. coord.) 1974.  
Seeds of the Woody Plants in the United States.  
USDA, FS, Agric. Handbook 450, Washington, D.C.  
883 pp. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.   A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of Western Washington and 
Northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Galloway, B. 1982.   Upper Stollo ethnobotany .  
Coqualeetza Education Training Center, Sardis, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973. Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington.

Haeussler, S., D. Coates, & J. Mather 1990.  
Autecology of common plants in British Columbia: A 
literature review.  British Columbia Ministry of 
Forests.  FRDA Report 158.  272 pp. 
 
Heller, C.A. 1976.   Wild edible and poisonous plant 
of Al aska.  Cooperative Extension Service Bulletin F-
40, University of Alaska, College, Alaska. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Isaacson, R.T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural library's 
source list of plants and seeds . Anderson 
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Jacobs, M. & M. Jacobs 1982.   Southeast Alaska 
native foods. IN : Hope. A., ed. Raven's Bones, Sitka, 
Alaska. 
 
Jensen, E.C., D.J. Anderson, J.C. Zasada, & J.C. 
Tappeiner II 1995.   The reproductive ecology of 
broad-leaved trees and shrubs: salmonberry, Rubus 
spectabilis Pursh .  Forest Research Laboratory, 
Oregon State University, Re search Publication 9e.  7 
pp. 
 
Kari, P.R. 1987.   Tanaina plantlore . Dena'ina 
K'et'una .  An ethnobotany of the Dena'ina Indians of 
south-central Alaska .  USDI, National Park Service, 
Alaska Region, Anchorage, Alaska. 
 
King County Department  of Public Works, Surface 
Water Management Division 1994.  Northwest native 
plants, identification and propagation for 
revegetation and restoration  Projects.  King County, 
Washington. 
 
'Ksan, People of 1980.  Gathering what the great 
nature provided.  Food traditions of the Gitksan .  
Douglas & McIntyre, Vancouver and University of 
Washington Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  Nutrition, 
botany, and use .  Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology Volume 8.  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  632 pp. 
 
Leigh, M. August 1997.   Grow your own native 
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and 
landscaping with western Washington native plants .  
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington  State Department of Ecology, and Washington State 
University Cooperative Extension. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan
ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1993.   Native American basketry of 
southern California .  Riverside Museum Press.  155 
pp. 
 
Norton, H.H. 1981.   Plant use in Kaigani Haida 
culture: correction of an ethnohistorical oversight .  
Econ. Botany 35:434-449. 
 
Port Simpson Curriculum Committee 1983.   Port 
Simpson foods .  The People of Port Simpson and 
School District No. 52, Prince Rupert, British 
Columbia, Canada. 
 
Randall, W.R., R.F. Kenist on, D.N. Bever, & E.C. 
Jensen 1994. Manual of Oregon trees and shrubs .  
Oregon State University Bookstore, Corvallis, 
Oregon.  305 pp.. 
 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D. Haase 1998.  
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants .  
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Schopmeyer, C.S. (Tech. Coord.) 1974.   Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States . Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Stevens, M. & R. Vanbianchi 1993.   Restoring 
wetlands in Washington.  A guidebook for wetland 
restoration, planning and implementation .  
Washington State Department of Ecology. 
Publication #93-17. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson & 
A.Z. York 1990.   Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia .  Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie 
1983.   Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island .  B.C. Provincial Museum 
Occasional Paper No. 24.  165 pp.

Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982.  Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island .  B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2.  
99 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.   Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians .  Part I.  Coastal Peoples. British Columbia 
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan & S. 
Hashisaki 1994.   A citizen's guide to wetland 
restoration .  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Region 10.  71 pp.  
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1974.   Collecting, 
processing, and germinating seeds of wildland 
plants .  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens  
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Dale C. Darris 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.