Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SKUNKBUSH 
Rhus trilobata Nutt. var. 
simplicifolia  (Greene) Barkl. 
Plant Symbol = RHTRS 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Skunkbrush, polecat bush, st inking sumac, ill-scented 
sumac,  quailbush, squawbush, squawberry, 
basketbush, lemonade sumac, three-lobed sumac, 
three-leaved sumac, lemita   
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Skunkbush fruits were used by Native 
Americans in foods, beverages, and medicines.  
Pliable young stems were woven with grass stems 
into durable baskets that would hold water.  The 
leaves are said to have been smoked by the 
Comanches. 
  
Wildlife & Livestock: Livestock in some locations use 
skunkbush, but it is not a preferred species.  It has 
been planted in some locations as a deterrent to 
grazing animals.  It provides some browse for deer, 
elk, and pronghorn when more preferred forage is 
unavailable.  Skunkbush fruits, which persist through 
fall and winter, provide a food for birds and small 
mammals when other foods are scarce or unavailable.  
Skunkbush also may form dense thickets that provide 
good hiding and nesting cover for small birds and 
mammals.       
 
Conservation : Skunkbush has been used as an 
ornamental (the fall leaves turn bright yellow, orange,  and red to reddish-purple), and it has been widely 
planted at recreation sites, 
rest areas, and roadsides.  
It is useful for windbreaks, shelterbelts, and because 
of the strong root development, for erosion control.  
Var. trilobata has been successfully transplanted onto 
phosphate mine spoils in Idaho.  'Bighorn,' a cultivar 
from Wyoming, has been widely planted on pinyon-
juniper sites, and the species has been successfully 
transplanted in aspen-maple, pinyon-juniper, and 
mountain-brush zones. 
 
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sumac family (Anacardiaceae).  Upright 
arching native shrubs 0.5-2.5 meters tall, forming 
rounded, moundlike, or upright thickets, crown 
diameter often greater than the plant height; roots 
deep and extensively branched, with woody, shallow, 
and spreading rhizomes, sometimes connecting 
shrubs more than 9 m apart; sprouts arising from 
rhizomes and root crown.  Leaves: deciduous, 
alternate, compound with 3 leaflets, variable in size, 
shape, lobing, and margin, the leaflets unstalked, 
ovate to rhomboid, more or less wedge-shaped at the 
base, coarsely-toothed, usually shiny-glabrous above, 
the terminal leaflet 3-6.5 cm long; summer foliage 
green, becoming orange or reddish in the fall.  
Flowers: yellowish to whitish, in small, dense 
clusters on short lateral shoots, opening before the 
leaves, bisexual and unisexual, both types borne on 
the same plant (the species polygamodioecious); 
male (staminate) flowers in yellowish catkins, female 
(pistillate) flowers in bright yellow, short clusters at 
the ends of branches.  Fru its: 5-7 mm in diameter, red 
at maturity and sparsely  hairy, each containing a 
single nutlet.   Rhus trilobata  closely resembles  R. 
aromatica  and is often treated as part of the latter.  
The common name is derived from the odor of the 
leaves, especially when bruised.   
 
Variation within the species : a number of ecotypes 
are known to occur in skunkbush.  Growth form and 
height vary geographically – plants are more 
branched and compact in the Southwest and taller in 
the north part of the range.  Current practice 
recognizes six formal varieties, distinguished by 
morphological characteristic s such as growth form,

height, leaf shape and size, fruit shape and 
pubescence, commonly intergrading where they 
occur together.   
 
Var. anisophylla (Greene) Jepson - OR, CA, NV, UT, 
AZ, and NM, south into Mexico. 
Var.  pilosissima  Engelm. - CA to TX, south into 
Mexico. 
Var.  quinata  (Greene) Jepson – OR, CA, NV, AZ, 
and NM.  
Var. racemulosa  (Greene) Barkl. - AZ and NM, south 
into Mexico. 
Var. simplicifolia  (Greene) Barkl. – OK, CO, and 
NM, to CA and OR, south to AZ and Mexico. 
Var. trilobata – covers the range of the whole 
species. 
 
Distribution : Broadly distributed throughout the 
western North America,  from Saskatchewan and 
Alberta south to Texas and California and into 
Mexico; not in Washington or British Columbia.  See 
details below for distribution of varieties.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Skunkbush grows in prairies to shrublands and oak 
woodlands at elevations of about 1000-3000 meters 
and in a variety of sites including dry rocky slopes, 
streamsides, seasonal drai nages, and canyon bottoms, 
sand dunes and sandhills, pastures, roadsides, and 
waste places -- in sun or partial shade and over a 
wide range of soils from nearly bare rock to sand and 
heavy clay.  It is intolerant of flooding and high water 
tables.  Skunkbush is a pr ominent species in many 
early seral communities, especially after fire, but it 
also is an indicator of climax in various shrub and 
grassland communities.   Flowering: April-July; 
fruiting: June-October, then persisting through the 
winter if not eaten.   
 
Establishment 
Skunkbush produces seed nearly every year, but the 
number of flowers that produce fruit is relatively low.  
Branches 6-10 years of ag e produce the most viable 
fruit.  Mostly birds and mammals disperse seeds.  
Roadside colonies frequently originate from 
germination of seed in caches of mice and squirrels.  
Skunkbush, like other species of  Rhus, may be an 
effective seedbank former, with long-lived seeds 
stored in the humus layer.  The seeds have dormancy 
broken by cold treatment.  Seedlings are intolerant of 
crowding, even under optimal conditions.  Growth of 
skunkbush is most rapid during the first 3-5 years, 
and plantings have remained healthy and vigorous for  more than 20 years; health
y rhizomes have been aged 
at more than 30 years.   
 
Management 
Skunkbush sprouts vigorously from woody rhizomes 
or from adventitious buds at the root crown after top-
kill by fire.  Crown width  and overall coverage often 
increase in response to fire.  Skunkbush also may 
have the ability to delay sprouting for up to a year 
following fire.   
 
Skunkbush can be propagated from root and 
softwood cuttings – most effectively done well before 
freezing weather.  Best seed germination is from fall 
and winter planting.  The  presence of seeded grasses 
has reduced the survival of skunkbush at some sites, 
and although the plants are generally drought-
tolerant, water-stressed seedlings may be stunted for 
several years and sometimes fail to recover.  
Skunkbush is generally reported to be tolerant of 
heavy grazing.    
  
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Sanford, R.C. 1970.   Skunk bush (Rhus trilobata 
Nutt.) in the North Dakota Badlands: Ecology, 
phytosociology, browse production, and utilization .  
Ph.D. diss., North Dakota State Univ., Fargo, North 
Dakota.  
 
Tirmenstein, D.A. 1987.   Rhus trilobata.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  U.S.D.A., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Wasser, C.H. 1982.  Ecology and culture of selected 
species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
West .  FWS/OBS-82/56.  U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom

Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited:19jun02 jsp; 03june03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.