Plant Guide
SWEETBRIAR ROSE 
Rosa rubiginosa L. 
Plant Symbol = RORU82 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 Rosa rubiginosa. Richard Old, XIDservices.com 
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: eglantine rose (USDA ARS, 
2012) 
Scientific Alternate Names: Rosa eglanteria L. (USDA 
ARS, 2012) 
Uses 
Rosa rubiginosa is valued by gardeners for its sweet, 
apple-like fragrance.  It is often misidentified as a 
desirable species in natural areas and mistakenly planted 
for wildlife habitat.  This rose can be very aggressive and 
dominate an area within a few years.  It should not be 
planted in a home landscape, for wildlife habitat, or for 
any other use.   
Weediness 
This plant is weedy and invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation (Center for 
Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health, 2012).  Consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state 
agriculture department regarding its status.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
 
Description 
General:  Rose family (Rosaceae).  Rosa rubiginosa is a 
shrub introduced from Europe.  It grows up to 10 feet tall 
and has multiple arching stems.  Stems have thorns that 
are stout, flattened, downward-curving and unequal in 
size.  Leaves are alternate and pinnately divided into 5 to 
7 leaflets with doubly serrated margins and gland-tipped 
teeth.  The undersides of leaves have hairs and stalked 
glands that impart a sweet aroma when crushed.  Flowers 
are solitary or in small clusters at the ends of branches 
and bloom in June to July.  Flowers have five pale to dark 
pink petals 0.6 to 0.8 inches long, five sepals, usually 10 
or more pistils, and multiple stamens.  Sepals have 
slender lateral lobes and stalked glands, curve backward 
at the time of anthesis and are deciduous.   Fruits ripen in 
September to October, are smooth, bright red, 0.4 to 0.6 
inches long, and persist on the plant after ripening.  Plants 
reproduce sexually by seed and vegetatively by layering 
and suckering (Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973; Young and 
Young, 1992; Burke Museum of Natural History and 
Culture 2012). 
 Rosa rubiginosa flowers. Richard Old, XIDservices.com 
Distribution:  Rosa rubiginosa grows in most states and 
provinces throughout the US and Canada.  For current 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  This plant is found along roadsides, in pastures, 
Conservation Reserve Program fields, and natural areas. 
Adaptation 
Sweetbriar rose is adapted to all soil types with moderate 
fertility, and can tolerate moderate saline conditions 
(USDA NRCS, 2012).  It requires 18 to 45 inches of

annual precipitation.  It is not shade tolerant (USDA 
NRCS, 2012). 
 Fruit (rose hips) of Rosa rubiginosa. Pamela Pavek 
 Thorns on lower stems of Rosa rubiginosa.  Pamela Pavek 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Numerous galls are often found on Rosa rubiginosa 
stems.  The galls are caused by a gall-forming wasp 
(Diplolepis rosae) which, like the plant, is a European 
species.  The galls do not cause any harm, and are hosts 
for parasitoid wasps.  The plant is susceptible to fungal 
diseases such as powdery mildew (Sphaerotheca pannosa 
var. rosae) and downy mildew (Perenospora sparsa).   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Birds and other wildlife eat the hips of sweetbriar rose 
and spread the seed.  Areas invaded with sweetbriar rose 
can become dominated by the plant, resulting in a decline 
in native plant species and other desirable vegetation.  
The forage value of pastures with sweetbriar rose 
decreases rapidly following the invasion and spread of the 
plant.  In addition, sweetbriar rose impedes the movement 
of livestock, wildlife and vehicles. 
Control 
Sweetbriar rose is difficult to control due to its large size 
and regeneration from sprouts.  Control often requires 
multiple years of treatment.  Plants can be eliminated by 
extracting from the ground with an ATV or other vehicle 
in the spring, then spraying the sprouts that emerge with 
an herbicide.  In areas where plants are numerous, 
mowing with a brush machine will facilitate herbicide 
application.  Effective herbicides include glyphosate, 
picloram plus 2-4-D, and triclopyr ester (Peachey, 2012).   
 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Rosa rubiginosa has 31,000 seeds per pound (USDA 
NRCS, 2012).  The seed does not require a stratification 
period if it is fresh, however if it has a chance to dry, a 
stratification period is required to break dormancy 
(Young and Young, 1992).   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
This plant is sold by garden nurseries and numerous 
cultivars are available.  However, gardeners should 
consider its invasive nature before planting.  Spread of its 
seed by birds and wildlife cannot be prevented unless the 
rose hips are removed soon after development.  Several 
native rose species are available as alternatives that have 
similar aesthetic attributes and pose no threat to 
surrounding plant communities. 
References 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. 2012. 
Available at 
ttp://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imagec
ollection.php (accessed 3 Oct 2012). University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Center for Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health. 2010. 
Available at http://www.invasive.org (accessed 29 
Nov 2012). University of Georgia, Athens, GA. 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London. 
Peachey, E. (ed.) 2012. Northwest Weed Management 
Handbook. Available at 
http://pnwhandbooks.org/weed/ (accessed 3 Oct 
2012). Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR.

USDA ARS, National Genetic Resources Program, 
Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). 
2012. Available at http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?5337 (accessed 5 October 
2012). National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville, MD. 
USDA NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database. Available 
at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 5 October 2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 
Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody 
Plants of North America. Disocorides Press, Portland, 
OR. 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant guide for sweetbriar rose (Rosa 
rubiginosa L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Pullman, WA. 
Published December 2012 
Edited: 29Nov2012 jab; 30 Nov 2012 gm; 30Nov2012 
plsp  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER