Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE 
CONEFLOWER  
Ratibida columnifera  (Nutt.) 
Woot. & Standl. 
Plant Symbol = RACO3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Mexican hat, yellow Mexican hat, upright prairie 
coneflower, long-head cone flower, columnar prairie 
coneflower 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Tea was made from the leaves and 
flower heads.  Cheyenne Indians boiled prairie 
coneflower leaves and stems to make a solution 
applied externally to draw the poison out of 
rattlesnake bites.  An infusion was used to relieve the 
pain of headaches and to  treat stomachaches and 
fevers (Moerman 1998).  A decoction was used as a 
wash to relieve pain and to treat poison ivy rash 
(Ibid.).   
 
Landscaping : Prairie coneflower is suggested for use 
in roadside plantings, parks, recreational areas and 
prairie restoration pr ojects; where annual 
precipitation is from ten to th irty inches.  This species 
is sometimes grown as an ornamental.   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
@ PLANTS 
Description 
General : Composite Family (Asteraceae).  Prairie 
coneflower is a native perennial about a foot and a 
half tall.  The rays are generally three to five 
centimeters long, much longer than the disk (solid 
part between the rays).  The floral disk is somewhat 
globe-shaped, ovoid, or shortly ellipsoid, twelve to 
twenty millimeters high (Steyermark 1963).  Prairie 
coneflower has well-developed leaves up to fifteen 
centimeters long and six centimeters wide, pinnatifid 
to partly bipinnatifid, with ultimate segments linear 
to oblong, often very unequal (Great Plains Flora 
Association 1986).  This species has one to several 
stems twelve to forty-seven inches tall.  The fruit is a 
small ashen.   
 
Distribution : Prairie coneflower  ranges from Alberta 
to Mexico, east to Manitoba, Minnesota, Illinois, 
Missouri, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas; and New 
England (Steyermark 1963).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Ratibida columnifera  grows well on loam, sandy 
loam, and clayey loam soils.  It prefers a sunny 
position and well-drained rich soil types.  This 
species is tolerant of weakly acidic to moderately 
alkaline soils and weak saline soils.  It has low to 
moderate water requirements.  Prairie coneflower is 
found on dry plains, prairies, waste ground, and along 
roadsides and railroads.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Ratibida columnifera  seeds are 
best sown in early spring in a cold frame.  Cover the 
seeds and place the pot in a sunny location.  
Optimum germination temper atures are between 68

to 86ºF, or 20 to 30ºC.  Germination should be 
achieved in two days.   
 
Management 
Prairie coneflower seeds can be planted in the fall.  If 
they are placed in winter storage for spring planting, 
they should be stratified with a cold dry treatment.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available through native plant seed sources 
specializing in Great Plains species.  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bare, J. E. 1979.  Wildflowers and weeds of Kansas .  
The Regents Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Bruggen, T. V. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Dorn, R. D. 1984.   Vascular plants of Montana .  
Mountain West Publishing, Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
Harrington, H. D. 1964.   Manual of the plants of 
Colorado .  2nd ed.  The Shallow Pr ess Inc., Chicago. 
 
Looman, J. & K. F. Best. 1994.  Budd’s flora of the 
Canadian Prairie Provinces .  Minister of Supply & 
Services Canada, Ottawa, Canada. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Nelson, R. A. 1977.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  2nd ed.  Skyland Publishers, Estes Park, 
Colorado. 
 
Sharp Brothers Seed Company 1989.   Catalog of 
wildflowers and forbs .  Sharp Brothers Seed 
Company, Amarillo, Texas. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames Iowa. 
 
Straughbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of 
West Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., 
Morgantown, West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Vance, F. R., J. R. Jowsey, & J. S. McLean 1984.  
Wildflowers of the northern Great Plains.  University 
of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
 
Weber, W. A. 1987.   Colorado flora: western slope .  
Colorado Associated Univ ersity Press, Boulder, 
Colorado. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 30may03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.