Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GOLDEN CURRANT 
Ribes aureum Pursh var. 
aureum  
Plant Symbol = RIAUA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Buffalo currant, fragrant golden currant, golden 
flowering currant, clove currant, spicebush 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Fruits of Ribes  species, including the golden 
currant, are a valuable f ood source for songbirds, 
chipmunks, ground squirrels, as well as numerous 
wildlife species and other animals. 
 
Ethnobotanic : The sweet and flavorful fruits are full 
of seeds but are popular for making jam, jelly, pie, 
and even ice cream.  Some western Indian tribes used 
currants ( Ribes species) for making pemmican.  The  Kiowa Indians believed that snakes were afraid of the 
currant bush and used it as a snakebite remedy.  
Other tribes have used the fruits to color clay pots.  
  
Conservation
: The fragrant (clove odor), golden-
yellow flowers of spring, yellowish to red fall 
foliage, edible fruits, and wide ecological range make 
golden currant a valued ornamental shrub for a 
variety of natural landscapes.  Golden currant is 
easily cultivated from seed or cuttings. 
 
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Currant family (Grossulariaceae).  A native 
shrub 1-3 m tall, spineless, with numerous, erect-
arching branches forming an irregular crown up to 6 
meters tall or more; bark gray to red-brown; 
rhizomatous.  Leaves deciduous, light green and 
glossy, alternate or clustered, orbicular or cuneate-
ovate with 3-5 rounded lobes, (0.6-)1-2.5(4.7) cm 
long and wide, cuneate to subcordate at base, 
glabrous or sometimes lightly hairy beneath.  Flowers 
in short racemes of 5-10(- 15), with the fragrance of 
cloves; long-tubed (from fused sepals) and trumpet-
shaped, with 5 yellow sepal lobes spreading at the 
top, with 5, short, reddish petals inserted at the top of 
the tube.  Fruit a berry 6-10 mm diameter, globose to 
ellipsoid, ripening from green to yellow to red and 
finally black to dark purple, with numerous seeds.  
The common name pertains to the conspicuous, 
golden flowers; “currant” is the general name for 
Ribes fruit.   
 
Variation within the species:  Ribes odoratum, often 
considered a distinct sp ecies, recognized by its 
considerably larger flowers, has been placed (re-
placed, as var. villosum ) as the eastern segment of the 
broader species.    
 
Var.  aureum   –  (golden currant) 
Var. gracillimum  (Coville & Britt.) Jepson  –  
(golden currant) 
Var. villosum  DC.  –  (fragrant golden currant, 
buffalo currant, clove currant) 
      synonym:  Ribes odoratum  H. Wendl.

Distribution: Var. aureum  is widespread in the 
western US and southeastern Canada, with 
populations in Ontario and perhaps Quebec, as far 
south in the US as trans-Pecos Texas.  Var. 
gracillimum  is endemic to California.  Var.  villosum 
in the central US, from western Texas to Montana 
and eastward to New York and Vermont; it is absent 
from the Atlantic seaboard.  The species is 
naturalized in Europe from garden escapes.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Golden currant grows in grasslands, coniferous 
forests and woodlands, and riparian and mountain 
shrub communities.  It occurs on floodplains, along 
streams, in ravines and washes, by springs, and on 
mountain slopes, at eleva tions of about 800–2600 
meters.  It is generally an early to mid-seral species in 
western coniferous forests.  Var.  villosum occurs on 
cliffs, rocky slopes, ravines, bluffs, open hillside, and 
thicket margins, often in sandy habitats.  Golden 
currant is somewhat shade tolerant and may grow in 
open, scattered, and dense pine stands, but it is 
usually suppressed by a denser canopy.   
 
Flowering (March–)April–June, just after appearance 
of the leaves; fruiting (May–)June–August.   
 
Establishment 
Plants of  Ribes generally begin fruiting after 3 years.  
Seeds may remain viable in the soil and duff for 
many years.  Germination is enhanced by 
scarification, but relatively good germination of 
golden currant seeds was obtained by stratification at 
-2.2–2.2 degrees C for 60 days without scarification.   
 
Golden currant transplants well and forms suckers.  
Plants can also be grown from cuttings.  It reproduces 
vegetatively by rhizomes, sprouting after cutting and 
fire.   
 
Management 
Golden currant can be used to re-vegetate roadsides 
and disturbed areas, such as mine spoils and 
rangeland.  It is rated mostly good in initial 
establishment, growth rate. persistence, germination, 
seed production, ease of planting, and natural spread.  
It tolerates shearing and may be used on dry, exposed 
sites in a range of soil types, and it is a good soil 
stabilizer.   
 
Golden currant is an alternate host for white pine 
blister rust ( Cronartium ribicola ); this and other 
species of  Ribes have been targets of various 
eradication efforts where wh ite pine is of commercial  interest.   Please check th
e PLANTS Profile for this 
plant for links to additional information. 
 
Fire top-kills golden currant, but it can survive low- 
to moderate-severity fire by sprouting from rhizomes.    
Such fires also scarify soil-stored seed and enhance 
germination.  Severe fire probably kills golden 
currant and may destroy soil-stored seeds.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  One cultivar (‘Crandall’) has 
been referred to as "the  North Country's answer to 
Forsythia ."  Other horticultural selections have been 
made for hardiness, flower color and density, and 
fruit taste and size.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Conrad, C. E. 1987.  Common shrubs of chaparral 
and associated ecosystems of southern California .  
Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-99.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Berkeley, California.   
 
Shaw, N. 1984.   Producing bareroot seedlings of 
native shrubs .  IN: P.M. Murphy (compiler).   The 
challenge of producing native plants for the 
Intermountain area .  Proceedings, Intermountain 
Nurseryman's Association conference; Las Vegas, 
NV, 1983.  Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-168.  USDA, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Ogden, Utah.   
 
Wasser, C.H. 1982.  Ecology and culture of selected 
species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
West .  FWS/OBS-82/56.  USDI, Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Washington, DC.   
 
Winkler, G. 1987 (rev. K.A. Marshall 1995)  Ribes 
aureum .  IN: W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire 
effects information system  [Data base].  USDA Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station, 
Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, 
Montana.   
  
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom

Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.