Plant Guide
BALDHIP ROSE  
Rosa gymnocarpa  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = RO GY 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington  
 
Rosa gymnocarpa. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:  wood rose , dwarf  rose, little 
wild rose (Hitc hcock and Cronquist, 1973; Burke 
Museum of Natural History and Culture, 2012)  
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Rosa apiculata  Greene, Rosa 
dasypoda  Greene, Rosa helleri  Greene,  Rosa leucopsis  
Greene,  Rosa prionota  Greene ( Hitchcock et al., 1969 ) 
Uses  
Wildlife:  Baldhip  rose fruits remain on the plant 
throughout the winter, and are eaten by small mammals, 
birds and insects (Conra d, 1987 as cited by Reed, 1993) .  
Rosa  species  are important browse for  Rocky Mountain 
elk in summer , but the use is lower in fall and winter  
(K ufeld , 1973 ).  White -tailed and mule deer browse 
baldhip  rose, especially in burned areas ( Keay and Peek, 
1980 ). 
  Livestock:  Livestock will browse baldhip
 rose plants , 
however  browsing inhibits the spread of the plant , 
probably due to  damage to the rhizom es from trampling 
(Zimmerman and Neuenschwander, 1984).  
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects:  The primary insect 
pollinators of roses are pollen -gathering bees  (Mader et 
al., 2011).  The op en-faced flowers of native roses are 
more attractive to pollinators  than  ornamental varieties 
with double flowers (Mader et al., 2011).  
 
Ethnobotanical:  Baldhip  rose was used for a variety of 
purposes by  native people in the Pacific Northwest.   The 
Okanagan -Colville and Thompson  used the stems and 
branches to construct baby carriers and arrows.  They  
made a decoction of the branches and leaves for a body 
and hair wash in sweat  baths, as a wash for sore eyes, to 
soak fishing lines and nets for good luck, for  hunters to 
remove huma n scent, and as a  tea for protection from bad 
spirits, for general disposition , and a tonic.  They also 
used a poultice of chewed leaves for treating bee stings, 
and smoked dried leaves with leaves from other plants.  
The rose hips were a minor source of f ood, and children 
played with them as beads.  (Moerman, 2012).   Interior 
Salish people also used dwarf rose for similar purposes 
(Parish et al., 1996).  
 
Hips  of all wild roses are high in vitamin C and are made 
into jams, jellies, syrups and teas.   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :
  Rose family (Rosaceae) .  Rosa gymnocarpa is 
an erect to spreading, long -lived shrub native to the 
western U.S. and Canada.  It grows 1 to 4 feet tall and has 
multiple slender stems that are covered with straight, 
weak prickles, or are sometimes unarmed.  Leaves are 
alternate, deci duous, and odd- pinnate with 5 to 9 leaflets.  
The leaf stems and underside of the leaf midrib have 
stalked glands.  Leaflets are elliptic to elliptic -ovate, and 
have doubly serrated margins with gland -tipped teeth, 
otherwise the leaflets are smooth.  Flowers occur at the 
ends of branches, bloom in May through July, and are 
usually solitary and small.  Petals are 0.4 to 0.6 inch long, 
are light to dark pink, and are broadly notched. Flowers 
have numerous stamens and pistils, and the styles are 
deciduous as t he fruit matures.  The pedicels and sepals 
have stalked glands, and the sepals are erect or ascending 
at anthesis, then deciduous.  The fruit is a pear -shaped