HIMALAYAN 
BLACKBERRY  
Rubus armeniacus Focke  
Plant Symbol = RUAR9 
  
Alternate Names  
Common Names:  , Himalaya -berry, Armenian 
Blackberry   
Scientific Names:  Rubus discolor  Weihe & Nees  
 
Uses  
Himalaya blackberry fruits are highly edible and 
commonly collected by berry pickers.  The fruit can be 
canned, frozen, or eaten fresh (Francis 2003).  Wildlife 
readily consumes the fruit as well.  It was used in the 
development of the hybrid marionberry c ultivar, ‘Marion’ 
(Waldo 1957).   
 
Blackberry thickets create highly effective barriers that 
can control human, wildlife, and domestic livestock 
access (Francis 2003).  
Status  
Himalaya blackberry is an introduced, perennial, 
spreading shrub.  It is very wee dy and is listed as a 
noxious weed in numerous states.  It is widely distributed 
but there are states where it does not occur.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threate ned or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Riparian areas are especially prone to Himalayan 
Blackberry invasion because riparian areas are generally 
composed of many plant species and blackberryfrequently  goe
s unnoticed until it has become firmly established.  It 
is less of a problem on actively managed agricultural 
areas because most practices such as disking impedes its 
ability to flourish.   
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Ext ension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov /
.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
 
Blackberry thickets can create almost impenetrable 
barriers.  
 
Description  
General : Himalayan Blackberry is an arching woody 
shrub.  Its leaves remain on the plant for a long period of 
time and sometimes persist all winter long in mild 
climates.  The leaflets occur in groups of three or five and 
each resembles a large rose leaf.  The underside of the 
leaves is white.   
The canes are thorny and may be as long as 10 meters.  
The canes are biennial: first year canes, primocanes, are 
non -fruit bearing, and second year canes, floricanes, are 
fruit bearing (Clark and Finn 2007).  The thorns typically 
have a reddish color later in the summer and may be as 
long a s 20 mm.  The canes will root (layer) upon touching 
the ground (Willoughby and Davilla 1984).  The canes 
can create an impenetrable intertwined thicket that may be 
as tall as 2 meters tall or taller if the canes are supported 
by a fence or other structure.     
The flowers are 5 -peteled and vary from white to light -
pink in color. The flowers occur in loose clusters and give 
rise to black fruits.  Each fruit is comprised of multiple 
drupelets.  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Blackberry leaves are typically comprised of 5 leaflets 
and  sometimes 3 leaflets.  
 
Ethnobotany  
Himalayan blackberry is a bit of a misnomer because it 
isn’t even from the Himalayas.  Himalayan blackberry 
originates from the Armenia region, hence its scientific 
name,  Rubus armeniacus .  Luther Burbank purportedly 
imported it to North America; the same Luther Burbank 
whom Burbank potatoes are named after.  
Himalayan blackberry has become part of the Pacific 
Northwest rural culture.  Locals collect berries each year 
and many small businesses incorporate ‘blackberry’ i nto 
their business names.  
Distribution :  Himalayan Blackberry originates from 
Eurasia but it is currently distributed worldwide (Francis 
2003).  It is well distributed in the western USA and 
Hawaii.  It occurs in eastern USA as well.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Vacant lots, railroad right of ways, degraded 
riparian areas, fence lines, and electricity power 
transmission lines are common Himalayan Blackberry 
sites.  Degrad ed soils do not limit this plant’s ability to 
flourish (Brinkman 1974).     
Adaptation  
It grows best in full sun but will tolerate partial shading.  
It can be found from coastal estuaries to inland upland 
sites as high as 1500 m (Willoughby and Davilla 1984).          
Control  
Controlling Himalayan Blackberry requires persistence 
because it frequently requires 2 or more years of intense 
effort to rid a stand (Stannard and Dobrowolski 2004).   Clipping the plant to the ground is relatively ineffective 
unless the clippings are routinely made whenever the 
canes reach 2 feet.  Clipping when the canes are shorter 
will reduce the vigor of the stand but does not deplete the 
energy reserves as fast.  
 
Plastic and woven barrier fabrics fail to provide much 
control after  the first year they are installed.  Once the 
barrier begins to breakdown or tear, the canes grow 
through.  Newer heavy- duty fabrics are better but require 
proper installation.   
Burning a thicket, while visually pleasing, is not very 
effective.  The temperatures rarely are hot enough to 
destroy the rhizomes.  Burning can be a good initial 
treatment because it reduces the top growth and makes 
application of other treatments far easier.  
Digging can be very effective.  Removing the rhizomes 
and crowns to a 6 -inch depth will greatly reduce the 
amount of regrowth.  The regrowth can be easily handled.  
It is imperative to plant desirable vegetation on the site or 
blackberry (or another weed) will simply reinvade.  
Disking and/or cultivating need to be practiced routinely 
to rid a stand.  This practice can spread rhizomes and 
aggravate the situation.  More than one operation is 
needed and these additional operations should be planned 
into the next year.  
Several herbicides provide excellent control of blackberry 
(Pra ther et al. 2013).  Please contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.   
Several other con trol techniques circulate in conversation, 
and we touch on them.  Treating the foliage with vinegar 
can cause leaf burn but is largely ineffective.  Stripping 
the foliage can reduce the vigor of small canes, but leaf 
stripping is far more labor intensive a nd less effective 
than digging
.     
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Tr ade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.

Literature Cited 
Brinkman, K.A. 1974. Rubus L. blackberry, raspberry.  
In: Seeds of woody plants in the Unitsed States.  
Agric. Handbook No. 450.  Wa D.C. USDA, Forest 
Service: 738 -743.  
Clark, J.R. and C.E. Finn. 2011. Blackberry breeding and   
genetics. Fruit, Vegetable, and Cereal Science and 
Biotechnology.  p. 27- 43. Global Science Books, 
2011  
Francis, J.K. 2003. Rubus discolor  Weihe & Nees.    
http://fs.fed.us/global/iitf/pdf/shrubs/Rubus discolor.pdf.  
(accessed 12/09/13)  
Stannard, M.E. and J. Dobrowolski. 2004. Himalay an  
blackberry in the Pacific Northwest: Attack of the 
canes. Forest Stewardship Notes: 13: 11- 12.  
Waldo, G.F. 1957. The Marion blackberry.  Circ. 571.   
Agric. Exp. Sta. Oregon State Univ. Corvallis OR.  
Willoughby, J.W. and W. Davilla. 1984. Plant species   
composition and life form spectra of tidal 
streambanks and adjacent riparian woodlands along 
the lower Sacromento River.  In: Proc. California 
riparian systems: ecology, conservation, and 
productive management.  
C itation  
Stannard, M.E.  2014.  Plant guide for Himalayan 
Blackberry (Rubus armeniacus). USDA -Natural  
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 99164- 6211. 
Published January 2014 
 
Edited: [08Jan2014 jab]   For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 
and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER