Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WOODS’ ROSE 
Rosa woodsii Lindl. var. 
ultramontana  (S. Wats.) 
Jepson 
Plant Symbol = ROWOU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Common wild rose, wild rose, mountain rose 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Fruits of Woods’ rose are a good source of 
energy and protein and are eaten by many animals, 
including squirrels, deer, coyotes, and bears.  Many 
birds and mammals are sustained by the persistent 
dry hips when the ground is covered with snow.  The 
plants are browsed by livestock and big game from 
spring through fall, but the young spring leaves are 
especially palatable.  Porcupines and beavers also 
browse the leaves.  Thickets formed by Woods’ rose 
provide nesting and escape cover for many birds and 
small mammals.    
  
Conservation : The rhizome system makes Woods’ 
rose effective in erosion co ntrol, and the species has 
been used to revegetate disturbed sites along road 
cuts, streambanks, and seeps.  Plants are used as 
ornamentals near homes to attract birds and other 
wildlife.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans used the roots, 
stems, leaves, flowers, and  fruits of Woods’ rose for  foods and therapeutic materials.  The hips are a 
source of vitamin C and are dried for use in flavoring 
teas, jellies, fruitcakes, and puddings.  The inner bark 
and roots were boiled to treat diarrhea and stomach 
aliments and a tea was made from the bark to treat 
muscles.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
 ©
 J. Scott Peterson USDA, NRCS, NPDC @ PLANTS 
Description 
Rose family (Rosaceae).  Native subshrubs or shrubs 
growing 0.2-2(-3) m high, rhizomatous, with shallow, 
frequently branching fibrous roots, sometimes 
forming nearly impenetrable thickets; stems reddish-
brown to gray, with straight or slightly curved 
prickles.  Leaves are deciduous, alternate, odd-
pinnately compound, leaflets 5-7(-11), obovate to 
ovate or elliptic, ca. 1.5-3(-4) cm long, finely toothed 
toward the tip.  Flowers occur on branches lateral 
from the old wood, 10-20 cm long, few in a cluster at 
the stem tip, less commonly solitary; petals 5, (10-
)15-25 mm long, pink to  lilac-pink, or lavender; 
sepals lanceolate, 1-2 cm long, erect and usually 
persistent, tomentose on the margins and inner 
surface.  Fruit is a fleshy,  red, globose to ellipsoid 
“hip” 5-12 mm wide, derived from the base of the 
sepals and petals; nutlets 15-35, 3-4 mm long.  
Named for Joseph Woods, 1776-1864, an early 
English student of roses.    
 
Variation within the species : many variants have 
been described, and the species now includes many 
roses previously described as species.  The following 
varieties are sometimes now  recognized (Cronquist & 
Holmgren 1997) but they are combined as a single 
variable species by others (e.g., Ertter 1993 in The 
Jepson Manual).   
Rosa woodsii  var. glabrata  (Parish) Cole – CA  
Rosa woodsii  var. gratissima  (Greene) Cole – CA 
and NV 
Rosa woodsii  var. ultramontana  (S. Wats.) Jepson  
Rosa woodsii var. woodsii   
 
Woods’ rose forms natural hybrids with  R. acicularis 
Lindl., R. arkansana  Porter, R. blanda  Ait., and 
probably others.

Woods’ rose is recognized among many similar 
species of rose by its combination of shrubby, 
thicket-forming habit, stems with straight prickles, 
and leaves and sepals without glands.    
  
Distribution  
Widely distributed over western North America, from 
Ontario and Manitoba, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and 
Iowa, south to Texas and northern Mexico, west to 
California and Alaska through every other western 
state and province.  Var. woodsii (see below) occurs 
in Alaska and Yukon but no other provinces or states 
bordering the Pacific; var.  ultamontana is the far-
western entity, sometimes regarded as including var. 
glabrata (California endemic) and var.  gratissima 
(California and Nevada).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Woods’ rose is commonly a dominant species on 
riparian and wetland sites, but it is adapted to a broad 
range of moisture conditions.  It is common in 
various regions as a pioneer on disturbed sites, 
especially along roadsides and south-facing cutbanks.  
It occurs on bluffs, dry grassy slopes, prairie 
sandhills, and in clearings in boreal and subalpine 
forests or sometimes as an understory species in 
stands dominated by cottonwood, ponderosa pine, 
and Douglas fir.  Moderate shade-tolerance allows it 
to persist as an understory species in mid-seral to 
climax communities; at elevations of 800-3500 
meters.  Flowering June-August; fruiting August and 
into the fall, the hips remaining on the plant through 
the winter.  
 
Establishment 
Woods’ rose produces flowers and fruits at about 2-5 
years of age.  Good crops are usually produced every 
2 years.  Birds and mamma ls eat the fruits and 
disperse the seeds in droppings.  The seeds remain 
viable for 2-5 years, and after warm or cold 
stratification, they germinate within 30 to 40 days.  
Woods’ rose also reproduces through rhizomes, root 
crown sprouts, and layering.  Establishment for 
ornament or rehabilitation is from transplants, 
hardwood cuttings, and direct seeding.    
 
Management 
Fire of low- to moderate-severity typically top-kills 
Woods’ rose, but sprouts from root crowns and 
rhizomes enable it to persist or even increase.  The 
shallow root crowns are injured by severe fire and 
populations consequently may decrease in vitality 
and abundance.  Reproduction from seed is rarely  observed after fire, and seedling growth rate in a 
burned area may be slow. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Blauer, A.C., A.P. Plummer, E.D. McArthur [and 
others] 1975.  
Characteristics and hybridization of 
important Intermountain shrubs.  I.  Rose family .  
Res. Pap. INT-169.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
Ogden, Utah.  
 
Cronquist, A. and N.H. Holmgren 1997.   Rosa.  Pp. 
134-140, IN:  Intermountain flora .  Vol. 3, Part A.  
Subclass Rosidae (except Fa bales).  New York Bot. 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Tesky, J.L. 1992.   Rosa woodsii.  IN: W.C. Fischer 
(compiler).   The fire effects information system  [Data 
base].  USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station, Interm ountain Fire Sciences 
Laboratory.  Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Bc/o 
Plant Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.