Plant Guide
AMERICAN BLACK 
CURRANT  
Ribes americanum MILL.  
Plant Symbol = RIAM2  
Contributed by : USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials 
Center    
 
American black currant. Photo courtesy of USDA NRCS, Bismarck, 
North Dakota   
 
Alternate Names   
Wild black currant, black currant  
 
Uses   
Windbreaks:  This species is suitable for the outside rows 
of multi -row belts.  
 
Wildlife:  Black currant is a favored browse of grazing 
animals.  Birds and small mammals eat the berries.  This 
species may form thickets which are desirable for habitat.   
 
Recreation and Beautification:  This low-growing shrub 
has attractive flowers which are visit ed by insect 
pollinators.  The berries are nearly black in color, with a 
smooth, glossy surface.  They are high in vitamins and 
antioxidants and are used for human consumption.  The 
crimson/gold fall leaf color adds to its visual appeal.   
 
Status   
In Minnesota and Michigan, American black currant is 
reported to invade sedge meadows (Marshall, 1995).  
White pine blister rust legislation prohibits the planting of 
Ribes  spp. in Michigan.  Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).    Weediness 
 
This plant does not sucker, but seedlings may establish 
off -site from seed spread by birds. Pleas e consult with 
your local NRCS field office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, State natural resource, or State agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.   
   
Description   
General : American black currant is a native shrub species 
three to six feet tall with erect branches lackin g spines, on 
multiple stems.  The simple, alternate leaves are one to 
three inches wide and gland -dotted beneath with three to 
five lobes.  The glands are golden -yellow in color 
(Stephens, 1973).  Small flowers open in May and have 
five white petals.  In central North Dakota, the median 
date for full flowering is May 21, with an average 
flowering period of 22 days (Callow et al., 1992).  In 
Illinois, the tubular flowers are visited by bumblebees 
which suck nectar and sweat bees which collect pollen 
(Hilty).  Drooping racemes produce glossy, red- purple to 
nearly black fruit (¼ to ½ inch in diameter) in August -
September.  The globose berries are smooth and contain 
many seeds.  Ripe fruits are sweet and desirable for 
human consumption.  They are commonly eaten b y birds 
and small mammals through the fall season.  Propagation 
is primarily from seed with some possible layering and 
basal sprouting.  American black currant may form open 
thickets, but does not spread by suckering.  Seedling vigor 
is good, and growth ra te is medium.  Lifespan is 
considered short to medium.  It has moderate flood 
tolerance, and is considered highly drought tolerant.  It 
occurs naturally as an understory species and is shade 
tolerant.  It is rated high in palatability by browsing 
animals,  but the evaluation plots in North Dakota showed 
little damage.  Chromosome number is x=8 and the 
photosynthetic pathway is C
3  .
 
Distribution : This species occurs from New Brunswick 
west to Alberta, south to Delaware, West Virginia, 
Indiana, Iowa, Nebraska,  Colorado, and New Mexico.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat : American black currant occurs primarily along 
stream banks and in moist ravines, but also in wet 
meadows, floodpl ains, and woodland edges (Larson and 
Johnson, 1999).