Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VIRGINIA ROSE 
Rosa virginiana P. Mill. var. 
virginiana  
Plant Symbol = ROVIV2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
pasture rose, wild rose, common wild rose 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The seed was a good source of vitamin 
E, it was grounded into a powder and mixed with 
flour or added to other foods as a supplement 
(Facciola 1990).  A decoction of the roots was used 
as a bath and to treat worms in children (Moerman 
1998).  An infusion of the roots was used to treat  bleeding cuts on the feet and as a wash to treat sore 
eyes (Ibid.).  The fruit se
rved as a good source of 
essential fatty acids, which is  fairly rare for a fruit.   
 
Medical: It is being investigated as a food that is 
capable of reducing  the incidence of cancer and also 
as a means of halting or reverting the growth of 
cancer (Matthews 1994).   The fruits are high in 
vitamin C and may be eaten out of hand or used to 
make preserves.   
 
 Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 1913 Illustrated flora of the northern states and Canada. Vol. 2: 285. 
Courtesy of Kentucky Native Plant Society. 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose family (Roseaceae).  Virginia rose 
( Rosa virginiana ) is an upright shrub growing 
between four to six feet tall.  The glossy dark green 
foliage develops excellent yellow to red fall color 
(Dirr 1997).  This species bears fragrant pink flowers 
that are two to three-inches  in diameter and occur in 
clusters of five to eight.   
 
Distribution : Rosa virginiana  ranges from Arkansas, 
east to Alabama, north to Newfoundland and west to 
Ontario (Vines 1960).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Virginia rose grows along the edges of salt marshes, 
roadsides and in pastures.  This species succeeds in 
moist soils, growing well in heavy clayey soils.  It 
prefers a sunny position and does well under winter 
conditions.  This is an outstanding ornamental shrub 
that is easy to grow.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Most rose seeds often take one 
to two years to germinate  because of an immature 
embryo and a hardened seed coat.  To reduce the 
waiting period, scarify the seed and place in damp 
peat at a temperature of 27  to 32ºC for four to five 
months by which the seed should began to germinate.  
Place the seedlings into individual pots when they are 
large enough to handle.  Out plant seedling in the 
summer if the plants are more than twenty-five 
centimeters tall, otherwise grow in a cold frame for 
the winter and out plant in late spring.

Management 
Pruning should be done to remove spent blooms and 
diseased areas after winter for winter injury, and to 
shape a plant.   
 
Roses are one of the most susceptible ornamentals to 
most pests and require control from intensive IPM 
control programs.   
 
Beneath the flesh of the fruit,  there is a layer of hairs 
around the seeds that can cause irritation to the mouth 
and digestive tract if ingested.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Materials are somewhat  available through native 
plant nurseries.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M. A. & C. W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Facciola, S. 1990.   Cornucopia - a source book of 
edible plants .  Kampong Publications. 
 
Genders, R. 1994.   Scented flora of world .  Robert 
Hall, London. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1970.   Home guide to trees, shrubs, 
and wildflowers .  Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Heuser, C. W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Matthews, V. 1994.   The new plantsman.  Vol. 1.  
Royal Horticultural Society. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Rehder, A. 1940.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  The MacMillan 
Company, New York, New York. 
 
Riotte, L. 1978.   Companion planting for successful 
gardening.  Garden Way, Vermont. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03  ahv; 10sep03; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.