Plant Guide
OILSEED RADISH 
Raphanus sativus L.  
Plant Symbol = RASA2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Booneville Plant Materials 
Center, Arkansas  
 
Oilseed radish. Photo provided by Dr. Ray Weil, University of 
Maryland . 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names :  forage radish, fodder radish, 
tillage radish
®, radish ripper, daikon, Japanese radish  
Scientific Alternate Names:  Raphanus sativus var. oleifer 
Stokes,  Raphanus sativus L.  ssp.  Oleiferus,  Raphanus 
sativus  L. var. oleiformis  Pers.   
Uses  
Cover Crop : Oilseed radish is used as  a cover crop, or a 
crop grown specifically to maintain cropland soil quality, 
fertility, and productivity (Magdoff and Van Es, 2009). 
Typically, cover crops are not harvested and are 
terminated  on the surface or otherwise incorporated into 
soil before they mature (Magdoff and Van Es, 2009). 
Cover crop species generally limit soil erosion because 
they provide cover to the soil when the so il would 
normally be fallow.   
 
Oilseed radish is a fall cover crop planted in early fall/late 
summer or after harvest of the primary crop. Planting 
occurs after the harvest of primary  crops such as wheat, 
rye, early potatoes, pickling cucumbers, snap beans , or 
celery (Ngouajio and Mutch, 2004). Oilseed radish can  also be aerial seeded into standing corn, soybean, or 
cotton prior to harvest.  
 
Oilseed radish develops a unique taproot that reaches 
depths
 of six feet. The upper 12 -20 inches of the taproot 
thicken and can grow to 2 inches in diameter (Weil et al., 
2006). This deep rooting growth habit is capable of 
treating multiple resource concerns on cropland, such as:  
 
Soil Compaction: The thick taproot  penetrates compacted 
layers better than other commonly used cover crops such 
as rye ( Secale cereale L.) (Williams and Weil, 2004). Th e 
root decomposes in the spring, leaving large, deep holes 
in the soil. These holes enable water, air, and primary  
crop roots to penetrate the soil in the summer when the 
soil is dry and hard (Weil and Williams, 2003). Planting 
oilseed radish can be a  no-till alternative to deep tilling or 
mechanical  ripping (Williams and Weil, 2004).   
 
Excessive nitrate leaching:  The deep taproot can 
scavenge  nitrogen in the soil left by the previous crop . 
Oilseed/forage radish cover crops can absorb 100 to 150 
lb/acre of nitrogen (Weil et al., 2006). Many cover crop 
species are nitrogen scavengers, but the roots of oilseed 
radish  are able to absorb nitrogen at greater depths , 
preventing  it from leaching into groundwater. Oilseed 
radish fields had lower  levels of nitrate  in soil 
gravitational water  than fields of red clover, ryegrass, and 
a fallow field (Isse et al., 1999). Oilseed radish roots 
absorb nitrogen deep in the soil where the primary  crop 
cannot access it . This trapped nitrogen becomes available 
to the next crop when the plant decomposes in the spring. 
Growing oilseed radish can act as a fertilizer for the next 
crop in the  rotation by recycling nitrogen that would 
otherwise be lost through leaching (Kristensen and 
Thorup -Kristensen, 2004).   
 
Weed  Management:  Under favorable conditions, oilseed 
radish seedlings can emerge as soon as 3 days after 
planting, and provide full ca nopy cover to shade out 
weeds in 3 -4 weeks (Weil et al., 2006). Studies in 
Michigan found that oilseed radish reduced weed biomass 
by 4,000 lb/acre when compared to a fallow site (Snapp 
and Mutch, 2003). Biomass decomposes quickly and 
leaves the seedbed ready for planting, without the need to 
till or remove leftover residue.  
 
Pest Management: Like other plants in the  mustard family 
( Brassicaceae) , the roots of oilseed radish exude 
chemicals that help suppress soil pests such as  nematodes. 
These chemicals, called glucosinolates, discourage 
infestations of soil- borne diseases (Ngouajio and  Mutch, 
2004). Breakdown of these chemicals in the soil produces

Adjust planting times to synchronize winterkill with 
maximum growth of the crop. If plants do not winterkill, 
they may be terminated  and incorporate into the soil by 
mowing, grazing, lightly disking, or spraying with 
a ppropriate herbicide treatment at flowering bef ore seed 
set.  
 
If the primary goal of the cover crop is to discourage soil 
pests, the Midwest Cover Crops Council recommends 
mowing oilseed radish at flowering, tilling into the soil, 
irrigating (unless natural precipitation is expected), and 
sealing with  a mechanical roller (2012).   
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use i t safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Radish  seed production occurs in  the northwestern US in 
Idaho, Washington, and Oregon. Locations where 
summer temperatures exceed 90 °F produce poor seed set 
(Navazio, 2007). Radish is a cross- pollinated species and 
seed set benefits fr om pollination; however, wi ld radish 
( Raphanus raphinastrum) can cross -pollinate with oilseed 
radish if within one mile of the crop (Novazio, 2007).   
 
Harvest seeds when pods turn from green to 
yellow/brown. Seedpods do not readily shatter and require 
mechanical separation using stationary threshers with 
rollers to remove ch affy material (Navazio, 2007). Large -
scale harvest of seed is difficult. Using a combine to 
harvest seeds requires custom attachments (Steve Groff , 
personal communication 2012). One pound of seed 
contains an average of 34,000 seeds (Midwest Cover 
Crops Council, 2012).  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Seeds are available from select commercial sources, but 
can be more expensive than many other cover crop 
species. There are several trademark varieties in the 
United States, including Tillage Radish
®, Nitro™ and 
Groundhog™. Many cultivars including ‘Adagio’, 
‘Arena’, ‘Colonel’, ‘Remonta’ ‘Revena’, ‘Rimbo’, and 
‘Ultimo’  have European o rigins. Commercially available 
‘common’  varieties ar e also sold under ‘VNS’ for variety 
not stated. Ngouajio and Mutch (2004) found that 
biomass production was similar in the Adagio, Arena, 
Rimbo, and common varieties.   
 
Durling and Ackroyd (2010)  found that Daikon VNS 
growth and performance was similar to ‘Groundhog’, 
‘Defender’, ‘Tillage’, ‘Diakon Midwood’ ‘Diakon Nema  common’ and ‘Driller’ 
varieties. ‘Diakon Midwood,’ and 
‘Nema Common’ flowered in both Michigan and 
Minnesota prior to winterkill, while ‘Diakon VNS’ 
flowered in Michigan when planted in earl y August 
(Durling and Ackroyd, 2011).   
References  
Budahn, H., H. Peterka, M. Ali Ahmed Mousa, Y. Ding, 
S. Zhang, and J. Li. 2009. Molecular mapping in oil 
radish ( Raphanus sativus L.) and QTL analysis of 
resistance against beet cyst nematode ( Heterodera 
schachtii) . Theor, Appl, Genet. 118:  775-782. 
Dean, J.E., and R.R. Weil . 2009. Brassica cover crops for 
N retention in the Mid -Atlan tic coastal plain . J. 
Environ.  Qual . 38:520- 528. 
De Andrade Avila, R.N., and J.R. Sodre. 2012. Physical -
chemical properties and thermal behavior of fodder 
radish crude oil and biodiesel. J. Industrial Crops and 
Products 38:54- 57.  
Durling, John and V.J. Ac kroyd. 2011. Proc. Midwest 
Cover Crops Council. Results from a Brassica variety 
trial in MN and MI. Ada, OH. 23 -24 Feb. 2011. Ohio 
Northern University .  
Harris, J. G. and M.W. Harris. 2006. P lant identification 
terminology:  an illustrated glossary. 2
nd edi tion. 
Spring Lake Publishing, Spring Lake, UT.  
Isse, A.A. , A.F. MacKenzie, K. Stewart, D.C. Cloutier, 
and D.L. Smith.  1999. Cover crops and nutrient 
retention for subsequent sweet corn production. 
Agron. J. 91:934- 939. 
Kristensen, H.L., and K. Thorup -Krist ensen. 2004. Root    
growth and nitrate uptake of three different catch 
crops in deep soil layers. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 
68:529- 537.  
Magdoff, F. , and H. Van Es. 2009. Building soils for 
better crops, sustainable soil management. 
Sustainable Agriculture  Publications, Waldorf, MD.  
McCartney, D., J. Fraser, and A. Ohama. 2009. Potential  of warm -season annual forages and Brassica  cover 
crops for grazing: a Canadian review. Can. J. Anim. 
Sci. 89:431- 440. 
Midwest Cover Crops Council. 2012. Midwest cover 
crops  field guide, ID -433. Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN.  
Novazio, J. 2007. Principles and practices of organic  radish seed production in the Pacific Northwest. 
Organic Seed Alliance [Online] 
http://www.seedalliance.org/uploads/pdf/RadishRadi
shSeed.pdf ( Accessed 20 June 2012 ). 
Ngouajio, M., and D.R. Mutch. 2004. Oilseed radish: a  new cover crop for Michigan. Michigan State Univ. 
Extension Bulletin E 2907, East Lansing.  
Radford, A.E., H.F. Ahles and C.R. Bell. 1968. Manual of 
the vascular  flora of the Caro linas. Univ.  of North 
Carolina Press,  C hapel Hill.  
Snapp, S.S., and D.R. Mutch. 2003. Cover crop choices  for Michigan vegetables. Michigan State Univ. 
Extension Bulletin E 2896, Lansing.

Sundermeier, A. 2008. Oilseed radish cover crop. Ohio 
State Univ. Extension Fact Sheet SAG -5 -08,  
Columbus.   
Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE). 
2010. Managing cover crops profitably. Third 
edition. SARE Outreach, College Park, MD.  
Thorup -Kristensen,  K. 2001. Are differences in root 
growth of nitrogen catch crops important for their 
ability to reduce soil nitrate -N content, and how can 
this be measured? Plant Soil 230:185- 195.  
Weil, R.R., C. White, and Y. Lawley. 2006. Forage  radish: new multi -purpos e cover crop for the Mid -
Atlantic. Univ. of Maryland Cooperative Extension 
Fact Sheet 824, College Park.  
Weil, R.R. , and S.A. Williams. 2003. Brassica cover 
crops to alleviate soil compaction. Fact Sheet  
[Online]. Univ.  o f Maryland, College Park. 
http://www.enst.umd.edu/files/weilbrassicacovercrop
s.doc  ( Accessed 20 June 2012 ). 
Williams, S.M., and R.R. Weil . 2004. Crop cover  root 
c hannels  may  alleviate  soil  compaction  effects on 
s oybean  crop . Soil Sci . Soc . Am . J . 68:1403- 1409. 
Yamaguchi, H., and M. Okamoto. 1997. Traditional seed  production in landraces of diakon ( Raphanus sativus) 
in Kyushu, Japan. Euphytica 95:141- 147.  
 
Prepared By :  Alayna Jacobs, USDA -NRCS Booneville 
Plant Materials Center, Arkansas  
Citation  
  Jacobs, Alayna  A. 2012. Plant G uide for oilseed radish  
( Raphanus sativus  L. ). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service,  Booneville Plant Materials 
Center . Booneville , AR 72927.  
Published  May 2012  Edited: 
may2012 aym, may2012 pac, may2012cs, 
may2012 plsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
ht tp://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER