Plant Guide
DOG ROSE 
Rosa canina L. 
Plant Symbol = ROCA3 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 Rosa canina. Robert Videki, Bugwood.org  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: common briar, dog brier 
(USDA ARS, 2012) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names: Rosa corymbifera Borkh. 
(USDA NRCS, 2012), Rosa bakeri Déségl., Rosa 
lutetiana Léman, Rosa montivaga Déségl., (USDA ARS, 
2012) 
Uses 
Ornamental:  Rosa canina is a Eurasian species planted in 
landscaped settings in the U.S. and Canada.  It has 
escaped cultivated gardens and become problematic in 
natural areas.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  Dog rose has multiple medical uses 
dating back to Hippocrates in ancient Greek times (Haas, 
1995).  It was used in prescriptions, but its precise use is 
unknown.  Pliny, the Roman naturalist, attributed the 
plant’s name to a belief that the root could cure the bite of 
a mad dog (Haas, 1995).  During World War II, Britain 
was unable to import citrus fruits so the government 
encouraged the gathering of dog rose hips as a source of 
vitamin C (Haas 1995).  Rose hip extracts are currently 
used in traditional European folk medicine as a diuretic, 
laxative, for kidney and lower urinary tract disorders, 
arthritis, gout, fever, colds and for vitamin C deficiency 
(Chrubasik et al., 2008).  Research has proven several 
compounds in extracts in the hips of dog rose have 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties (Lattanzio et 
al., 2011). 
Weediness 
This plant is weedy and invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation (Center for 
Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health, 2012).  Consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state 
agriculture department regarding its status.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
 Rosa canina flowers. Robert Videki, Bugwood.org  
Description 
General:  Rose family (Rosaceae).  Rosa canina is a 
shrub introduced from Eurasia.  It grows up to 9 feet tall 
and has multiple arching stems.  Stems are covered with 
thorns that are stout, flattened, downward-curving and 
unequal in size.  Leaves are alternate and pinnately 
divided into 5 to 7 leaflets with serrated margins.  Both 
sides of the leaves are glandless and smooth.  Flowers are 
solitary or in small clusters at the ends of branches and 
bloom in June to July.  Flowers have five white to pink 
petals 0.8 to 1 inch long, five sepals, usually 10 or more 
pistils, and multiple stamens.  Sepals are glandless, often 
have slender lateral lobes, curve backward at the time of 
anthesis and are deciduous.   Fruits ripen in September to 
October, are smooth, bright red and 0.6 to 0.8 inches long.  
Fruits persist on the plant for several months and become 
black.  Plants reproduce sexually by seed, and 
vegetatively by suckering and layering.  (Hitchcock and

Cronquist 1973; Young and Young, 1992; Burke Museum 
of Natural History and Culture 2012). 
Distribution:  Rosa canina is found on the east coast of 
North America, from Quebec to North Carolina and west 
to Kansas.  It is also found on the west coast, from British 
Columbia to California and east to Utah.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Rosa canina is found along roadsides, in 
pastures, Conservation Reserve Program fields, and 
natural areas. 
Adaptation 
This plant is adapted to low elevations.  
 Rosa canina thorns. Richard Old, XIDservices.com 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Numerous galls are often found on Rosa canina stems.  
The galls are caused by a gall-forming wasp (Diplolepis 
rosae) which, like the plant, is a European species.  The 
galls do not cause any harm, and are hosts for parasitoid 
wasps.  The plant is susceptible to fungal diseases such as 
powdery mildew (Sphaerotheca pannosa var. rosae) and 
downy mildew (Perenospora sparsa).   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Birds and other wildlife consume the hips of dog rose and 
spread the seed.  Areas invaded with dog rose can become 
dominated by the plant, resulting in a decline in native 
plant species and other desirable vegetation.  The forage 
value of pastures decreases rapidly following the invasion 
and spread of the plant.  In addition, dog rose impedes the 
movement of livestock, wildlife and vehicles. 
Control 
Dog rose is difficult to control due to its large size and 
regeneration from sprouts.  Control often requires 
multiple years of treatment.  Plants can be eliminated by 
extracting from the ground with an ATV or other vehicle 
in the spring, then spraying the sprouts that emerge with 
an herbicide.  In areas where plants are numerous, 
mowing with a brush machine will facilitate herbicide 
application.  Effective herbicides include glyphosate, 
picloram plus 2-4-D, and triclopyr ester.   
 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Rosa canina has 31,000 seeds per pound (Young and 
Young, 1992).  The seed does not require a stratification 
period if it is fresh, however if it has a chance to dry, a 
stratification period is required to break dormancy 
(Young and Young, 1992).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
This plant is sold by many garden nurseries.  However, 
gardeners should consider its invasive nature before 
planting.  Spread of its seed by birds and wildlife cannot 
be prevented unless the rose hips are removed soon after 
development.  Several native rose species are available as 
alternatives that have similar aesthetic attributes and pose 
no threat to surrounding plant communities. 
References 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. 2012. 
Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php (accessed 15 Oct 2012). University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Center for Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health. 2010. 
Available at http://www.invasive.org (accessed 29 
Nov 2012). University of Georgia, Athens, GA. 
Chrubasik, C., B.D. Roufogalis, U. Muller-Ladner, and S. 
Chrubasik. 2008. A systematic review on the Rosa 
canina effect and efficacy profiles. Phytother. Res. 
22:725-733. 
Hass, L.F. 1995. Dog rose (Rosa canina). J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 59:470. 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London. 
Lattanzio, F., E. Greco, D. Carretta, R. Cervellati, P. 
Govoni and E. Speroni. 2011. In vivo anti-
inflammatroy effect of Rosa canina L. extract. J. 
Ethnopharm. 137:880-885.

USDA ARS, National Genetic Resources Program, 
Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). 
2012. Available at http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?5309 (accessed 17 October 
2012). National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville, MD. 
USDA NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database. Available 
at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 5 October 2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 
Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody 
Plants of North America. Disocorides Press, Portland, 
OR. 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant guide for dog rose (Rosa canina 
L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Pullman, WA. 
Published November 2012 
Edited: 29Nov2012 jab; 30Nov2012 gm; 30Nov2012 plsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER