Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FRAGRANT SUMAC 
Rhus aromatica Ait. var. 
aromatica 
Plant Symbol = RHARA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate common names  
Aromatic sumac, lemon sumac, polecat bush  
 
Uses 
Wildlife: The fruit is an important winter food for 
birds, including turkey, ruffed grouse, robins, and 
flickers, and for various small mammals (e.g., 
raccoon, opossum, chipmunk).  The foliage is 
relatively unpalatable to most species of wildlife and 
domestic livestock.  Thickets of fragrant sumac 
provide cover for many species of birds and small 
mammals.    
  
Conservation : Fragrant sumac is not widely used for 
landscape plantings, probably because of its 
relatively small size, but it is used as a ground cover, 
especially on banks.  The plants are hardy and can 
grow in sun or partial shade.  The main ornamental 
feature is the orange to red fall foliage color.  Several 
cultivars have been selected – mostly for variation in 
growth form.  Fragrant sumac also has been used for 
rehabilitating disturbed sites such as banks, cuts, and 
fills.    
 
Ethnobotanic : American Indians made a tart drink 
(“Indian lemonade”) from the ripe fruits of fragrant 
sumac  (larger-fruited  Rhus species provide a larger 
quantity of the same substance).  The bark of all 
sumacs has been used as an astringent, and leaves  and bark can be used for tanning leather because of 
the high tannin  content.  Various Indian tribes have 
used fragrant sumac
 in treatment for various illnesses 
and health problems.  The leaves, mixed with 
tobacco, were used as a smoking mixture.   
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 Oklahoma Biological Survey 
 
Description 
General : Sumac family (Anacardiaceae).  Straggling 
to upright native shrubs 0.5-2(-2.5) meters tall (rarely 
tree-like), forming colonial thickets of up to 10 feet 
spread, suckering from the roots, the branches slender 
ascending, puberulent, glabrate, or densely pilose; 
buds naked, tiny, yellow, hairy, surrounded by a 
raised, circular leaf scar.  Leaves: deciduous, 
alternate, compound with 3 leaflets, variable in 
shape, lobing, and margin, the leaflets unstalked, 
ovate to rhomboid, more or less wedge-shaped at the 
base, coarsely-toothed, usually shiny-glabrous above, 
the terminal leaflet 3-6.5 cm long; summer foliage 
green to glossy blue-green, turning orange to red or 
purple in the fall.  Flowers: yellow, in small, dense 
inflorescences on short lateral shoots, opening before 
the leaves, bisexual and unisexual, both types borne 
on the same plant (the species polygamodioecious); 
male (staminate) flowers in yellowish catkins, female 
(pistillate) flowers in bright yellow, short panicles at 
the ends of branches.  Fruits: 5-7 mm in diameter, 
bright red at maturity and densely hairy, containing a 
single nutlet 3.8-4.5 mm long, in terminal clusters.  
The common name “sumac” is from the Middle 
English for related tree.  The  leaves are fragrant or at 
least odorous.   
 
Variation within the species : three varieties are 
currently recognized, ba sed on differences in 
geography, leaf shape, and pubescence of stems, 
leaves, and fruits.  Var.  aromatica occurs over nearly 
the whole range of the species.   
 
Rhus aromatica  var. arenaria  (Greene) Fern. – 
restricted to Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. 
 
Rhus aromatica  var. serotina  (Greene) Rehd. – the 
western segment, occurring from South Dakota to 
Texas and eastward to Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, and 
Illinois.  It apparently intergrades with forms of  Rhus

trilobata where their ranges meet in the Great Plains 
(mainly from Texas to South Dakota).  
 
Distribution : Fragrant sumac is native to most of the 
US east of the Rocky Mountains, from Ontario and 
western Quebec, Massachussetts and New Hampshire 
to Florida and west to the Great Plains in Texas to 
South Dakota.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Fragrant sumac is common along the forested eastern 
margins of the Great Plains and in open or otherwise 
disturbed sites on the margins of the Gulf Coast 
prairie.  It grows at a range of sites including open 
rocky woodlands, valley bottoms, lower rocky slopes, 
and roadsides.  Flowering: March-May, usually 
before the leaves expand; fruiting: June-August.      
 
Establishment 
Fragrant sumac reproduces from seed or clonally via 
root suckers.  It is a pioneer species, establishing 
rapidly from seed after heavy disturbance, 
particularly fire.  Browsing by deer may be 
responsible for rapid early removal of mature fruits; 
birds are the primary dispersal later.  Individual 
plants may live about 20-30 years; clones can live 
substantially longer.  Fragrant sumac sprouts 
vigorously after fire and can be propagated from root 
cuttings.    
 
Seed dormancy results from the presence of a hard, 
impermeable seed coat.  Fire scarifies seeds, 
promoting germination; various artificial methods of 
pretreatment have been te sted, including sulfuric 
acid, and hot water soaks, mechanical scarification, 
and cold treatment.  Pretreated sumac seeds generally 
begin germination within 10-20 days.  The resistant 
seed coats probably allow the seeds to remain viable 
for several years in the humus layer, as do those in 
seeds of some other  Rhus species , allowing re-
establishment through seed progeny when conditions 
are favorable for germination and growth.   
 
Management 
Fragrant sumac reportedly sprouts vigorously after 
fire in the southern Great Plains, and the primary 
mode of colonization after disturbance is through 
sprouting from the adventitious-bud root crown.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil  Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barkley, F.A. 1937
.  A monographic study of Rhus 
and its immediate allies in North and Central 
America, including the West Indies .  Ann. Missouri 
Bot. Gard. 24:265-498.   
  
Brizicky, G.K. 1962.   The genera of Anacardiaceae 
in the Southeastern United States .  J. Arnold Arbor. 
43:359-375.  
 
Brizicky, G.K. 1963.   Taxonomic and nomenclatural 
notes on the genus Rhus (Anacardiaceae) .  J. Arnold 
Arbor. 44:60-80.   
 
Frankel, E. 1991.   Poison ivy, poison oak, poison 
sumac, and their relatives .  The Boxwood Press, 
Pacific Grove, Calif.  For  review see Bull. Torrey 
Bot. Club 120(1):76. 19xx.   
 
Gilbert, E.F. 1966.   Structure and development of 
sumac clones .  Amer. Midl. Nat. 75:432-445.   
 
Hardin, J.W. & L.L. Phillips 1985.   Hybridization in 
eastern North American Rhus (Anacardiaceae) .  ASB 
Bull. 32(3):99-106.    
 
Johnson, T. 2000.   Rhus aromatica.  Herbweb.com.  
[http://www.herbweb.com/index.html]  
 
Oklahoma Biological Survey 2000.   Rhus aromatica 
Ait .  IN Catalog of woody plants of Oklahoma .  
Norman, Oklahoma.  20sep2000. 
<http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/rhara3.htm > 
 
Tirmenstein, D. 1987.   Rhus aromatica.  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  U.S.D.A., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Uttal, L.J. 1984.   An environmental race of Rhus 
aromatica Ait. in western Virginia .  Jeffersonia 
15:75-76.  
 
Xiaojie L., J.M. Baskin, & C.C. Baskin 1999.  
Contrasting dispersal phenologies in two fleshy-
fruited congeneric shrubs, Rhus aromatica Ait. and 
Rhus glabra L. (Anacardiaceae) .  Canad. J. Bot. 
77:976-988.

Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 30may03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.