Plant Guide
NOOTKA ROSE  
Rosa nutkana  C.  Presl  
Plant Symbol = RO NU 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington  
 
Rosa nutkana  flower. Ben Legler,  Universi ty of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names: bristly Nootka rose , 
Spalding’s rose   
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:  R. anatonensis St. John, R. 
caeruleomontana  St. John, R. columbiana Ryb d., R. 
durandii  Crepin, R. jonesii St. John, R. macdougali Holz., 
R. megalantha G.N. Jones,  R.  muriculata  Greene, R. 
rainierensis  G.N. Jones, R. spaldingii Crepin (Hitchcock 
et al., 1969 ; USDA ARS, 2012 ) 
Uses  
Ornamental:  Nootka rose is an attractive shrub that can 
be incorporated into landscaped areas.   It should be 
planted where its spread by rhizomes and suckers will not 
be a problem.  
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects:  Roses produce small 
amounts of nectar, so the primary insect pollinators of 
roses ar e bees gathering pollen (Mader et al., 2011).  The 
open -faced flowers of native roses are more attractive to  pollinators than non-
native cultivars with double flowers 
(Mader et al., 2011).  
 
Wildlife:  Nootka rose fruits (hips) remain on the plant 
throughout  the winter, and are eaten by small mammals, 
birds and insects.  Rosa  species  are important browse for  
Rocky Mountain elk in summer, but the use is lower in 
fall and winter  (Kufeld , 1973).  Deer  also browse leaves 
and young shoots (Parish et al., 1996).  
 
L ivestock:  Livestock browse  Nootka rose leaves and 
young shoots (Parish et al., 1996).  
 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans throughout the Pacific 
Northwest and Rocky Mountain region used Nootka rose 
as  food, medicine, and for ceremonial purposes 
(Moerman, 20 12).  Hips of all wild roses are high in 
vitamin C and are made into jams, jellies, syrups and teas.   
 
Revegetation:   Nootka rose produces extensive rhizomes 
and grows rapidly, making it an ideal plant for 
revegetation projects.  It  is used to control soil erosion on 
hillsides, road cuts and  streambanks.  
 
 
Rosa nutkana flower. Ben Legler,  University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture