Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN RED RASPBERRY  
Rubus idaeus L. 
Plant Symbol = RUID  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
raspberry, grayleaf red raspberry, red raspberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: A tea was made from the leaves and 
used in the treatment of  diarrhea and as an aid in 
childbirth (Moerman 1998).   The tea has also been 
known to relieve painful menstrual cramps (Ibid.).  
Externally, the leaves and roots are used as a gargle 
to treat tonsillitis and mouth inflammations, sores, 
minor wounds, burns and varicose ulcers (Brown 
1995).  Europeans in the 17
th century regarded the 
raspberries as an antispasmodic and they made a 
syrup of the juice which they employed to prevent 
vomiting (Readers Digest 1990).  In the 18
th century 
physicians and herbalists deemed the berries useful as 
a remedy for heart disease (Ibid).  Red raspberries are 
eaten fresh or in jams and jellies, or added to pies and 
other baked goods, candies and dairy products to add 
flavor.  Purple to dull blue dye was obtained from the 
fruit.   
 
Wildlife : American red raspberry provides food and 
cover for many wildlife species.  Grouse, birds, 
raccoons, coyotes, squirrels, skunks, and chipmunks 
eat the fruits.  Raspberry thickets provide shelter for  rabbits and squirrels and service as a nesting spot for 
many birds.   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General
: Rose family (Roseaceae).  American red 
raspberry is a native, deciduous shrub that grows up 
to 1.5 meters high with biennial stems.  The leaves 
are pinnately compound, with  three to five leaflets.  
The flowers are white to greenish white, drooping, 
single or in small grapelike clusters.  The fruit is a 
red raspberry, rounded, two centimeters long and 
broad, maturing between July through September.   
 Robert Mohlenbrock @ PLANTS
 
Distribution : American red raspberry is a native 
North American species that grows across northern 
Europe to northwestern Asia.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Rubus idaeus ssp. strigosus  is frequently found along 
the edges of swamps and bogs and is especially 
commonly found after burnings, clearings, or other 
disturbances.  This species grows good in well-
drained loamy soil in a sunny location or in a semi-
shaded area.  It tolerates a wide range of soil pH 
texture and requires adequate soil moisture.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : American red raspberry seeds 
are best sown in the early  autumn in a cold frame.  
Stored seeds should be stratified for one month at 
3ºC.  When the seedlings are large enough to handle 
place them into individual  pots and grow them in a 
cold frame.  Plant seedlings in their permanent 
position in the late spring of the following year.   
 
Propagation by Cuttings : hardwood cuttings can 
propagate American red raspberry.  Cuttings should 
be propagated in a site out of full sun and sheltered 
from drying winds (Heuser 1997).  A slow release 
fertilizer should be added to the rooting medium 
where the cuttings will stay for a year before 
transplanting.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Materials are available through commercial nurseries.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bown, D. 1995.  Encyclopedia of herbs and their 
uses .  Dorling Kindersley, London. 
 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.   An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.   Trees and shrubs of New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Chevallier, A. 1996.   The encyclopedia of medicinal 
plants .  Dorling Kindersley. 
 
Epple, A.O. 1995.   A field guide to the plants of 
Arizona .  Falcon Press, Helena, Montana. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1967.   Edible native plants of the 
Rocky Mountains . University of New Mexico Press, 
New Mexico. 
 
Heuser, C.W. Jr., 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  Taunton Press, Newtown, Connecticut. 
 
Hitchock, C.L. & A. Cronquist 1973.   Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest .  University of Washington Press, 
Seattle & London. 
 
MacKinnon, A, J.Pojar, and R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of Northern British Columbia .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Readers Digest 1990.  Magic & medicine of plants .  
The Readers Digest Association, Inc., Pleasantville, 
New York. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.   Alaska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service.  Ag. Handbook No. 14.  
Washington, D.C. 
 
Voss, E.G. 1985.  Michigan flora.  Part II.  
Cranbrook Institute of Science Bulletin 59 & 
University of Michigan Herbarium. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised: 29jan03 jsp;  09jun03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.