Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWAMP ROSE 
Rosa palustris Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = ROPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Swamp rose is used as 
hedges, walls, fences or trellises for climbing, edges 
for low selections, for massing and raised beds.  This 
species is an attractive sh rub throughout the entire 
year.  The fruits are eaten by wildlife.   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Rose family (Roseaceae).  Swamp rose is a 
native, perennial shrub that grows up to seven feet 
tall.  The stems are tall, 0.3 to 2.5 meters high, with 
stout straight curved prickles (Strausbaugh & Core 
1977).  The leaves are alternate, pinnately divided 
into seven leaflets, the leaflets are pointed at the tip, 
toothed, hairy, up to 1½ inches long.  The flowers are 
pink, solitary or few in a cluster, and 3 to 5.5 
centimeters broad.  This sp ecies flowers once a year, 
in midseason, and the bloom id for a protected period 
of six to eight weeks.  The fruit is red, fleshy, and up 
to ¾ inch in diameter. 
 
Distribution: Swamp rose is found throughout 
Indiana, from Nova Scotia to Minnesota, south to  Florida, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Mississippi.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Swamp rose is common in marshes and swamps.  
This species is abundant in swampy habitats and 
along ditches and streams (Bush-Braun 1961).  It 
grows best in damp or wet rich loamy soil, in full sun 
or partial shade (Brown 1963).   
© William S. Justice 
Botany Department, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
Propagation form Seed
: Rosa palustris seeds should 
be collected in the fall.  Most rose seeds have a hard 
seed coat and require acid scarification, followed by a 
period of warm stratification and then cold 
stratification.  After pre-sowing treatments, the seeds 
should be sown immediately in containers or seed 
trays containing a seed ge rmination mixture to which 
a slow release fertilizer has been added.  Place the 
seedlings into individual pots when they are large 
enough to handle.  Out plant seedlings in the summer 
if they are more than twenty-five centimeters tall; 
otherwise grow in a cold frame for the winter and out 
plant in the late spring.   
 
Management 
Pruning should be done to remove spent blooms, and 
diseased areas, after winter  for winter injury, and to 
shape a plant.   
 
Roses are one of the most susceptible ornamentals to 
most pests and diseases and require control from 
intensive IPM or control programs.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Materials are somewhat  available through native 
plant nurseries within its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dirr, M. A. & C. W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia.

Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Graves, A. H. 1952.   Illustrated guide to trees and 
shrubs .  Arthur Harmount Graves, Wallinford, 
Connecticut. 
 
Greene, W. F. & H. L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
south native and exotic .  The University of North 
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1970.   Home guide to trees, shrubs, 
and wildflowers .  Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania. 
 
Heuser, C. W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Mohlenbrock, R. H. & J.W. Voight 1959.   A flora of 
southern Illinois .  Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale. 
 
Rehder, A. 1940.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  The MacMillan 
Company, New York, New York. 
 
Straughbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of 
West Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., 
Morgantown, West Virginia. 
 
Vines, B.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 08apr02 ahv; 25feb03 ahv; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political  beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.