Plant Guide
TALL BUTTERCUP 
Ranunculus acris L.  
Plant Symbol = RAAC3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Montana State Office  
 Figure  1. Tall buttercup  
 
Alternate Names  
Meadow buttercup  
 
Uses  
In its native range of central and northeastern Europe, tall 
buttercup is considered a weed of old pastures and 
hayland.  
 
Status  
This plant can be weedy and invasive, and is listed as 
noxious in Monta na. Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agri culture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web  Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for furt
her 
information.  
 
Description  
General :Tall buttercup is a perennial that grows from a 
stout, abruptly ending root stock (praemorse). It has a 
short, thick rhizome capable of splitting to form daughter 
plants in clumps reaching about three  feet (one meter) in 
diameter.  There are thick roots on the underside of the 
rhizome and wiry, persistent fibers from the vascular 
bundles of decayed l eaf petioles on the upper side.  
Axillary buds form on the rhizomes at the tightly  spaced 
nodes from which the basal leaves  grow.   
 
Basal leaves grow directly from the rhizome or root 
crown and have petioles up to eight inches in length.  Leaf 
blades are one to three inches long, are broadly 
pentagonal in outline, but can  also be ovate or heart-
shaped.  They are more or less  deeply divided into three 
palmate lobes that are each divided again two to three 
times into acute segm ents. There can be 40 to 50 basal 
leaves.    
 
Freely branching, erect flower stems are one to three feet 
(30 to 100 centimeters) tall, and there may be o ne to 
several stems per plant. Hairs on the stem are sparse to 
copious, and soft and sprea ding or appressed to the stem. 
Similar hairs are on the leav es, leaf petioles, and sepals. 
The stem leaves resemble the basal leaves but are smaller, 
alternate in arran gement along the stem and reduced 
upward to three - to five -lobed bracts. The upper leaves 
lack petioles.   
 
The regular flowers have radial symmetry and form on 
the branch ends in cymo se inflorescences. Flower 
pedicels can be up to five inches long and are  hairy.  The 
five floral sepals are bent downward (ref lexed), about 
one -quarter inch long, greenish, wit h long, soft, spreading 
hairs.  The sepals shed early during flower ing. There are 
usually five (but as many as eight) glossy petals which are 
typically br ight yellow, bu t may be pale yellow or white. 
Each petal is approximately one- half inch long and 
roundish in shape. There is a nectary about one millimeter 
long at the base of t he inner surface of the petal. Thirty to 
70 stamens surround the 15 to 40 pisti ls that are on a 
globe -shaped receptacle.  The fruit is a small (two to three 
millimeters long), dry walled achene contain ing a single 
seed.  Achenes are roundish, compressed, and smooth with 
a prominent keel and a hooked beak at the tip.
  
Distribution:  Tall buttercup is a perennial forb  native to 
central and northeastern Europe where it is a weed of old 
pastures and hay meadows. In North America, it has been 
reported from all but eight states and provinces. For