Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW 
CONEFLOWER  
Ratibida pinnata (Vent.) 
Barnh. 
Plant Symbol = RAPI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
gray-head prairie coneflower, drooping coneflower, 
pinnate prairie coneflower 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Ratibida pinnata  root was used to cure 
toothache (Fielder 1975). 
 
Landscaping &Wildlife : Yellow coneflower is a 
strong survivor of former  prairies where the majority 
of the original plants have perished.  This is a long 
live species and is best to plant where there is  competition from other plants.  The seed heads are 
eaten by birds in the late 
fall.  The flowers attract 
several different butterfly species. 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Yellow 
coneflower is a native perennial herb growing from a 
woody caudex up to one meter or taller.  The leaves 
are pinnantely compound, mostly with five to seven 
lanceolate segments, with harsh and scurfy surfaces 
(Bruggen 1976).  The disk flowers are usually gray at 
first becoming brown with age.  When the disk heads 
are crushed, an odor of anis e is emitted.  Each flower 
has its own stalk and five to eight yellow, drooping 
petals arranged in a cone shape. 
 Division of Natural Areas and Preserves Ohio Department of Natural Resources 
 
Distribution : Yellow coneflower ranges from Ontario 
and New York to Minnes ota, South Dakota, and 
Nebraska, south to Georgia, Arkansas and Oklahoma 
(Steyermark 1963).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
This species occurs in prai ries, thickets, and borders 
of woods.  It is often found along roadsides and 
railroad right-of-ways.  Yellow coneflower grows 
best on loam, clay, and sa ndy soil types that are from 
medium moisture to dry.  It prefers calcareous soils 
that are neutral pH 6-7, but will grow in sunny 
locations with well-drained soils, and is often found 
in wet mesic, mesic and dry mesic sites. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Ratibida pinnata  seeds are best 
planted in the spring or fall. Generally the seeds does 
not need any pre-treatment.  They can be stratified at 
33 to 38ºF for thirty days. 
 
Management 
Harvesting of seeds should be done from October 
through November.  The cones should be clipped 
form the stem and placed into a bucket to rub the 
seeds off the cone to be used for propagation.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Somewhat available through native plant seed 
sources within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bruggen, T. V. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Fielder, M. 1975.   Plant medicine and folklore .  
Winchester Press, New York, New York. 
 
Gleason, H. A. 1952.   The new Britton and Brown 
illustrated flora of the northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  3 vols.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, New York, New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1993.   The Illustrated book of 
wildflowers and shrubs .  Stackpole Books, 
Mechanicsburg, PA. 
 
Mohlenbrock, R.H., ed. 1975.   Guide to the vascular 
flora of Illinois .  Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale, Illinois. 
 
Mohlenbrock, R. H. & J.W. Voight 1959.   A flora of 
southern Illinois .  Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale, Illinois. 
 
Ohio Department of Natural Resources 2000.   Ohio 
prairies .  Division of Natural Areas and Preserves.  
Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/dnap/prairies/OhioPrairi
es.htm> 
 
Small, J. K. 1933.   Manual of the southeastern flora .  
The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames Iowa. 
 
Swink, F. & G. S. Wilhelm 1979.   Plants of the 
Chicago region . 3rd ed.  The Morton Arboretum, 
Lisle, Illinois. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 30may03 jsp; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.