Plant Guide
WESTERN BUTTERCUP 
Ranunculus occidentalis Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = RAOC 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2008  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:   western field buttercup  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  none  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat:  Western buttercup is an early 
blooming plant making it a suitable pollen and nectar 
source for early season pollinators.  Attracting pollinators 
is not just advantageous for crop productivity, it is 
essential for many food crops.  Bees especially are 
attr acted to the bright yellow blooms that are one of the 
first to appear in the spring (Ley et al., 2012).  
Restoration:  This  plant is a great choice for wetland 
prairie restoration throughout its range.  Its versatility 
enables it to thrive in moist upland or  lowland sites as a 
quickly establishing native (Stanley et al., 2010).  Ornamental:
 Gardeners may like to add this early -
blooming pollinator plant to their garden to draw 
beneficial insects and add diversity to their landscape.  
Ethnobotany  
Western buttercup has been noted as an important species 
to tribes throughout its range.  In northern California and 
southern Oregon, its blooms are said to mark the coming 
of the summer salmon runs.  Many tribes ground the 
seeds of the buttercup and mixed  them with other seeds to 
make pinole (a flour -like staple), and the Aleut noted the 
juices of its blooms are poisonous (Moermon, 2012).  
Status  
Ranunculus occidentalis is a facultative wetland species, 
meaning throughout most of its native range it occurs in 
moist wetland areas or vernal pools , but also sometimes 
occurs in uplands .  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  
General:  Western buttercup is a common, perennial , 
native forb/herb in the crowfoot or buttercup family 
(Ranunculaceae).  Its traits are fairly variable and its 
many varieties are easily mistaken for  other native and 
non -native buttercups.   Plant stems are erect and grow to 
be from 6 inches to 2.5 feet tall, and have wedge- like, 
three -lobed leaves at the base.  B asal leaves typically 
range  from  ¾ to 2 inches ( 2–5 cm ) long by  ¾ to 3 inches 
( 2 –8 cm ) wide, and stem leaves stay low to the base of the 
plant, are few, lobed , and branched  (Whittemore , 2012) .  
They mature and bloom as early as March, continuing 
through July or August depending on variety, latitude , and 
elevation, with yellow flowers having  5 to 14 short, broad 
petals  that are 1/16 to 5/16 inch ( 2–8 mm)  wide by 3/16 to 
1/2 inch ( 5–13  mm ) in length.  Flower petals are fewer 
and shorter when compared to the  9–16  longer  petals of 
other species.  Seeds are 1/16 to 1/8 inch ( 2–3 mm ) in 
circumfere nce, flat, disc -shaped , and have a small 
protruding beak from one edge ( Figure 3). 
There are several varieties of western buttercup , some of 
which intergrade or overlap in their distribution, and 
which are sometimes difficult to distinguish due to the 
larg e geographical distribution of the species, and slight 
variations within and among varieties.  Botanists currently 
recognize between four (USDA -NRCS, 2012) and seven 
(Torrey and Gray, 1997) varieties of R. occidentalis . 
R. occidentalis  is very closely related to California 
buttercup ( R. californicus ), and in early phases can also 
be confused with the invasive creeping buttercup ( R.