Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SASSAFRAS 
Sassafras albidum  (Nutt.) Nees
Plant Symbol = SAAL5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Common sassafras, ague tree 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: All parts of the sassafras plant are 
spicy and aromatic.  The roots, bark, leaves, new 
shoots, and pith from the branches of sassafras were 
used extensively for a wide variety of purposes by 
may Native American tribes  including the Cherokee, 
Chippewa, Choctaw, Creek, Delaware, Oklahoma, 
Houma, Iroquois, Koasati, Mohegan, Nanticoke, 
Rappahannock, and Seminole.  The medicinal uses of 
sassafras by Native Americans were many.  Infusions 
made from the bark of the roots were taken internally 
as a preventive to ward off fever, as well as a remedy 
to treat diarrhea, rheumatism, measles, and scarlet 
fever.  An infusion of the roots was used as a blood 
purifier, and as a dietary aid to treat “overfattness.”  
Infusions of the plant were used as a cough medicine, 
mouthwash, and gargle for colds.  Root infusions 
were also used to treat fevers that occurred in women 
after giving birth and as a wash for eyesores.  
Decoctions made from roots were used to treat heart 
troubles.  An infusion of the plant was mixed with 
whiskey and used for rheumatism, tapeworms, and as 
a blood remedy to purify the blood.  The leaves were 
made into a poultice that would be rubbed onto bee 
stings, wounds, cuts, sprained ankles, and bruises.  
Nosebleeds were treated with a decoction made from  the pith of new sprouts.  The pith from branches was 
made into a decoction used to wash and dress burns.  
Infusions of the plant were used to treat lower chest 
pain, nausea, vomiting, indigestion, constipation and 
diarrhea.  The bark was used as an emetic 
purification after funeral ceremonies.  Bark infusions 
were given to babies and children to treat itching, 
enlarged eyes, fever, drooling, and loss of appetite.  
Children with worms drank and were bathed in an 
infusion that included the 
bark of sassafras.  The 
plant was taken to treat gallstones and bladder pain.  
In addition to this variety of medicinal uses, sassafras 
was used for food, construction and other purposes.  
The leaves were used fresh as a spice, much like bay 
leaves, for flavoring in meat soups. Leaves were 
dried and pounded and used as a thickening agent and 
to add flavor to foods and soups.  “Filé”, made from 
the ground roots or leaves,  is an important spice used 
today in Cajun foods, such as gumbo.  The white or 
red roots, made a pleasant-tasting tea, although the 
red roots were preferred.  The wood from the 
sassafras tree was used to make furniture.  The 
flowers were used as a fertili zer when planting beans.  
The plant was used as a fragrance to scent soap. The 
bark contains oil of sassafras, an important flavoring.   
© William S. Justice @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife : The fruits are readily eaten by wildlife.  
Birds, such as quails, wild  turkeys, kingbirds, crested 
flycatchers, mockingbirds , sapsuckers, pileated 
woodpeckers, yellowthroat warblers and phoebes eat 
the fruits and disperse the se eds.  Black bears, beaver, 
rabbits and squirrels eat the fruit, bark and wood.  
White-tailed deer browse the twigs and foliage. 
 
Other:  Sassafras has been cultivated since 1630 for 
its leaves, bark, and wood.  The plants are used for 
tea, oil, and soap.  The heartwood is orange-brown 
and course-grained.  It is used for purposes requiring 
lightwood, such as boat construction, because it is 
soft but durable.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Laurel Family (Lauraceae).  Sassafras is a 
native, perennial, deciduous  shrub or tree.  The trees 
are short to medium-tall (9  to 18 m), and spread from 
6 to 8 m.  Young trees have greenish bark.  Older

trees have reddish brown bark that is rough, thick, 
and deeply ridged.  The leaves are alternate and 
variable in shape with eith er none or one to three 
lobes at the apex.  The two-lobed leaves are mitten-
shaped.  The leaves are light, bright green during the 
summer and turn to bright yellow-orange and red-
orange in the fall.  The trees are dioecious (a tree will 
have either male or female flowers) with fragrant 
flowers.  The female flow ers (1cm across), borne on 
small, terminal clusters before the leaves, are without 
petals, but have six greenish-yellow sepals (3 to 5 
mm long).  Male flowers are inconspicuous.  The 
female trees have small, oval fruits (6 to 10 mm) that 
are dark blue with thick, red stalks.  The leaf buds 
appear at the same time the tree flowers in early 
spring.  The fruits ripen in the fall. 
 
Distribution : Sassafras is native to the eastern United 
States.  For current distri bution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Habitat: This plant is a pioneer tree on disturbed sites 
in its native range.  It is adapted to various soils with 
low pH.  It can be found in woodlands, fields and 
along roadsides. 
 
Establishment 
Sassafras trees are valued for their fragrant spring 
bloom, interesting horizontal branching pattern, and 
striking fall color.  The small trees are medium to fast 
growing and work well for landscape use as 
specimen trees and mass plantings.  They are easy to 
culture and require little care.  Although adapted to 
dry, sandy soils, they do best in moist, fertile soils in 
partial to full shade.  Seed s, root-cuttings or suckers 
may propagate sassafras trees.  Seeds are produced 
every one or two years af ter the plant reaches the 
minimum seed-bearing age of ten years.  Seeds may 
be gathered when the fruits turn a dark blue.  Seeds 
should be cleaned and stored at cool temperatures 
where they will last for up  to two years.  The seeds 
require prechilling for 120 days in order to germinate.  
Sow the seeds .5 to 1.5 cm deep in prepared beds in 
the late fall.  The plants do not transplant well 
because of a deep taproot.  It is therefore best to 
purchase young plants that have been grown in 
containers for successful transplanting. 
 
Management 
The trees can form dense thickets from sucker 
growth.  These thickets can be quite striking in color 
during the fall months.  If a single stem is desired, 
remove the suckers that develop.  Mowing can easily 
control the suckers.  The  tree may be pruned in the 
winter to remove dead wood.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The trees can develop a variety of insect and disease 
problems that are generally not serious.  Insects will 
eat the foliage, but rarely  eat the entire leaves.  The 
plants may experience root ro t if grown in wet, clay 
soils.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians . Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Bushnell, D.I., Jr. 1909.   The Choctaw of Bayou 
Lacomb St. Tammany Parish Louisiana .  
Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American 
Ethnology.  Bulletin 48.  59pp.   
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.  493 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants. 
Fifth Edition .   Stipes Publishing, Champaign, 
Illinois.  1187 pp. 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft 1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Press,  Syracuse, New York.  278 
pp. 
 
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, & G.A. Stokes 1994.  
The historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana .  Louisiana

State University Press, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  324 
pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001) 
 
Rogers, D.J. & C. Rogers 1991.   Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana .  Primitive 
Man Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference 14(4): 49-75. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp.  
 
Swanson, R.E. 1994.   A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A.  1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes . Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
88 pp. 
 
Whitcomb, C.E. 1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants .  Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma.  
740 pp. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.