Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CLUSTERED BUR-REED 
Sparganium glomeratum  
(Laestad.) L. Neum. 
Plant Symbol = SPGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic..The Klamath Indians dug the tubers 
(possibly  Sparganium angustifolium,  S . erectum, 
and/or  S. eurycarpum ) produced in late autumn from 
the creeping rootstocks of some of the species of this 
genus, and use them as food (Steyermark 1963).  An 
infusion of  Sparanium erectum  can be mixed with 
other plant leaves and used in the treatment of chills 
(Moerman 1998).  A decoction of  Sparganium 
stoloniferum  root was used in the treatment of chest 
pains and abdominal pain (Yeung 1985). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Bur-reed family (Sparaniaceae). 
American bur-reed 
  Sparganium americanum  (SPAM) 
branched bur-reed 
  Sparganium androcladum  (SPAN) 
narrowleaf bur-reed 
  Sparganium angustifolium  (SPAN2) 
simplestem bur-reed 
  Sparganium erectum (SPER) 
broadfruit bur-reed 
  Sparganium eurycarpum  (SPEU) 
floating bur-reed 
  Sparganium fluctuans (SPFL)  
clustered bur-reed 
  Sparganium glomeratum  (SPGL) 
 © June M. Dobberpuhl @ Wisconsin State Herbarium University of Wisconsin-Madison
northern bur-reed 
  Sparganium hyperboreum  (SPHY) 
small bur-reed 
  Sparganium natans (SPNA) 
These bur-reed species are native, herbaceous marsh 
or pond plants with rootstocks.  The leaves are 
alternate, stiff and erect or limp and floating, linear, 
and internally septate (The Great Plains Flora 
Association 1986).  The individual flowers are small 
and occur in separate male (staminate) or female 
(pistillate) globular clusters on the same plant. 
(Steyermark 1963). 
 
Distribution: A genus of twenty or more  Sparanium 
species is widely distributed  in temperate and colder 
latitudes of the eastern and western hemispheres, and 
in eastern North America (B raun 1967).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
This species grows best on wet ground in rich soil.  It 
prefers full sun but can tolerate some shade.  
Sparanium  species is mostly found in muddy or 
shallow water of swamps and ponds.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Sparanium  seeds should be 
sown as soon as they are ripe in the greenhouse.  This 
species should be placed in pots standing in two to 
three centimeters of water.   Place the seedlings into 
individual pots when they are large enough to handle 
and gradually increase the depth of water with plant 
growth.  Plant  Sparanium sp to their permanent 
positions in the summer. 
 
Large divisions can be planted directly into their 
permanent positions.  While allowing smaller potted

divisions to grow in a cold frame until they are well 
established and ready for summer out-planting to 
their permanent location.. 
 
Management 
Seeds of most aquatic plants should be sown as soon 
as they are ripe.  The seeds lose viability quickly if it 
is allowed to dry out.  If immediate sowing is 
inconvenient, store seeds in moist peat, or substitute 
in a plastic bag and keep  frost-free (Heuser 1997). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Braun, L.E. 1967.  The monocotyledoneae from cat-
tails to orchids .  The Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Heuser, C. W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut. 
 
Peck, M.E. 1961.   A manual of the higher plants of 
Oregon .  2nd ed.  Oregon State University Press, 
Portland, Oregon. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of the southeastern flora .  
The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Strausbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Yeung, H.C. 1985.   Handbook of Chinese herbs and 
formulas .  Institute of Chinese Medicine, Los 
Angeles, California. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.