Plant Guide
HARDSTEM BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus acutus (Muhl. ex 
Bigelow) A. Löve & D. Löve  
Plant Symbol = SCAC3 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
Hardstem bulrush. Photo by Derek Tilley, USDA -NRCS.  
 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  tule  
Scientific Alternate Names:  Scirpus acutus  
Uses  
Wildlife :  
Livestock rarely use this species when the area is flooded. 
They will use it as roughage or in the winter under heavy 
snow cover because the stems  are often protruding above 
the snow bank.  Forage value of hardstem bulrush is rated 
poor for cattle, sheep, h orses, elk, whitetail deer, mule 
deer, and pronghorn antelope.  
  Waterfowl will feed on the seed. 
The dense tules provide 
excellent nesting cover for numerous waterfowl and 
wetland  birds (Boggs et al ., 1990). 
 
Muskrats and beaver will eat the rootstock and young 
shoots. Muskrats also  use the stems for building their 
houses.  
 
Water Treatment/Erosion Control : 
Hardstem bulrush’s dense root mass makes this species an 
excellent choice for soil stabilization. Its abov e ground 
biomass provide s protection from erosive wave action and 
stream currents that erode shorelines or stream banks. The 
rhizom atous root system also form s a matrix for many 
beneficial bacteria, making this plant an excellent choice 
for wastewater  treatment (Hurd et al., 1994) . 
 
Ethnobotany : 
The young sprouts and shoots of hardstem bulrush can be 
eaten raw or cooked, and the rhizomes and unripe flower 
heads can be boiled as a vegetable.  Hardstem bulrush 
rhizomes were also  sun dried  and  pounded into a kind of 
flour.  Bulrush pollen  is eaten as flour in bread, mush or 
pancakes.  T he seeds can be beaten off into baskets or 
pails, ground into meal and used as flour.  
 
Tule houses were common throughout many parts of 
California; the overlapping tule  mats ma de homes  well-
insulated and rain -proof.  The walls  and roofs  were 
thatched with mats of tule or cattail and secured to the 
frame.  In Nevada, tules and willows were bound together 
in a sort of crude weaving for "Kani", the Paiute name for 
summerhouse.  .  H ardstem bulrush was also used to make 
shoes, skirts, baby diapers, bedding, and duck decoys.  
Several California Indian tribes make canoes of hardstem 
bulrush  stems bound together with vines from wild grape.   
 
Hardstem bulrush has also been used by Native  American 
tribes medicinally. The Cree used a poultice of stem pith 
to stop bleeding. Navajo and Ramah tribes used the plant 
as a ceremonial emetic, and the Thompson tribe placed 
ashes from burned stems on a newborn’s bleeding naval 
(Moerman, 2009) . 
Status  
Hardstem bulrush is considered threatened in Connecticut 
and endangered in Pennsylvania (USDA -NRCS, 2011).  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).

Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae). Hardstem bulrush 
is a p erennial, rhizomatous ,  wetland obligate species that 
reach es up to 3 m (10 ft)  in height and form s very dense 
stands. The s tems are upright, gray- green to dark -green, 
round,  1 to 2 cm ( 0.4 to 0.8 in ) thick and 1 to 3 m ( 3 to 10 
f t)  tall. The l eaves are f ew and short, found at or near the 
base, and commonly have a well developed sheath. The 
inflorescence is a terminal  panicle o f 3 to 10 spikes which 
are made up of up to 50 or more spikelets. Each spike 
may be on a short pedicel or sessile. The inflorescence is 
exceeded by a  2.5 to 10 cm (1 to 4 in) lateral bract.  The 
fruit is a d ark brown lenticular achene up to 2.5 mm (0.1 
in ) long  (Welsh et al., 2003) . 
Distribution :    
Hardstem bulrush occurs throughout North America 
except for the southeastern states from  Louisiana east to 
Florida and north to Tennessee (USDA -NRCS, 2011). For 
current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page  for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :   
Hardstem bulrush is  found at low to mid elevations, 
generally below 2, 300 m (7,500 ft), in  inundated to 
periodically wet areas of marshes, swamps, and meadows 
and along lake, reservoir, and pond shorelines.  
 
Adaptation  
Hardstem bulrush forms large, often monoculture, stands 
with the young plants on the outside and the older plants 
in the center of a stand. It is generally found in areas of 
standing water ranging from 10 cm to more than 1.5 m (4 
in  to 5 ft) in depth. It will not tolerate long periods of  
very deep water. Hardstem bulrush will grow on soils that 
range from peat to coarse substrates. It will grow and 
spread on alkaline, saline, and brackish sites and will re -
sprout after fire. Burning  increases its production and 
protein content. Hardstem bulrush reproduces from seed 
and rhizomes. Rhizomes  will spread more than 45 cm (18 
in) in one growing season.   
Establishment  
Wild transplants:  
Wild plants can be collected and transplanted directly i nto 
the desired site. 
If less  than 4 dm² is removed from 
any 1 -m² area (1 ft² in 1 yd²), the  hole will fill in 
within one growing season. 
Care should be taken 
not to collect plants from weedy areas as weeds can be 
relocated to the transplant site.  
 
Plantin g plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild 
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand of 
this species. Plug spacing of 30 to 45 cm ( 12 to 18 in) will 
fill in the interspaces  within one growing season. Soil 
should be kept saturated. Standing  w ater should be no 
deeper than 4 to 5 cm ( 1.5 to 2 in) during the first growing 
season. Larger transplanted plugs can handle more  standing water if the stems are cut long enough to ensure 
they are out of the water. Raising and lowering the water 
level during the establishment period will speed up plant 
spread
 and can be used to control weeds  (Hoag et al., 
1992) . 
 
Management  
Water level in a wetland should be fluctuated from 
saturated conditions up to a maximum depth of 30 cm (12 
in ) of standing water  for establishing plants . The young 
plants can handle deeper water, but not for an extended 
period of time. This species can tolerate periods of 
drought and total inundation. It will spread into water 
depths of 1 to 1.5 m ( 3 to 5 ft). Water levels can be 
m anaged to either enhance or reduce spread as well as to 
control terrestrial weeds.  Hardstem bulrush may be 
replaced by cattail ( Typha spp.) if water levels are 
dropped for an extended period (Harris and Marshall, 
1963). Hardstem bulrush re -establish from s eed and  
rhizomes following fires (Smith and Kadlec, 1985).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Pests are generally not a problem. Aphids will feed on the 
stems, but generally will not kill the plant.  
Environmental Concerns  
Because of its poor forage value, hardst em bulrush can be 
considered undesirable in flooded meadows and pastures.  
Hardstem bulrush  is native to western North America. It 
can spread under favorable conditions but does not pose 
any environmental concern to native plant communities.  
Seeds and Plant  Production  
Hardstem bulrush reproduces sexually by seed and 
asexually through vegetative spread via rhizomes.  
  
Hardstem bulrush seed. Photo by Derek Tilley 
 
Seed  Collection and Cleaning:   
Seeds ripen in late August to September. Seeds are not 
held tightly in the seed head, and high winds, frost, and 
brushing against the seed head will cause the seeds to 
dislodge. Seed may be collected by hand stripping from 
the plant or by clipping the seed  head using a pair of hand 
shears.

A hammermill is needed to break up coarse debris and 
knock seed free from the panicle. Cleaning can be 
accomplished using a seed cleaner with a No. 12 top 
screen and a 1.27 mm (1/20 in) bottom screen. Screens 
should be sized so desired seed will fall through and 
debris and weed seed are removed. Air velocity should be 
adjusted so chaff is  blown away. Air flow and screen size 
may require adjustment to optimize the cleaning process 
for each collection.  
 
Greenhouse Plant Pr oduction:  
Improved germination rates have been achieved with 
cold/wet stratification treatment with  the seeds in a 
mixture of water and  sphagnum moss at 2°C for 30- 75 
days.  Others have found success  using a 10%  acid wash 
for 45 minutes followed by a  th ou rough washing then wet 
pre -chilling  the seed for 75 days.  
 
Seed needs light, moisture, and heat for germination. 
Place seed  on the soil surface and press in lightly to 
assure good soil contact. Do not bury  the seed. Soil 
should be kept moist. Greenhouse te mperatures should be 
maintained at approximately 35 to 38° C (95 to 100° F). 
Germination should begin within  7 to 10 days. Maintain 
moisture until plants are to be transplanted.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no cultivars, improved, or selected materials of 
hardstem bulrush. Common wildland collected seed is 
available from commercial sources (Native Seed 
Network).  
References  
Boggs,  K; Hansen, P ; Pfister, R; and J. Joy . 
1990.Classification and management of riparia n and 
wetland sites in  northwestern Montana.  Missoula, 
MT: University of Montana, School of Forestry, 
Montana Forest and Conservation Experiment 
Station, Montan  Riparian Association. 217 p.  
Harris, SW, Marshall, WH. 1963. Ecology of water -level 
manipulatio ns on a northern marsh. Ecology. 44(2): 
331- 343.   
Hoag, J.C., G.L. Young, & J. Gibb 1992.  
Riparian/wetland project information series no. 1: 
Planting techniques for vegetation riparian areas from  the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center.  USDA, NRCS, 
Idaho Pl
ant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  8p.  
Hurd, EG.; Shaw, N, and LC Smithman. 1994.  Cyperaceae and Juncaceae --selected low -elevation 
species. In: Monsen, S B.; Kitchen, S G., compilers. 
Proceedings —ecology and management of annual 
rangelands; 1992 May 18 -22; Boise, ID. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT -GTR -313. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station: 380 -383.  
Native Seed Network. http://www.nativeseednetwork.org  (Accessed June 15, 2012)   
Smith, LM.; Kadlec, JA. 1985. Fire and herbivory in a  Great Salt Lake marsh. Ecology. 66(1): 259- 265. 
USDA -NRCS. 2011. The PLANTS  Database 
(http://plants.usda.gov, 17 February 2011). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874- 4490 
USA.  
Welsh, SL,  Atwood  N D, Goodrich , S. , and LC  Higgins. 
2003. A  Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. Brigham 
Young University, Provo, UT.  
 
Prepared By  
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation 
Tilley, D.  2012 . Plant guide for hardstem bulrush 
( Schoenoplectus acutus ). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. 
Aberdeen , ID. 83210 . 
Published  October 2012  
 
Edited:  19Mar2011djt; 20Mar2011lsj; 21Mar2011dgo; 
13sep2012djt; 23Oct2012jab 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.
 
 
 
   
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER