Plant Guide 

COMPOSITE 
DROPSEED

Sporobolus compositus  (Poir.) 

Merr. var. compositus 

Plant Symbol = SPCOC2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center and the National Plant Data Center 
Ann Gardner Ada Herbarium, Iowa State University 
Alternate Names 
Sporobolus asper, Sporobolus asper var. hookeri, 
rough dropseed, tall dropseed, zacaton 
Uses 
Forage: Composite dropseed is a minor portion of 
the vegetative composition in most of the areas in 
which it grows.  It is not a particularly valuable 
forage species. The forage value of composite 
dropseed, compared to other grasses, is fair for 
livestock and poor for wildlife. It is most palatable in 
the spring when plants are in the vegetative 
developmental stage and palatability declines as 
culms mature. In Kansas composite dropseed tends to 
increase in overgrazed bluestem pastures, but it tends 
to decrease in short-grass prairies.  
Prairie restoration and Roadside plantings: On 
upland hardwood forest-tallgrass prairies in central 
Oklahoma, the diet of cottontail rabbit is dominated 
by composite dropseed, Heller&#39;s rosette grass 
(Dichanthelium oligosanthes), and Croton species. 
Disturbed habitats were maintained by removal of 
woody overstory vegetation with herbicide and 
burning. Differences in the botanical composition and 
quality of rabbit diets between disturbed and 
undisturbed habitats were of little biological 
significance.   
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Composite 
dropseed is a tall (2 to 4 ft.), native, perennial, warm-
season bunchgrass. Culms are erect, solitary or in 
small tufts, simple or branching, 24 to 48 inches tall, 
solid and glabrous.  Some varieties have short 
rhizomes. Inflorescences are narrow panicles, 2 to 12 
inches long and partially to completely included in 
the upper sheaths. The inflorescences are either white 
or pale purple in coloration. Composite dropseed 
flowers during late summer to early autumn. The 
stems and leaves bleach whitish during winter. 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: Composite dropseed occurs on prairies and 
foothills on dry clayey to silty soils. It is most 
abundant on soils that are intermittently wet and dry. 
It does not grow on either deep sandy soils or on soils 
with a high water table. In the Great Basin composite 
dropseed grows on dry often sandy sites in Juniper 
communities and in fallow fields below 2,100 ft. 
Adaptation 
Composite dropseed is more drought tolerant than 
many grasses of the bluestem prairie, but it is not as 
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Resources Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 

Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.htm l> 

National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

drought hardy as sand dropseed (Sporobolus 
cryptandrus). 
Establishment 
Pretreatment of composite dropseed seeds with 
potassium nitrate resulted in 39% germination. 
Management 
Burning in early spring favors warm-season 
composite dropseed, whereas late spring burning 
favors cool-season species. Forage yield of composite 
dropseed increased following a spring burn during 
both wet and dry years in an Ashe’s juniper 
(Juniperus ashe) community in southeastern Texas. 
An autumn burn favored the growth of composite 
dropseed in a southern Texas chaparral community.  
A field study addressed the effects of fire, cattle 
grazing and the interaction of these two disturbances 
on plant species abundance and community structure 
in an tallgrass prairie in Oklahoma. Plant species 
composition was sampled across 4 levels of 
increasing disturbance intensity: ungrazed + 
unburned (undisturbed), grazed + unburned, ungrazed 
+ burned, and grazed + burned. Burning occurred 
during mid-April. Grazing occurred from mid-May to 
September at a moderate to heavy stocking rate.  
Burning decreased the percentage cover of composite 
dropseed from 11.7 to 4.8, when averaged across 
grazing treatments and years. Grazing had no effect 
on the percentage cover of composite dropseed. The 
common species in the plant community were 
classified as either matrix or non-matrix species. 
Matrix forming species are superior competitors that 
consume the majority of resources, and non-matrix 
species occupy areas between the matrix forming 
dominants. In this study the matrix species were 
perennial grasses: big bluestem (Andropogon 
gerardii), little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium), 
Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans), and composite 
dropseed. The non-matrix species were perennial and 
annual forbs, and the annual grass cheatgrass 
(Bromus tectorum). Collectively, the matrix and non-
matrix species exhibited an opposite response to both 
burning and grazing treatments. Collectively, fire 
increased the cover of matrix-forming grass; 
composite dropseed was an exception. Grazing 
decreased the cover of matrix grasses and increased 
the cover of forbs. Cheatgrass was the most common 
non-matrix species. Burning reduced the percentage 
cover of cheatgrass from 30.0 to 1.8, when averaged 
across grazing treatments and years. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
An average seed lot of composite dropseed contains 
759,362 seeds per pound. Observations indicate that 
cross-pollination in composite dropseed is possible 
but probably infrequent. Nevertheless, standard 
isolation procedures should be used in composite 
dropseed seed production. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
“Northern Missouri Germplasm” is a source 
identified ecotype for northern Missouri counties. It 
was collected from native prairie remnants in 
Missouri counties north of the Missouri River and 
from east to west across northern Missouri. The 
potential uses of Northern Missouri Germplasm 
include roadside plantings, prairie restoration, 
landscaping, and increasing species diversity in 
prairie communities. Seed is available from the 
USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials Center, 2803 
N. Hwy. 79, Elsberry, Missouri.  
References 
Boe, A. 1990. Variability for seed size and yield in 
two tall dropseed populations. J. Range Manage. 
43:195-197. 
Anderson, K.L., Smith, E.F. & Owensby, C.B. 1970. 
Burning bluestem range. J. Range Manage. 23: 81-
92.

Baskin, C.J. & Baskin, J.M. 1998. Seeds: Ecology, 
biogeography and evolution in dormancy and 
germination. Academic Press. In: Native Plant 
Propagation Database 
http://nativeplants.for.uidaho.edu/network/Previe 
wResults.asp 
Box, T.W. Powell, J.D. & Lynn, D. 1967. Influence 
of fire on south Texas chaparral communities. 
Ecology 48: 955-961. 
Collins, S. 1987. Interaction of disturbances in 
tallgrass prairie: a field experiment. Ecology 68: 
1243-1250. 
Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses. Accessed 20 
October 2005 http://www.lib.ksu.edu/wildflower/ 
Riggins, R. 1977. A biosystematic study of the 
Sporobolus asper complex (Gramineae). Iowa State 
Journal of Research 51: 287-321. 
Peitz, D.G., Lockmiller R.L, Leslie, D.M. & Engle, 
D.M. 1997. Protein quality of cottontail rabbit 
forages following rangeland disturbance. J. Range 
Manage. 50: 450-458. 
Stubbendieck, J., Hatch, S.L. & Butterfield, C. 1995. 
North American range plants. ed. 2. University of 
Nebraska Press, Lincoln. 
USDA Forest Service. Fire effects information 
system. Accessed 20 October 2005 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ 
USDA NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS database. 
<http://plants.usda.gov>. Accessed: 23March2006. 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Wink, R.L. & Wright, H.A. 1973. Effects of fire on 
an ashe juniper community. J. Range Manage. 26: 
326-329. 
Prepared By 
USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials Center and 
James Henson, National Plant Data Center 
Species Coordinator 
USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials Center, 
Elsberry, Missouri 
Edited: 23March2006 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.