Plant Guide
 
BARNEBY REED-
MUSTARD 
Schoenocrambe barnebyi  (S.L. 
Welsh & N.D. Atwood) Rollins 
Plant Symbol = SCBA80  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials  Program 
 Barneby reed -mustard  (Schoenocrambe barnebyi).  Photo by 
C.R. Delmatier  
Alternate Names  
Syes Butte Plainsmustard  
Thelypodiopsis barnebyi  
 
Uses  
There are no known human or wildlife uses of 
Barneby reed -mustard.  
Status 
Barneby reed -mustard was determined by the USDI -
Fish and Wildlife Service to be an endangered 
species warranting protection in 1992 (USDI -FWS,   
   
1992).
 There are an estimated 2,000 individual plants 
in existence (USDI -FWS, 1994).  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Mustard  family ( Brassicaceae).  Barneby 
reed -mustard is a perennial forb with multiple stems 
arising from a branching woody caudex and taproot. 
The stems grow 10 to 35 cm (4 to 14 in) tall, and bear 
elliptical, entire leaves which can be hairy to glabrous 
and glaucus. The leaves are 13 to 51 mm ( 0.50 to 2.0 
in) l ong and 4 to 24 mm (0.16 to 0.94 in) wide with  
0.4 to 10 mm (0.02 to 0.40 in) long petioles. The 
flowers have four white to lavender petals, 10 to 12 
mm ( 0.40 to 0.47 in) long,  with conspicuous purple 
veins. The fruit is a silique (a lengthened pod), 34 to  
65 mm ( 1.34 to 2.56  in) long and 1 to 2 m (0.04 to 
0.08  in) wide (Welsh, et al., 2003).  
 
Distribution : 
There are two known populations of Barneby reed -
mustard . One population is within the boundary of 
Capitol Reef National Park in the Fremont River 
draina ge west of Fruita, Utah in Wayne County, and 
the other population is  in the southern portion of the 
San Rafael Swell in Emery County, Utah. The two 
populations are separated by a distance of 
approximately 40 km (25 mi).  
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  
Barneby reed -mustard inhabits semi arid canyonlands 
on steep slopes , generally with northern exposures. 
The plants  grow in mixed shadscale ( Atriplex 
confertifolia ), buckwheat ( Eriogonum corymbosum  ) 
and ephedra ( Ephedra torreyana  and E. viridis ) plant 
communities (Welsh et al., 2003). Other plant 
associates include Utah serviceberry ( Amelanchier 
utahensis ), galleta grass ( Hilaria jamesii) , tarragon 
( Artemisia  dracunculus ) and ru bber rabbitbrush 
( Ericameria  nauseosa) (USDI -FWS, 1994).  
 
Adaptation  
This species is endemic to red clay soils derived from 
the Moenkopi and Chinle Formations overlain with 
sandstone talus. These soils are rich in selenium and 
gypsum (USDI -FWS, 1994). Both  populations are

found in a 15 to 23 cm (6 to 9 in) mean annual 
precipitation zone (WRCC, 2011). 
 
Management  
Existing threats to the survival of Barneby reed -
mustard include oil and gas exploration, oil -shale 
mining, stone quarrying, and off -road vehicle ( ORV) 
use. An additional potential threat is habitat 
destruction due to uranium mining activity. A large 
portion of the San Rafael Swell population lies within 
existing  mining claims. The Capitol Reef National 
Park population is at risk of habitat destruction from 
foot traffic caused by park visitors (USDI- FWS, 
1994).  
 
Management goals include the establishment of a 
minimum of 5 separate populations consisting of 
2,000 or more individuals per population. This is to 
be  accomplished by  controlling the habitat 
threatening activities listed above, and by identifying 
suitable habitat for additional populations  and 
introducing propagated materials . Life history, 
reproduction and ecological studies for the species 
are also indicated (USDI -FW S, 1994).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Historical sheep and cattle grazing  use may have 
impacted Barneby reed -mustard on US DI-BLM 
lands. However current grazing levels are not 
believed to pose a serious threat. 
  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with Barneby reed -mustard.  
 
 
Seed and Plant Production  
Reproduction of Barneby reed -mustard is sexual. 
Flowering occurs from April to May with fruit 
ripening in May to June. Specific pollination vectors 
are unknown (USDI -FW S, 1994).  
 
References  
USDI -Fish and Wildlife Service. 1992. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; final rule to 
determine the plant Schoenocrambe argillacea 
(Clay reed -mustard) to be a threatened species,  and the plant Schoenocrambe barnebyi
 (Barn eby 
reed -mustard) to be an endangered species. In: 
Federal Register. 57(9): 1398- 1403. 
USDI -Fish  and Wildlife Service. 1994. Utah reed -
mustards; clay reed -mustard ( Schoenocrambe  
argillacea ), Barneby reed -mustard 
( Schoenocrambe barnebyi ), shrubby reed-
musta rd (Schoenocrambe suffrutescens ) recovery 
plan. Denver, Colorado. 22p.  
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.  
Western Regional Climate Center. 2011. Online.  http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/index.html. Accessed 
January 13, 2011.  
Prepared By : 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho.  
Citation 
Tilley, D., L.  St. John and D. Ogle. 2011. Plant guide 
for  Barneby reed -mustard  (Schoenocrambe 
barnebyi ). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
Published  Jan 2011 
Edited:  13Jan2011 djt; 13jan2011dgo; 13Jan2 011ls 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER