Plant Guide
ROSE CHECKER -
MALLOW  
Sidalcea virgata  Howell  
Plant Symbol = SI VI3 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011 . 
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common Names:   wild hollyhock, showy wild 
hollyhock,  virgate checkerbloom,  rosy checkermallow,  
dwarf checkerbloom  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Sidalcea  malviflora (DC.) A. 
Gray ex Be nth. ssp. virgata  (Howell)  C.L. Hitchc. , 
Sidalcea  malviflora  (DC.) A. Gray ex Benth. var.  virgata  
(Howell) Dimling , Sidalcea malviflora  (DC.) A. Gray ex 
Benth.  ssp. asprella  (Greene) C.L. Hitchc.  var.  virgata   
Uses  
Prairie restoration : Rose checker -mallow is a native 
wildflower used in prairie restoration plantings as an 
important member of a diverse native plant community.  
Pollinator habitat: Rose checker -mallow f lowers are  one 
of the primary  nectar sources  for  the  federally endangered 
Fender’s blue butterfly , Icaricia icarioides fenderi  
( Wilso n et al. , 1997 ).  It is also a suspected host plant for 
the  West  C oast painted lady Vanessa annabella, common 
checkered skipper  Pyrgus communis , and two-banded 
checkered skipper  Pyrgus ruralis  (Newhouse, 2001) .  
Flowers of Sidalcea  species are a source of pollen and 
nectar for European honeybees  (LCBA , 2012),  as well as  
native bees  and other beneficial insects  (Newhouse , 
2009) .   There is one native bee  (Diadasia  nigrifrons ) that  is a specialist pollinator of Sidalcea 
species ( Leong , 
2006 ).   
Status  
Sidalcea  virgata is listed as an endangered species  in the 
state of Washington  (WDNR , 2003) .  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Rose checker -mallow  is a member of the 
mallow family (Malvaceae).   It  is a n herbaceous  perennial 
that typically grows 8 to 40 inches tall  (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist , 1961) .  Plants have a strong taproo t and short 
to trailing rhizomes (horizontal underground stems).  The 
aboveground  stems are often trailing or reclining on the 
ground ,  freely root at the base,  are generally not hollow,  
and are covered in soft, branched  (stellate) , fairly long 
hairs .  Leaf  stems (petioles)  are covered in dense, stellate 
hairs,  and the upper surface of basal leaves is  densely 
covered in short  simple or forked hairs .  Basal leaves are 
generally palmate, while leaves along the stem are deeply 
divided.   Flower  stalks are generally loose, often one -
sided, rarely branched (from 1 -3  side  branches), and have 
relatively few flowers (5 -30) compared to other Sidalcea 
species in  western Oregon (Gisler , 2003).    
This species is  gynodioecious, meaning populations 
contain plants with  hermaphrodite flowers  ( outcross ing 
and self -compatible ), as well as plants that have only 
female flowers  ( obligate  outcrossing)  ( Halse et al. , 1989).   
Flowers have five petals that are rounded with a shallow 
notch at the tip , 5/8 -1  inch  (15-25 mm)  long on p erfect 
(bisexual)  flowers and 3/8 -1/2  inch  (9-13 mm)  on female 
flowers,  and are pink to magenta (or sometimes white  
around Eugene, Oregon).  Carpels containing individual 
seeds  are relatively large for checker -mallows ( 1/7-1/6 
inch, or 3.5 -4 mm) and have a  very rough, deeply net -  
 Native  Eucerine  bee visiting rose checker -mallow flower s. Photo by A. 
Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center , 2009.

R.M. Love, D. Luomo, R.J. Meinke, and M.V.  
Wilson (ed.) Conservation and  man agement of n ative 
f lora and f ungi. Native Plant Soci ety of Oregon, 
Corvallis . 
Prepared By :   
Annie Young- Mathews, Conservation A gronomist 
USDA NRCS  Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon  
Citation  
Young- Mathews, A. 2012.  Plant guide for rose checker -
mallow  ( Sidalcea virgata) . USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service,  Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR .  Published 
May 2012 
Edited:  26Mar2012 dcd;  27Mar2012 ab; 17Apr2012 jab; 27Apr2012 gm    
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site  http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web 
sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER