Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH 
CORDGRASS 
Spartina alterniflora  Lois. 
Plant Symbol = SPAL  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Louisiana State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
saltmarsh cordgrass, 
oystergrass, saltwater 
cordgrass 
 
Uses 
SE US Coastal & Shoreline 
Restoration: Smooth 
cordgrass is a unique plant 
species that when 
established properly and 
under applicable conditions 
has proven to provide 
significant erosion 
protection to shorelines, 
canal banks, and other areas 
of coastal wetland loss. 
 
Smooth cordgrass is used 
primarily for erosion 
control along shorelines, 
canal banks, levees, and 
other areas of soil-water 
interface.  In addition, 
smooth cordgrass is an 
effective soil stabilizer used 
on interior tidal mudflats, 
dredge-fill sites, and other 
areas of loose and 
unconsolidated soils 
associated with marsh 
restoration.  When 
established in conjunction 
with shorelines, smooth 
cordgrass provides an 
effective buffer that 
dissipates energy, reduces 
shoreline scouring, and 
traps suspended sediments and other solids.  Dense 
stands of smooth cordgrass are efficient users of 
available nutrients, producing significant amounts of 
organic matter.  The cumulative effects of organic  matter production, sediment trapping, and erosion 
control not only provide shoreline protection but also 
accelerate sediment accumulation and near-shore 
building.  Consequently, smooth cordgrass is a 
sustainable and renewable restoration resource, and 
when properly established and in the appropriate 
habitat, will persist and potentially remain effective 
indefinitely. 
 
Status 
Grass Images 
Texas A&M University 
Smooth cordgrass is a native species critical to 
Barrier Island and wetland restoration along the 
southeastern coastal states, while it is introduced into 
areas on the Pacific coas t, where has become an 
aggressive invasive species.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status, such 
as, state noxious status, an d wetland indicator values. 
 
Weediness 
Smooth cordgrass has been introduced along the U.S. 
West Coast and is very invasive .  Consult the links 
found at the bottom of the PLANTS Plant Profile for 
additional information regarding this species along 
the Pacific coast, partic ularly in California and 
Washington. 
 
Description 
General : Smooth cordgrass is  a herbaceous, native, 
warm season grass that forms dense vegetative 
colonies along shorelines and inter-tidal flats in 
coastal wetlands.  Smooth cordgrass is a robust, 
rapidly spreading plant, tolerant to fluctuating water 
depths and salinity.  Smooth cordgrass spreads 
primarily by vegetative propagation, producing new 
stems from an extensive system of underground 
rhizomes.  Plant height will vary according to site 
conditions, but generally will range from 24” to 72.”  
Colonies tend to grow parallel to and continuous 
along shorelines; the width and thickness of a 
vegetative colony is controlled by a number of site-
specific conditions such as elevation, shoreline-slope, 
and frequency, depth, and duration of flooding. 
 
Distribution : Generally, this species occurs in the 
coastal states along the U.S.  It is not native on the 
West Coast.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.

Establishment 
Adaptation: Smooth cordgrass is an inter-tidal 
brackish plant species.  It is described as a facultative 
halophyte; that is, it will tolerate salt, but salt is not a 
requirement for its growth.    Smooth cordgrass can be 
established in freshwater, however, numerous field 
trials have demonstrated that smooth cordgrass is 
difficult to establish and will not persist under 
freshwater field conditions.  The ideal salinity range 
for establishing and growing smooth cordgrass is 8 to 
33 parts per thousand or brackish to saline habitats.  
Smooth cordgrass can be established and will persists 
in areas of elevated salinity (such as salt-flats and 
tidal lagoons), however plants in high saline habitats 
tend to be stubby and less robust, generally resulting 
in thinner and more open vegetative stands. 
 
Of primary importance in site  selection is that the site 
be inter-tidal.  Smooth cordgrass is critically sensitive 
to reduced soil sulfides, a condition common to 
anaerobic and brackish marsh soils.  Smooth 
cordgrass should not be planted outside of the tidal 
zone.  Smooth cordgrass will tolerate fluctuating 
water levels.  Optimum water depths for establishing 
plants are 1” to 18”.  Plantings in deeper water have 
been successful, however plants are slow to anchor 
and vegetative cover is sparse.  Consequently, plants 
are more prone to washout, and minimal shoreline 
protection is achieved. 
 
Smooth cordgrass is adapted to a wide range of soils 
from coarse sands to cl ays and mucks.  Plant 
establishment and productivity appear to be superior 
on heavier mineral soils such as mucky clays, silty 
clays, silty clay loams, and fine sands.  Soils with 
very high levels of organic matter pose structural 
problems and have proven to be problematic in 
establishing stands of smooth cordgrass. 
 
Considerations : There are a number of other site-
specific elements that should be considered when 
working with smooth cordgrass.  These conditions 
represent extremes and should be thoroughly 
investigated prior to committing to a significant 
project if any of these conditions occur. 
 
•   Soil load-bearing properties -- It is not 
uncommon for soils (especially in dredge deposit 
sites) to be fluid to the point that they physically 
will not support the weight of plants.  This is an 
indicator of soils with a very high water-to-
mineral ratio. 
 
•   High organic soils – Smooth cordgrass will not 
survive in soils with extremely high levels of 
organic matter.  These soils are described as  having very low bulk density and are 
problematic.  When soil texture approaches the 
consistency of peat moss, there is potential for 
low plant survival. 
 
•   Poor water circulation – Smooth cordgrass is 
critically sensitive to sulfide accumulations and 
has a relatively low tolerance to sulfide toxicity. 
 
•   Shoreline configuration – Abrupt and steep cut-
banks are indications of high wave energy and/or 
highly erodible soils.  Special precautions may 
be required to keep transplants from dislodging 
prior to becoming established. 
 
•   Herbivore grazing – Smooth cordgrass is a 
favorite of numerous grazing animals.  In areas 
of heavy nutria population, caging plants may be 
required to protect newly planted material. 
 
•   Smothering – Precautions should be taken when 
planting in areas of heavy floating debris.  Both 
mechanical damage to th e plants from surf-trash 
and smothering from water hyacinths are 
common. 
 
If any of these conditions are present, consult with a 
wetland specialist for additional information and/or 
possible alternatives. 
 
Planting : Smooth cordgrass is a poor seed producer.  
Although plants appear to produce a significant 
number of seeds, most seeds are empty, damaged, or 
sterile.  Consequently, seed fertility is low.  For 
planting purposes, two forms of vegetative plant 
materials are recommended:  containerized and bare-
root plugs.  Both plant forms have shown to be 
equally successful in establishing plant stands when 
planted properly and on applicable sites.  There are 
no commercially availabl e sources of seed, and 
seeding is not currently  a recommended practice. 
 
Smooth cordgrass can be produced in a number of 
container sizes, however trade-gallons are the most 
widely used and most popular size.  Trade-gallon 
containers have a higher per unit cost compared to 
smaller containers or bare-root plugs, but provide the 
most reliable means of establishment.  Trade-gallon 
plants have proven to be a highly successful 
transplant, especially along shorelines and other areas 
of high wave energy. 
 
A trade-gallon will have 5 to 12 aerial stems that are 
18” to 24” in height.  Smooth cordgrass produces 
new tillers (stems) and spreads almost entirely from 
rhizomes.  Consequently, a well-developed root mass

is critical to the survival and productivity of 
transplants. 
 
Bare-root plugs are the most economical of the 
commercially available plant sizes.  Per unit 
production costs are low and transportation costs are 
very low compared to container plants.  Bare-root 
plugs are generally limited to planting sites that have 
little or no energy exposure.  Typical sites would 
include mudflats, sediment disposal areas, terraces, or 
other interior and protected sites.  Bare-root plugs 
because of their limited su rface area will not persist 
in high-energy environments.  They tend to dislodge 
prior to establishing.  Bare-root plugs have 
significantly less rootmass than container plants, will 
suffer a higher level of transplant shock, and are 
slower to spread than container plants.  However, if 
handled properly and used on an applicable site, bare-
root plugs can be highly successful transplants. 
 
Bare-root plugs typically consist of 3 stems 12” to 
18” in height, and stems should remain attached at 
the root.  Plugs should have a rootmass of at least 2” 
in diameter at the root cr own and 6” of root length. 
 
A complete description (specification) for both trade-
gallon container plants and bare-root plugs is 
available from the Natura l Resources Conservation 
Service in Louisiana. 
 
Planting Date : As a general rule, smooth cordgrass 
can be planted between April 1 to September 30.   
Some additional consid erations include the 
following: 
 
•   Smooth cordgrass can be planted anytime past 
the last frost date if there is a need to plant earlier 
and available transplants  are actively growing.  
In some areas this may be earlier than April 1. 
 
•   In interior marshes with poor water circulation, 
avoid planting between mid-July and the end of 
August.  Elevated water temperatures are 
generally detrimental to new transplants; 
therefore July and August plantings should be 
limited to lakes, bayous, and other areas of 
frequent tidal exchange. 
 
•   Late fall plantings in October and November 
have been successfully made in the past, but 
should be limited to sites that are well protected 
and have minimal winter storm effect. 
 
Planting Location: It is critically important to 
remember that smooth cordgrass is strictly an inter-
tidal plant species and must be planted within the  inter-tidal zone.  Smooth cordgrass can be used for 
erosion control along shorelines, canal banks, levees, 
and other areas of soil-water interface.  In addition, 
smooth cordgrass is an effective soil stabilizer used 
on interior tidal mudflats, dredge-fill sites, and other 
areas of loose and unconso
lidated soils associated 
with marsh restoration. 
 
Shoreline Plantings : Shoreline plantings are typically 
planted as a single row parallel to the shoreline.  
Transplants should be planted at the mid-point 
between the high and low tide elevations.  Plant 
spacing within th e row will vary according to the size 
of the transplant materials being used and the rate at 
which full coverage is desired.  Trade-gallons 
generally are planted on 5’ to 8’ centers and plugs 
generally on 2’ to 3’ centers.   Under applicable site 
conditions, smooth cordgrass will spread laterally 
filling spaces between plants  and will grow up to its 
highest elevation and down to  its lowest elevation.   It 
is not uncommon for smooth cordgrass to produce 8’ 
to 10’ of lateral spread in one growing season. 
 
Depending on site conditions and the planting 
objective, two rows of smooth cordgrass are 
occasionally planted.  A two-row planting will 
provide quicker and denser short-term coverage than 
a single-row planting.  If two rows are planted, rows 
should be parallel to each  other and about 5’ apart 
using the same plant spacing  within row as that of a 
single row.  The first row should be placed slightly 
above the mean tide elevatio n and the second row 5’ 
below the first.  Plants within the two rows should be 
staggered on center so that plants alternate between 
spaces. 
 
Interior Plantings: In addition to planting shorelines, 
smooth cordgrass can also  be used along terraces, 
levees, across mudflats and dredge-fill sites.   The 
planting configuration should be designed to provide 
maximum reduction in fetch lengths.   Rows can be 
placed across shallow water exchange points to create 
a passive hydrologic barrier that will slow tidal 
exchange and trap suspended sediments.  Planting 
large areas generally will require a significantly large 
number of plants.  Where applicable, plugs can be 
used and placed in a row-column configuration.  The 
row and plant spacing can va ry from a few feet to 
many, depending on the objective of the planting, the 
target rate for coverage, and available resources. 
 
Planting Methods : When planting trade-gallons, 
transplants should be planted in a dug hole.  Post-
hole diggers, gas drills with modified bits, or any 
other methods of digging are satisfactory.  The 
planting hole should be the same size or only slightly

larger than the root-ball and deep enough so that the 
top of the root-ball is flush or slightly below ground.  
The top of the root-ball should not protrude above 
nor be more than 2” below normal ground.  The 
planting hole should be tightly closed around the 
plant to prevent the plant from wobbling and plants 
should remain erect after planting. 
 
Planting sites where high wave energy is a problem 
may require the addition of a plant anchor.  A plant 
anchor consists of ¼” mild steel re-bar bent into a 
crosier hook (candy-cane  shape) and pushed down 
into the soil so that hook lays across the root-ball, 
pinning it to the ground.  Anchors are generally about 
30” in overall length and will add to the cost of the 
planting.  However, anchors are generally necessary 
at unusually problematic sites to prevent plants from 
washing out. 
 
When planting bare-root plugs, holes need only be 
approximately 3” in diameter and deep enough to 
cover the roots.  Any style of tool that will punch a 
hole this size such as a dibble bar will work.  
Cupping the roots of the plug in hand and pushing 
down into the mud carefully will also work in more 
fluid soils.  There are no plant anchors for plugs, and 
in practice plugs should not be used at any site where 
wave energy is a factor. 
 
Fertilization : There is no clear consensus on the 
effectiveness of fertilizer  when used in saturated 
and/or anaerobic soils.  However, the additional cost 
of fertilizer is a small investment given the overall 
cost involved in vegetative restoration.  High 
nitrogen slow-release fertilizer tablets will add 
approximately .08 to .10 cents to the cost of an 
individual plant. 
 
Slow-release fertilizer tablets are commercially 
available in a range of weights and analyses.  
Recommended tablet weight should be between 15 
and 25 grams and have a nitrogen content of not less 
than 15% or more than 30%.  When using tablets 
with trade-gallon plants, push the tablet into the top 
3” of the root-ball immediately prior to or 
immediately after planting the transplant.  The 
resulting hole should be pinched closed.  When using 
tablets with bare-root plugs, drop the tablet in the 
planting hole prior to inserting the plug. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two known cultiv ars, ‘Vermilion’ and 
‘Bayshore’.  Vermilion was released in 1989 for use 
in the Gulf of Mexico northern basin, and Bayshore 
was released in 1992 for use on the Atlantic Coast.   The Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant 
Materials Program released both. 
 
Plant materials are generally obtained from two 
sources, a donor wetland 
site or commercial 
nurseries.  The use of donor wetlands to obtain young 
plants will eventually affect the health and vigor of 
the donor stand regardless of the care taken in 
frequency, spacing, and location of plant removal.  In 
addition, the removal of plant materials without the 
applicable permits may be in violation of standing 
state and federal regulations.  Removing plant 
materials from donor stands is not recommended. 
 
Nursery-grown stock is generally the most reliable 
and ecologically appropriat e way to obtain plant 
materials.  There are a number of commercial 
nurseries that produce and maintain smooth cordgrass 
transplants.  Trade-gallon and vegetative plugs are 
the two most common sizes, however most nurseries 
will contract for other container sizes.  Smooth 
cordgrass seed is curr ently not commercially 
available. 
 
Vegetative specifications should be used to tailor 
plant material quality and quantity to a specific 
project.  These specifications should include 
acceptable sources, cultivars,  ecotypes, plant size, 
stem height, container specifications, and extent of 
root development.  In addition, other requirements 
such as climatic hardening, salt hardening, 
procedures for transportation and handling are 
commonly included. 
 
A list of commercial wetland plant nurseries and 
assistance in developing pl ant material specifications 
is available from the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service in Louisiana. 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Callaway, J. C., & M. N. Josselyn 1992.   The 
introduction and spread of smooth cordgrass 
(Spartina alterniflora) in south San Francisco Bay .  
Estuaries 15:218-226. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1951.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, D.C. 
 
Linthurst, R. A., & E. D. Seneca 1980.   Dieback of 
salt-water cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora Loisel.) in 
the lower Cape Fear Estuary of North Carolina: An

experimental approach to reestablishment.  Environ. 
Cons.  7:59-66. 
 
Texas A&M University 1997.  Grass images .  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/image/poacr2ba.
htm>.  Bioinformatics Working Group, College 
Station, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000504.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Mike Materne , retired 
USDA, NRCS, Louisiana  State Office, Plant 
Materials, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mike Materne , Agricultural Center, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Edited 18sep00 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 24may06jsp; 080609 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.