Plant Guide
SPALDING’S 
CATCHFLY  
Silene spaldingii  S. Watson 
Plant Symbol = SISP2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program   
 
Figure 1. Spalding’s catchfly.  Photo by C. Menke.  
 
Alternate Names  
Spalding’s campion, Spalding’s silene   
   
Status   
Spalding’s catchfly was listed as threatened by the US 
Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service in 
2001. It is listed in Idaho as threatened (State of Idaho, 
2009) and endangered in Oregon (Oregon Department of 
Agriculture, 2009). In Washington state it is considered 
threatened with a status of S2 (Washington State, 2010), 
and in Montana i t has a rank of S1 (Montana Natural 
Heritage Program, 2010). Natureserve ranks it G2, 
Globally imperiled, with a US national status of N2, and 
Canada national status N1 (Natureserve, 2010). It is listed 
as endangered in Canada (Government of Canada, 2010).   
   
Description   
General : Carnation or pink family (Caryophyllaceae). 
Spalding’s catchfly is a long- lived perennial forb that 
emerges in spring from a woody root crown and dies back 
to below ground level each fall. Plants range from 8 to 30  inches tall w
ith generally one to few yellow -green stems 
per plant. Each stem bears four to seven (up to 12) pairs 
of 2 - 3 inch long, lance -shaped leaves (Hitchcock et al., 
1964). It has swollen nodes where the leaves attach to the 
stem. The plant is covered in dense s ticky hairs that 
frequently trap dust and insects, hence the common name 
catchfly. Flowers have a tubular calyx approximately 0.6 
inches long; the pale white petals extend slightly beyond 
the sepals. Flowers bloom from mid -July through August 
and sometimes  into September. It may remain dormant 
for 3 - 6 consecutive years without emerging. The plant 
has a very large taproot (3 ft or longer).  
   
Distribution :  
Spalding’s catchfly is native to portions of Idaho, 
Montana, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia , 
Canada. It occupies five physiographic regions: the 
Palouse Grasslands in west -central Idaho and southeastern 
Washington; the Channeled Scablands in eastern 
Washington; the Blue Mountain Basins in northeastern 
Oregon; the Canyon Grasslands of the Snake R iver and its 
tributaries in Idaho, Oregon, and Washington; and the 
intermountain valleys of northwestern Montana. There are 
currently 99 known populations of Spalding’s catchfly, 66 
populations are composed of fewer than 100 individuals 
each. Twenty -three  populations contain 100 or more 
individuals apiece, and the 10 largest populations are each 
made up of more than 500 plants (USDI Fish and Wildlife 
Service, 2007). For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
   
Habitat :   
The species occurs in dry to moist grasslands in 
bunchgrass and sagebrush -steppe habitats with Idaho 
fescue and bluebunch wheatgrass being the dominant 
components. Occasionally plants can be found in open 
pine habitats. (USDI Fish and W ildlife Service, 2007).   
   
Adaptation   
Plants can be found from 1900 to 3600 ft in elevation. 
Spalding’s catchfly grows on all aspects but is most often 
encountered on north facing slopes.  
 
The plants prefer sites with deep silt- loam soils 
(Natureserve, 2010).   
   
Establishment   
Spalding’ s catchfly reproduces solely by seed. It does not 
spread by rhizomes or other asexual means. It is partially 
self -compatible (Lesica & Heidel 1996), but its offspring 
are more fit if cross -pollinated (Lesica 1993). Bumblebees 
appear to be the primary polli nator (Lesica and Heidel, 
1996).