Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHIA 
Salvia columbariae  Benth. 
Plant Symbol = SACO6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Sage 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Chia, the Spanish name for  Salvia 
columbariae , is a plant of great economic importance 
to many Native American tribes in California, who 
have long used chia for food and medicinal purposes.   
Historically, chia seeds were a staple food for many 
Pacific coast groups includi ng the Salinan, Costanoan 
and Chumash as well as inland tribes such as the  
Paiute, Maidu, and Kawaiisu.   Chia is one of the first 
plants obtained by humans in Kawaiisu mythology 
(Zigmond 1981).  Chia was regularly cultivated along 
with corn in the fields of the Nahua peoples of 
ancient Mexico.   Salvia columbariae  seeds were used 
by the Chumash on Santa Rosa Island, one of the 
Channel Islands off the coast of Southern California, 
as long as 600 years ago,  as evidenced by radio 
carbon dating of seeds found in pottery jars at burial 
sites there (Clebsch 1997).  Large beds of chia plants 
are reported to bloom in  areas that once were the 
locations of ancient Native American villages 
(Romero 1954).   Chia is an important resource that 
was often managed by native peoples.  The Chumash 
and Cahuilla were among those groups who would 
increase the following year’s harvest by periodically 
burning stands of chia plants (Timbrook et al. 
1982;Bean & Saubel 1972).  
 
Chia seeds are a valuable source of nutrients, protein 
and oil.  When roasted, they have a pleasant, nutlike 
flavor.  The Diegueño took chia seeds on journeys 
where a few seeds kept in the mouth and periodically 
chewed, would keep up their strength (Hedges & 
Beresford 1986).  One tablespoon of chia seed is said 
to be enough to supply a person with 24 hours worth 
of energy.   
 © Charles Webber
California Academy of Sciences @ Calflora 
 
 The seeds were usually harvested by bending the 
stalks over a seed burden or gathering basket and 
beating the seeds out of the prickly, dry heads with a 
seedbeater.  Even though th e seeds are tiny, in this 
way, several quarts could be gathered within a few 
hours.  The Cahuilla tribe of southern California 
would harvest the entire stalk and tie them into 
bundles (Romero 1954).   The bundles were then 
taken to a specially prepared clear, hard area of 
ground where the seeds were separated by thrashing 
the stalks with sticks and bare feet.  Baskets were 
used to fan away the chaff, leaving the seeds to be 
gathered.    
 
After hulling and winnowing, the seeds were stored 
underground for later use or were often parched with 
hot coals or pebbles in baskets or clay trays.  The 
seeds were pulverized in a bedrock mortar into a 
meal that was used to make biscuits, cakes, and a 
mush called  pinole.  A porridge or soup was made by 
mixing the ground seeds with water and then cooking 
in a specially made watertight basket to which hot 
rock or stones were added.  Upon the arrival of wheat 
with the Europeans, the Cahuilla and other native 
peoples continued to grind chia along with the wheat 
berries (Barrow 1978).  Mason (1912) writes that the 
Salinan mixed chia with flour to make “tortillas, 
delicate and agreeable to the taste as if they had 
kneaded them with lard.”  The Diegueño would 
“improve the flavor” of a large quantity of wheat by 
adding only a small amount of chia (Hedges & 
Beresford 1985).   
 
Chia seeds contain a musilagenous substance and 
expand considerably into a gelatinous volume when 
moistened.  An aromatic, minty beverage could be 
made by soaking raw chia seeds in water (Saunders 
1923).  Ground seeds were so aked in water to make a 
refreshing beverage that is said to have high thirst-
quenching properties.  Chia, used in this way, is also 
said to make the alkaline water of the desert 
palatable.

Seeds mixed with water were also used to treat fevers 
(Bocek 1984).  A hot poultice of ground chia seeds 
was placed inside a cloth or bandage and applied to 
infected areas of the body.   Europeans quickly 
adapted medicinal uses of chia; early California 
mission fathers learned how to make an infusion 
from chia seeds to treat feve rs and it is said that chia 
makes the “finest poultice for gunshot wounds” 
(Jepson 1911).   The Costanoan were among the 
many tribes who used chia seeds to remove foreign 
matter or reduce irritation of the eye (Bocek 1984).  
A single to several of the whole seeds were dropped 
into the eye, and rolled around or left in overnight.  
The Cahuilla tribe used chia seeds in this fashion to 
remove sand in the eyes acquired from sandstorms 
encountered after a long day of hunting (Romero 
1954).  Seeds were sometime s mashed with a rock or 
hammer and placed in the  eye overnight (Zigmond 
1981).  The film that resulted from the gelatinous 
seeds in either method absorbed any foreign body or 
irritant and helped to ease inflammation.  Chia seeds 
were often used for ceremonial offerings (Timbrook 
1990).   
 
Other :  Chia is one of the traditional foods that is 
considered useful by resear chers in treating diabetes, 
a disease that afflicts many modern Native 
Americans and may be attributed to the loss of many 
traditional foods (Lowry 1999).   
 
Wildlife :  Chia flowers are an important source of 
nectar for bees and butterf lies.  Many species of 
birds, small mammals, and insects eat the seeds.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Mint family (Lamiaceae).  Chia is native to 
western North America.  Th e plants can vary greatly 
in size depending on moisture availability ranging, in 
both height and diameter, from 3 to 4 cm under very 
dry conditions to 60 cm under optimal conditions.  
The thick, wrinkled leaves  (10 to 15 cm long) are 
dark green and deeply lobed with a thin covering of 
fine, soft, grayish hairs on the upper surface.   Leaves 
grow predominantly from the basal area of the plant 
with smaller leaves growing up the stems.  Several 
stems emerge from the base of the plant, each bearing 
from one to four interrupted (2 to 3 cm apart) button-
like whorls of tiny, tubular  flowers (6-16mm).  The 
pale blue to deep blue flowers have two lips; the  white-tipped lower lip is cleft into three lobes, with 
the central lobe slightly larger in size.  Several 
contrasting leafy, burgundy-colored bracts subtend 
the flower heads.   A spiny tip protrudes from a 
central notch in each bract.  
Each flower results in up 
to 13 tiny, gray to light brown, flat seeds 1.5-2mm in 
length.   
 
Flowers bloom in late spring or early summer, from 
March through June in California.  As the season 
progresses, the blossoms dry and turn from clear blue 
to golden, and remain dry upon their stems.  The tiny 
seeds disperse by shaking out of the dry blossoms.   
 
Distribution : Chia’s native range extends through the 
coastal and inner coast ranges of California from 
Mendocino County in the north to Baja in the south.  
Chia grows throughout southern California and into 
adjacent areas of Nevada, Arizona, Utah, and 
Northwestern Mexico.  Chia was once more common 
in many of its native areas, but its populations have 
declined due to overgrazing, urban development, and 
fire suppression (Timbrook et al. 1982). 
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  Chia is a member of the foothill woodland, 
coastal sage scrub and chaparral communities in 
California, where it sometimes forms extensive 
stands (Bean & Saubel 1972).  It can be found in the 
open, exposed grassy areas of woodlands, in sandy 
washes, dry, open plains, hillsides and gravelly, 
disturbed sites.  It is commonly found at elevations 
below 1200 meters but is known to grow in some 
areas up to 2100 meters (Munz & Keck 1963).    
 
Adaptation 
Chia is adapted to arid conditions and soils of low 
fertility.  It is one of the so-called “fire following” 
species, in that it increases  in abundance after a fire 
(Timbrook et al. 1982).   
 
Establishment 
Annual wild flowers, such as chia, are generally 
planted directly into a prep ared bed or border area.  
Chia requires full sun, good drainage and only 
enough water to become established.   Do not plant 
chia near lawns and other plants that require frequent 
watering.   
 
Seeds may benefit from pretreatment, but this 
treatment may vary depending on the origin of the 
seeds (Emery 1998).  Ask your seed supplier as to 
their recommendations.  Broadcast the chia seeds in

autumn by sprinkling the seeds onto the surface of 
the soil.   Rake the seeds lightly into the soil.  A light 
sprinkling of charate (the charred remains of burned 
plants) over the sown seedbed has been shown to 
increase germination (Emery 1988).  Once 
established, Chia is quite drought tolerant.   The 
plants will tolerate some moisture during the growing 
period but should not be watered frequently.    
Remove weeds as they appear.   
 
If necessary, seeds may be planted in flats in the early 
spring and then transplanted later into a sunny, open 
area.  Fill flats with a light, porous soil.  Appropriate 
soils may be purchased or a homemade combination 
of equal portions of compost, garden loam and sand 
may be used.  Sprinkle the seeds evenly over the 
surface.  Cover with a fine layer of more soil not 
exceeding two times the di ameter of the seed.  
Lightly press the surface to insure contact of the 
seeds with surrounding soil.    Use a fine spray nozzle 
to gently water the flats.   Keep the flats evenly moist 
and do not let them dry out. Reduce watering 
frequency after the seedlings emerge.    
 
Management 
Chia will self-sow freely if the seeds survive 
predation by birds, mice and ants.  Several bee 
species have been observed pollinating chia, however 
it also has the ability to self-pollinate in the absence 
of these insect visitors (Visco & Capon 1970). 
 
Chia hybridizes freely with other  Salvia species, 
including perennial shrubs, such as  S. mellifera 
(Clebsch 1997). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean, L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh (from the 
earth):  Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of 
plants.   Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian 
Reservation.  225 pp.  
 
Bickford, C. & P. Rich 1984.  Vegetation and flora of 
the Landels-Hill Big Creek Reserve, Monterey 
County California.   Second Edition.  Publication No. 
15, Environmental Field Program, University of 
California, Santa Cruz, California.  122 pp.   
 
Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.   Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, CA.  768 pp. 
 
Brusa, B.W. 1975.   The Salinan Indians and their 
neighbors.   Naturgraph Publishers, Inc., Happy 
Camp, CA.  95 pp. 
 
Clebsch, B. 1997.   A book of Salvias:  Sages for 
every garden.   Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  221 
pp.   
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Gardens, 
Santa Barbara, CA.  115 pp.   
 
Epling, C. 1938.   The California salvias: A review of 
Salvia, section Audibertia.   Annals of the Missouri 
Botanical Gardens.  Vol. 25.  Pp 95-152. 
 
Gifford, E.W. 1932.   The Northfork Mono.  
University of California Publications in American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 31.  University of 
California, Berkeley, CA.  Pp. 15-65.   
 
Hanes, T.L. 1990.   Terrestrial vegetation of 
California.   California Native Plant Society Special 
Publication Number 9.  M.G. Barbour & J. Major, 
Editors.  Sacramento, CA.  Pp 417-469.   
 
Hickman, J.D., Editor 1993.   The Jepson manual:  
Higher plants of California.   University of California 
Press, Berkeley, CA.  1400 pp.      
 
Hoover, R.L. 1971.  Food plants of the California 
Indians .  Pacific Discovery Vol. 24, No. 3.  Pp.11-17.  
 
Jepson, W.L. 1911.   A flora of western middle 
California .  Second Edition.  Cunningham, Curtiss & 
Welch, San Francisco, CA.  515 pp.   
 
Lowry, J.L. 1999.   Gardening with a wild heart:  
Restoring California’s native landscapes at home.  
University of California Pr ess, Berkeley, CA.  252 
pp.   
 
Mason, J.A. 1912.   The ethnology of the Salinan 
Indians.   University of California Publications in 
American  Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 10, No. 
4.  Pp 97-240.   
 
Mathews, M.A. 1997.   An illustrated field key to the 
flowering plants of Monterey County and ferns, fern 
allies, and conifers .  California Native Plant Society, 
Sacramento, CA.  401 pp.

Moerman, D.E. 1998  Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Munz, P.A. & D.D. Keck 1963.   A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, CA.  1681 pp. 
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, NY.  425 pp.  
 
Prevost, R., Publisher & Editor 1974.  Nutritional & 
medicinal native plants of California .  Renan Prevost, 
Lemon Grove, CA.  164 pp.   
   
Romero, J.B. 1954.   The botanical lore of the 
California Indians: With side lights on historical 
incidents in California.  Vantage Press, Inc., New 
York, NY.  82 pp.  
 
Saunders, C.F. 1923.   With the flowers and trees in 
California.   Robert M. McBride & Company, New 
York, NY.  286 pp.   
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.   Growing California  native 
plants.    University of California Press, Berkeley, 
CA.  366 pp. 
 
Sparkman, P.S. 1908.   The culture of the Luiseño 
Indians .  University of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 8, No. 4.  
Pp 187-234. 
 
Timbrook, J. 1990   Ethnobotany of Chumash Indians, 
California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany Vol. 44, No. 2.  Pp 
235-253.   
 
Timbrook, J.  1986.   Chia and the Chumash:  A 
reconsideration of sage seeds in Southern California.   
Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology 
Vol. 8, No. 1.  Pp 50-64.   
 
Timbrook, J., J.R. Johnson & D.D. Earle  1982.  
Vegetation burning by the Chumash .  Journal of 
California and Great Basin Anthropology Vol.4, No. 
2. Pp 163-186. 
 
Visco, F.J. & B. Capon  1970   Pollination 
mechanisms in three species of   Salvia native to 
Southern California.   Aliso Vol. 7, No. 2.  Pp 231-
242.   
 
Walters, D.R., M. McLeod, A.G. Meyer, D.Rible, R 
O. Baker, & L. Farwell 1977.   Native plants: A viable 
option.   Special Publication No. 3,  California Native 
Plant Society, Berkeley, CA.  213 pp. 
 
Webber, C. 1998.   Salvia columbariae.   Calflora & 
Digital Library Project, University of California, 
Berkeley.  [Online]. 
Available:
http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?s
eq_num=16350&one=T.  [27 September 2001].   
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah.  102 
pp.   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department,  
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California  
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp;  09jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.