Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EGGPLANT 
Solanum melongena  L. 
Plant Symbol = SOME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania 
 
Caution: Eggplant leaves are toxic and should only 
be used externally. 
 
Alternate Names 
Aubergine, birenghenas (Chamorro), brinjal, paegani 
(Tuvalu), gaigani, jiloei ro, melongene,melanzana, 
baigan, gilo’, berenjena, badinjan, Italian eggplant, 
pea apple, sasumber, terong, garden egg, mad apple 
 
Uses 
Human Food : Eggplant fruit is usually baked, 
sautéed, stuffed, cut into strips or cubes and fried.  It 
can be baked, stewed, fried, or added to soups, 
curries etc.  It is a good  source of vitamin C and 
potassium.  Expansive information is available 
through the links for this species on its PLANTS 
Plant Profile. 
 
Ethnobotanic : It has been used as an antidote to 
poisonous mushrooms (Duke & Ayensu 1985).  It is 
bruised with vinegar and has been used as a poultice 
for cracked nipples, abscesses and hemorrhoids. 
 
The leaves are narcotic and toxic.  A decoction is 
applied to discharging sores and internal 
hemorrhages.  A soothing and emollient poultice for 
the treatment of burns, abscesses, cold sores and 
similar conditions can be made from the leaves.  
 
The ashes of the peduncle are used in the treatment of  intestinal hemorrhages, piles and toothache.  A 
decoction of the root is an astringent. 
 
The fruit helps to lower blood cholesterol levels and 
is suitable as part of a diet to help regulate high blood 
pressure (Chiej 1984). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Eggplant is an annual in temperate zones 
and perennial in the tropics.  This plant is a warm-
season frost-tender perennial that can be grown as an 
annual.  Eggplants usually grow from 2-4 feet tall 
with many branches and large, rangy leaves.  
Eggplant leaves are, altern ate and lobed, with the 
underside of most cultivars covered with dense wool-
like hairs.  The flowers are violet-colored, star-
shaped, and bloom either as a solitary or in clusters of 
two or more.  These characteristics give the plant an 
ornamental look.   
 
 Peggy Greb, Courtesy of USDA ARS 
 
The fruit can vary in shape from oval to round and 
long to oblong.  Most growers and consumer are 
accustom to seeing the mature fruit that is shiny

purplish black, oval or pear shape.  However, the 
mature fruit can be red, yellowish-white, or green. 
The purplish black eggplants can be bitter with thick 
tough skins and fibrous flesh or mild-sweet with thin 
tender skin and non-fibrous flesh.  The white skin 
eggplant is firmer, drier and milder tasting but has a 
very thick skin that must be peeled prior to eating.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Normally, transplants are used to establish eggplants 
in the field.  Seeds germinate in 5 days at 86 degrees 
F, but may require up to 13 days at 68 degrees F.  
Transplants require 6 to 8 weeks growth at daytime 
temperatures of 70 to 80 degrees F and night time 
temperatures of 65 to 70  degrees F to be ready for 
field planting after all danger of frost is past.   
 
Careful watering is necessary at the time of 
transplanting because  transplants are very sensitive to 
water stress.  Plants are typically established in 30-to-
36-inch rows with 18 to 24 inches between plants.  
Eggplant transplants are very responsive to the use of 
black plastic mulch and drip irrigation.  This process 
provides warmer soil temperatures in the spring, 
protection from weeds, and consistent water 
availability.  This plastic mulch along with irrigation 
will allow growers to grow  double rows of eggplant 
within the same row. 
 
Eggplant grown from seed in small farms should be 
seeded 4 to 6 weeks before the plants are to be set 
out.  Commercial mixtures for starting seeds are 
available.  Seeds are planted by placing 2 seeds per 
inch in rows 4-6 inches apart a depth of 1/2 inch in a 
medium that is kept moist and at a temperature of 75° 
to 85 °F.  Be sure the soil does not dry out during the 
germination period.  Once the seeds germinate keep 
the soil moist to the touch.  Over watering will cause 
damping-off.  
 
Management  
Small producer and gardeners find it more convenient 
to buy their eggplants as transplants rather than to 
grow their own from seed  due to insufficient space, 
inadequate growing conditions, lack of time, or 
because they only need a few plants.  On the other 
hand, some varieties are not locally available as 
transplants so one has no choice but to grow their 
own from seed.  
 
Transplanting : When purchasing transplants, select 
those that are sturdy, dark green in color and not yet  in bloom.  Leaves should be fully expanded and free 
of diseases and insects.  Transplants grown in 
individual containers may cost more, but are usually 
worth the added expense, because their roots are 
disturbed less when they are transplanted in the field.  
 
Transplant young seedlings into growing containers 
when the stems have straig
htened and the first true 
leaves have opened.  This is usually 15 to 20 days 
after the seed was sown, but may be longer at lower 
temperatures.  The young plants should be exposed to 
full sunlight if possible.  The best temperatures for 
growing transplants are from 65° to 75°F during the 
day and 60° to 70°F at night.  Growing the young 
transplants in a hot bed or cold frame works well. 
 
Hardening off the plants enables them to withstand 
the planting shock.  Start the hardening off process 
10 days to 2 weeks before planting them in the 
garden.  Begin by moving the plants in their 
containers outdoors to a shady spot (a cold frame 
works well for this purpose).  Move the plants into 
sunlight for short periods each day, increasing the 
length of exposure gradually.  Reduce the watering 
frequency to slow growth, but don't allow the plants 
to wilt.  Don't put tender seedlings outdoors on windy 
days.  Once the plants are hardened off and the 
danger of a frost is passed, they can be planted in the 
field. 
 
Planting : The eggplant is a warm season crop and is 
very tender to frost.  It can even be injured by periods 
of cold temperature above freezing, and is more 
sensitive to low temperatures than either tomatoes or 
peppers.  The plants are usually set 2 to 3 feet apart in 
rows 3 to 4 feet apart and in full sun.  
 
Site preparation: Till soil to a depth of 6-10 inches to 
allow for root development.  In areas that have 
compacted soil till or subsoil to a depth of 18 to 24 
inches to destroy the hard pan.  Growers with small 
plot can prepare the soil with the use of a tiller or by 
spading.  Soil preparation should be preformed in the 
fall after the harvest season or in the spring before 
planting.  Soil should not be worked while it is wet.  
 
Plant eggplant in the full sun.  Those growing in 
partial shade will produce less than optimum yields 
and will take longer for the fruit to ripen. These 
young seedlings will perform better with protection 
from the wind.  The site should have fertile, well 
drained soil.  If possible, avoid planting where 
eggplant, tomatoes, potatoes, or peppers were planted 
the previous year.  All of these can be susceptible to 
and harbor similar disease problems.

Eggplant is a heavy feeder and therefore may need 
extra fertilizer for a good crop.  A soil test may be 
necessary to determine the fertility of your soil.  If no 
soil test, apply 2 to 3 lbs of a complete fertilizer (i.e. 
10-10-10, 6-12-12, or 9-16-16) per 100 feet of row. 
This application should be completed in two separate 
operations by incorporating one half of the fertilizer 
at the time of planting and the remaining fertilizer 
after the first fruit appears.  Some soils may require a 
¼ cup of starter fertilizer (high in phosphorus) 
solution be poured around each newly transplanted 
seedling to help stimulate growth.  A side dressing of 
¼ cup of fertilizer incorporated in a 2-foot circle 
around the base of the plant immediately after 
flowering will be beneficial on soils low in nitrogen. 
Do not over-fertilize.  
 
Watering : Eggplant need generous moisture at all 
times. One inch of water each week is a minimum.  
This may vary, however, due to air temperature, 
wind, soil type, rainfall, and whether or not a mulch 
is used.  
 
Sandy soils require more frequent watering.  Heavy 
soakings at weekly intervals are better than many 
light soakings as light, frequent watering promote 
shallow root systems.  Mulching will reduce water 
loss from the soil.  
 
Mulches help keep weeds down, reduce water loss 
and stabilize soil temperatures.  Inorganic mulches, 
such as polyethylene and aluminum, are available in 
many farm and garden stores.  Organic mulches, such 
as straw, leaves or grass clippings, can also be used.  
Organic mulches should be at least 2 inches, and 
preferably 3 to 4 inches, deep.  Mulching too early in 
the season with organic mulches will keep the soil 
cool, resulting in slow growth, poor fruit set, and 
shallow rooting.  When mulches are used all fertilizer 
and drip irrigation must be applied before applying 
the mulch unless fertigation is practiced. 
 
Weed Control : Weeds compete with eggplant for 
sunlight, nutrients and water.  In small plantings, 
weeds are best controlled with cultivation or 
mulches; however in large plantings, herbicides can 
be used.  
 
Harvesting : Eggplant fruits are harvested from the 
time they are one-third grown to full size.  However, 
removing the fruit before the flesh becomes soft and 
the seeds begin to harden.  Over-mature fruits that 
have passed the prime stage for eating become 
spongy, the seeds harden and darken, and the fruit 
surface becomes dull.  Fruits  can be snapped from the 
plant, but less damage usually occurs if they are  clipped with a sharp knife or scissors.  The short stem 
that attaches the fruit to the stalk is often covered 
with sharp spines so gloves may be necessary when 
harvesting.  The harvested fruits are delicate; be 
careful when handling them.  
 
Staking may be necessary later in the season as the 
number and size of the fruit 
increase.  Rain, wind and 
irrigation can cause the branches to break or droop.  
Fruit touching the ground may spoil. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Eggplant are subject to a number of problems, 
including diseases, insects and those brought on by 
weather and other environmental factors.  
Diseases of eggplant include  seed rot, damping-off, 
anthracnose, late blight, alternaria leaf spot and 
verticillium wilt.  Seed treatment and proper growing 
conditions can reduce seed rot and damping-off.  
Verticillium wilt is best controlled by long term 
rotations with non-related crops that are not 
susceptible to wilt, and by planting in well-drained 
soil.  
 
Insects can also cause damage to eggplant.  
Cutworms may feed on new leaves or cut stems on 
small plants.  Spider mites can be a problem during 
hot weather.  Flea beetles, which chew small holes in 
the leaves of eggplant, can be severe in some years.  
The Colorado potato beetle can also cause severe 
damage if left uncontrolled.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Nitta/Molokai’ hybrid is a popular eggplant 
( Solanum melongena ) that is grown on Guam.  The 
Department of Horticulture of University of Hawaii 
released the cultivar in 1995.  The hybrid produces 
high quality fruits with long fruit length, deep 
maroon color, and longer shelf life.   
 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist for advice on cultivars for your area.  Also, 
check the links at the bottom of the PLANTS Plant 
Profile for this species. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Burrows, G.E. & R.J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic plants of 
North America . Iowa State University Press, Ames. 
 
Chevallier. A. 1996. The encyclopedia of medicinal 
plants. 
Dorling Kindersley, London. 
 
Chittendon, F. 1956. RHS dictionary of plants plus 
Supplement. 
Oxford University Press, UK. 
 
Chiej. R. 1984. Encyclopaedia of  Medicinal Plants. 
MacDonald, Edinburgh. 
  
Duke. J. A. and Ayensu. E. S. 1985. Medicinal plants 
of China.
 Reference Publications, Inc., Algonac, 
Michigan. 
 
Duke, J.A. 2007. Dr. Duke’s phytochemical and 
ethnobotanical database. USDA ARS GRIN, 
Beltsville, Maryland. Accessed: 070214. 
<http://www.ars-grin.gov/duke/> 
 
Huxley. A. 1992. The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening. 
 MacMillan Press, UK. 
  
Plants for a Future. 2007 . Solanum melongena L. 
Accessed: 070214. 
<http://www.pfaf.org/database/plants.php?Solanum+
melongena> 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007.  PLANTS database. Accessed: 
070214. National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana. http://plants.usda.gov. 
  
Prepared By 
Lincoln Moore , Formerly USDA NRCS NPDC, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore , Formerly USDA NRCS NPDC, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 070214 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.