Plant Guide
TALL BLACKTIP 
RAGWORT  
Senecio atratus  Greene  
Plant Symbol = SEAT  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen  Plant Materials 
Center   
Tall blacktip ragwort. Photo by  Barry  Breckling  ©  2009 . 
Alternate Names  
Black groundsel  
Slide butterweed  
Uses  
Tall blacktip ragwort has been seeded and transplanted 
into restoration and reclamation projects at upper 
elevation sites in the Rocky Mountains. It has value as a  food source f
or insects. Due to its toxic properties, it is 
not a good source of forage for livestock or game animals.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endanger ed species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Tall blacktip 
ragwort is a perennial, subrhizomatous  forb from a 
branching caudex. The plants have an erect growth habit 
and reach a mature height of 20 to 80 cm ( 8 to 32 in). The 
leaves and stems are densely hairy causing the herbage to 
appear grayish. The leaves are oblanceolate,  8 to 30 cm (3 
to 12 in) l ong and 1 to 4 cm ( 0.4 to 1.6 in) wide. The leaf 
margins are dentate to nearly entire. The inflorescence is a 
compact cluster of 15 to 60 floral heads. The floral heads 
are 6 to 8 mm (0.24 to 0.31  in) in  height and 3 to 6 mm 
( 0.12 to 0.24 in) wide with  yellow ray and disk flowers. 
The bracts are green to brownish with black tips. The fruit 
is an achene bearing a white pappus (Welsh et al 2003).  
Distribution : Tall blacktip ragwort is found in the Rocky 
Mountain regions of Utah, Wyoming, Colorado and New 
M exico.   For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Tall blacktip ragwort is found in montane plant 
communities from 2,400 to 3,600 m ( 7,800 to 11,800 ft). 
It is commonly associated wit h aspen, spruce-fir, mixed 
conifer and tall forb communities.  
Adaptation  
Tall blacktip ragwort is adapted to sites receiving 18 or 
more inches  (457 mm)  of mean annual precipitation.  
Establishment  
A high altitude seeding in Rocky Mountain National Park 
show ed high levels of establishment and survivorship 6 
years after seeding (Harrington 1946).  
Management  
Tall blacktip ragwort has been used as a minor component 
of seed mixtures.   Management strategies should be based 
on  the  key species in the established pla nt community.  
Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Many members of the genus Senecio  are known to 
contain toxic alkaloids  which can cause liver disease n 
livestock and humans (Burrows and Tyrl  2001). Tall