Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC WILLOW 
Salix lucida Muhl. ssp. 
lasiandra  (Benth.) E. Murr. 
Plant Symbol = SALUL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
yellow willow, red willow, black willow, whiplash 
willow, golden willow, caudate willow, western 
black willow, waxy willow,  western shining willow, 
Salix lasiandra  (SALA5) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The inner bark was dried, ground into 
a powder, and then added to flour for making bread.  
The stems and bark were used in basket making 
(Moerman 1998).  The native Americans used the 
stems for bow making and the bark for fabric making 
and tea. 
 
Medicinal : Willows produce salicin, which is closely 
related to acetylsalicyclic acid, commonly known as 
aspirin.  Various preparations from willows are used 
to treat stomachache, sore  throats, colds, diarrhea, 
and dandruff.  The inner bark is haemostatic and has 
been applied externally to bleeding cuts (Moerman 
1998). 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Pacific willow is an 
excellent species for use in  landscaping.  It provides 
food and cover for many w ildlife species.  Deer and 
elk browse the young shoots of the plant.  It is also a 
preferred food of mouse and cattle. 
 
Agroforestry : Salix lasiandra  is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of 
winter storms and reduce home heating costs during 
the winter months. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 Charles Webber © California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Description 
General : Pacific willow ( Salix lasiandra) is a tall, 
slender, large shrub or small tree, fifteen to forty-five 
feet high (McMinn & Maino 1963).  The leaves are 
long, thin, shiny, five to ten centimeters long with 
finely 
toothed edges.  The fruits are thick catkins that are 
hairless, light reddish-brown, and six to eight 
millimeters long.  The bark is furrowed with broad 
flat scaly plates. 
 
Distribution : Pacific willow is native along stream 
banks from British Columbia southward to southern 
California and New Mexico (McMinn & Maino 
1963).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Salix lasiandra  is a fast growing but short-lived tree.  
This species prefers a damp heavy soil but will 
succeed in most soils.  This  species is often found in 
riverbanks, floodplains, lakeshores, and wet 
meadows often standing in quiet river backwaters 
(MacKinnon, Pojar, & Coupe' 1992). It grows best in 
a sunny position scattered at low elevations along 
major rivers (Ibid.). 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seeds must be sown as soon 
as they are ripe in the sp ring.  Seeds are viable for 
only a few days and the maximum storage period is 
four to six weeks with germination rates dropping off 
fast after ten days at room temperature (Dirr & 
Heuser 1987).  Willow seeds have no dormancy and 
germinate within twelve to twenty-four hours after

falling on moist ground (Ibid.).  Seedbeds must be 
kept moist until seedlings are well established. 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Hardwood cuttings can 
be collected and prepared for insertion, normally 
from November through March.  Cuttings seven to 
ten inches long and a half to one inch thick are 
initially stuck close and dug after one year (Dirr & 
Heuser 1987).  Willows have a rooting percentage of 
ninety to one-hundred percent and the rooting 
number is not promoted by rooting hormones (Ibid.). 
 
Management 
Pacific willow is used to colonize disturbed sites for 
streambank stabilization projects.  Cuttings are used 
for revegetating disturbed riparian areas to extract 
soil moisture and high amounts of carbohydrates. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available from wetland plant nurseries within its 
range.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Howell, J.T. 1949.   Marin Flora: manual of the 
flowering plants and ferns of Marin County, 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley 
& Los Angeles, California. 
 
MacKinnon, A., J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of the northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine 
Publishing, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook No. 410.  
Washington, D.C. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore  
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp;  09jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.