Plant Guide
SAGO PONDWEED 
Stuckenia pectinata (L.) Böerner  
Plant Symbol = STPE15  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
 
Figure 1. Sago pondweed. Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA NRCS. 1992. 
Western wetland flora: Field office guide to plant species. West Region, 
Sacramento. Courtesy of USDA NRCS  Wetland Science Institute.  
 
Alternate Names 
Previously known as  Potomogeton pectinat us and 
Stuckenia pectinatus,  the currently accepted name  is 
Stuckenia pectinata.  
 
  Coleogeton pectinatus ; Potomogeton interruptus ; 
Potomogeton latifolius ; Potomogeton flabellatus ; 
Potomogeton columbianus ; broadleaf  pondweed; duck 
grass; eelgrass, fennel pondweed; foxtail; Indian grass, 
old -fashioned bay grass; pondgrass; potato moss; wild 
celery; fennel -leaved water milfoile; poker grass; pochard 
grass; string weed   Uses
 
Wildlife : Waterfowl extensively use and rely on sago 
pondweed as a food source (Kantrud, 1990).  The whole 
plant can be consumed, and parts are utilized by diving, 
dabbling, whistling ducks, many types of geese, swans, 
coots (Kantrud, 1990) and the long- billed dowitcher 
(Sperry, 1940).  
 
Bioremediation  and bioindication: May be used to 
suppress phytoplankton blooms by taking up phosphorus 
from the water (Stewart and Davies, 1986).  May also be 
used to monitor heavy metal pollution in rivers (Whitton 
et al., 1981) . 
 
Erosion control : The wave dampening action of sago 
pondweed can be used for erosion control of shores and 
dams ( Kantrud, 1990).  
 
Status  
Sago pondweed is a threatened plant in New Hampshire.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available f rom the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Sago pondweed is considered a nuisance weed or noxious 
weed  in som e waters that are used for recreational 
purposes (Harrison, 1962; Kantrud, 1990) and irrigation 
canals (Yeo, 1965; Kantrud, 1990).  
 
Description  
General : Pondweed Family (Potomogetonaceae).  Sago 
pondweed is an aquatic herbaceous plant up to 1 m tall 
(Bare , 1979).  Sago pondweed is generally completely 
submersed except the reproductive spike that peaks above 
the water that flowers June –  September (Larson, 1993).  
It is nearly unbranched at the base, becoming freely 
branched towards the top (Larson, 1993).   The leaves are 
filiform to threadlike being  2 -12 cm long and between 0.2 
-  1.5 cm wide, with stipules fused to the blade being up to 
2/3 as long as the leaf blade (Bare, 1979; Larson, 1993).  
The inflorescence is a spike with 2 -6 unevenly spaced