Plant Guide
SORGHUM 
Sorghum bicolor  (L.) Moench  
Plant Symbol = SOBI2  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Tucson Plant Materials 
Center   
 
Flowering sorghum seed head and vegetation  in Tucson, Arizona . 
(Photo by Jonathan Walther , USDA-NRCS,  Tucson  Plant Materials 
Center)   
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common Names :  sweet sorghum, sorgo 
forrajero  (Spanish) , durra (Africa) , guinea corn, black 
amber, chicken corn, shattercane,  wild cane, broomcorn, 
grain sorghum, forage sorghum,  Sudangrass  
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:   
Sorghum vulgare Pers ., 
Andropogon sorghum (L.). Brot. ,  
Sorghum  bicolor  (L.) Moench ssp. arundinaceum  (Desv.) 
de Wet & Harlan,  
Sorghum  bicolor  (L.) Moench ssp. bicolor ,  
Sorghum  bicolor  (L.) Moench ssp. drummondii  (Nees ex 
Steud.) de Wet & Harlan   Uses
 
Cover Crop :  Sorghum is used as a drought tolerant, 
summer annual rotational cover crop either alone or 
seeded in a  warm season cover crop mixture.  There are 
multiple cultivars of sorghum available for use as a cover 
crop including sorghum -S udangrass  hybrids ( Sorghum 
bicolor  x  Sorghum bicolor var. sudanen se).  However, all 
sorghum and S udangrass-related species  have the 
potential to  smother weeds, suppress nematode s pecies, 
and penetrate compacted subsoil ( Clark, 2007).  Sorghum 
cover crops can also be used as livestock forage in a 
cropping system (Magdoff and Van Es, 2009).  Sorghum -
S udangrass hybrids c an produce up to 4,000- 5,000 
pounds  of dry matter per acre ( Clark, 2007). 
 
Soil Compaction:  Sorghums and sorghum -S udangrass 
hybrids have extensive root systems that can penetrate up 
to 8 feet  into th e soil and e xtend more than 3 feet  away 
from the stem (Shoemaker  and Bransby , 2010) . These 
aggressive root systems al leviate subsoil compaction. To 
encourage more significant root growth, sorghum stalks 
should be cut at least once during the growing season 
when  they reach 3 –4 feet tall (Clark, 2007).    
 
Weed  Management:  Sorghums are quick growing grasses 
that have the po tential to shade out and/or smother weed 
populations w hen planted at a high density. In addition, 
r oot exudates of sorghum have been shown to reduce the 
growth of weeds such as velvet leaf, thorn apple, redroot 
pigweed, crabgrass, yellow foxtail and barnyardgrass 
(Stapleton et al., 2010) . Sorghum  is also recommended 
for control of nutsedge infestation s (Clark, 2007).  
 
One of the most studied root exudates of sorghum is the 
compound sorgoleone. Sorgoleone is produced 
exclusively by sorghum species and suppr esses the 
growth of many  plant species, but it is  most active on 
small seeded species  (Dayan et al ., 2010). Sorgoleone 
activity in the soil is similar to the activity of a pre -plant 
incorporated herbicide. Detectable levels of sorgoleone 
have been measured up to seven weeks after incorporation  
(Dayan et al ., 2010).    
 
Root exudates also have the potential to harm annual and 
perennial crop species such as tomato, lettuce,  and 
broccoli. However, researchers in California found that 
the harm ful effects of sorghum root exudates are less 
persistent when sorghum residues are shredded and/or 
incorpor ated into the soil (Stapleton, 2010).    
 
Pest Management: Sorghum -Sudangrass  hybrids have 
been reported to inhibit  some species of nematode s in 
subse quent  crops. The suppressive activity of the hybrids