Plant Guide
TANSY RAGWORT 
Senecio jacobaea L .   
Plant Symbol = SEJA  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Montana  State Office  
 
Tansy ragwort flowers.  Photo by Michael Shephard,  USDA Forest 
Service, available from Bugwood.org
  
 
Caution:  T his plant may be weedy or invasive.
   
 
Alternate Names  
staggerwort, stinking willie .     
 
Uses  
Tansy ragwort exceeds the 1975 U.S. National Research 
Council protein and digestibili ty requirements for sheep 
for which it has been suggested as good summer feed.  It 
is a good bio- monitor of iron, manganese and zinc in 
atmospheric pollutants.   
 
Status  
Tansy ragwort is a non -native, invasive terrestrial forb 
listed as noxious, prohibited , or banned in nine states.    
 
Weediness  
This plant may be weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state  natural resource, or
 
state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Additional weed information is available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  Consult 
other related web sites on the Plant Profile for this species 
for further info rmation.  
  
Description  
Tansy ragwort is a winter annual, biennial, or short -lived 
perennial commonly growing between 8 -36 inches (20- 80 
centimeters) tall, but sometimes to heights greater than 6 
feet (175 -200 centimeters) under optimal conditions.  
Rigi d stems grow singly or in groups from an upright 
caudex with only the upper half of the stems branching at 
the inflorescence.  Tansy ragwort additionally perennates 
via fragments of the numerous (50- 100/crown) soft, 
fleshy roots that grow primarily horizon tally and 
penetrate the soil to a maximum depth of 12 inches (30 
centimeters).   
    
Rosettes, either seedling or root bud in origin, are formed 
from distinctive stalked basal leaves  2.7 -7.9 inches (7 -20 
centimeters) long, deeply and pinnately lobed with o vate, 
obovate, or narrow coarsely -toothed segments.  Leaves 
are either glabrous or with loose wooly down on the 
underside, especially during early development.  Rosette 
leaves generally die back at or before flowering.  Stem 
leaves are deeply bi - or tri -pi nnatifid, arranged alternately 
on the stem and are reduced in size higher on the stem.  
Middle and upper stem leaves lack a petiole and slightly 
clasp the stem.   
    
Bright yellow, showy flowers arise only on the pedicel 
ends; outer pedicels are progressiv ely longer than inner 
pedicels and form flat - or round- topped, dense and 
compact corymbs.  Capitula 12 -25 millimeters in diameter 
and numbering 20- 60 per corymb have 13 dark -tipped 
bracts 3 -4 millimeters long, and are composed of both ray 
and disc florets.   There are 13 achene producing ray 
florets with rays 8 -2 millimeters long.  Disc florets are 
numerous and produce both pollen and achenes.  The 
number of capitula and achenes produced per plant is 
highly variable.  
 
Single seeds are contained within each  achene; achenes 
produced from ray florets shed their pappus, are glabrous, 
and have a thick pericarp, whereas achenes produced 
from disc florets retain their pappus, are pubescent with 
short hairs (trichomes) along prominent ribs and are 
lighter in weight  than ray achenes.  The pappus, 
composed of numerous white 'hairs' 6 millimeters in 
length, is attached to the
 top of the achene; its 
resemblance to a white beard explains the origin of the 
genus name,  Senecio, derived from  the Latin senex for 
"old" or "old man".