Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVERLEAF 
NIGHTSHADE  
Solanum elaeagnifolium Cav. 
Plant Symbol = SOEL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office and the National Plant Data Center 
 
Alternate Names 
whiteweed, trompillo, white horsenettle 
 
Uses 
Caution: Poisonous plant.  Like most plants in the 
nightshade genus, silver-leaf nightshade is poisonous 
to cattle, but rarely consumed.   Solanum is a huge 
genus with 1,200-1,800 species worldwide, but only 
20 are found in Texas (all poisonous).  The green 
portions of its domestic cousin, the potato, are also 
poisonous.  Wildlife value of this plant is minimal. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Nightshade Family (Solanaceae).  Solanum 
elaeagnifolium, is a deep-rooted, native perennial, 
which rarely reaches a height  of more than 3 feet.  
Silver-leaf nightshade gets its name from the short, 
white or silvery pubescence  (hairs or fuzz) on the  leaves and stems.  This plant is found throughout 
Texas.  Plants growing in humid regions do not 
normally have spines or prickles, while those found 
in arid regions are more commonly prickly.  Leaves 
are alternate and entire.  
Leaf margins are normally 
wavy.  Flowers are typical of the nightshade family 
(potatoes, peppers, and tomatoes).   Solanum is the 
genus of the domestic potato. 
 
Solanum dimidiatum  (western horse-nettle) is 
somewhat similar, but does not have the velvety 
appearance.  Vegetatively,  Croton capitatus (wooly 
croton, doveweed, goatweed ), resembles silverleaf 
nightshade, though  Croton is never armed.  Unlike 
nightshade,  Croton is very intolerant of shade. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
Distribution 
This species is known from Washington and 
California to Maryland and Florida.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Silver-leaf nightshade is found on upland 
sites and appears to prefer loamy, droughty soils, but 
is found on virtually all soil types, except for deep 
sands.  It is shade tolerant, becoming quite abundant 
under trees and beside farm buildings.  Because the 
plant is poisonous and avoided by livestock, it tends 
to become more prevalent in overgrazed areas. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Davis, L. 2000.   Texas plant fact sheet: Solanum 
elaeagnifolium .  USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches 
Technical Office #2, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  001206.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Prepared By 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lee Davis 
USDA, NRCS, Nacogdoches Technical Office #2, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 Edited 21may01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.