Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
ELDERBERRY  
Sambucus nigra L. ssp. 
canadensis  (L.) R. Bolli 
Plant Symbol = SANIC4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Arizona elderberry, American elder, sweet elder, wild 
elder, flor sauco, tree of music, Danewort, Walewort, 
New Mexican elderberry, velvet-leaf elder, hairy blue 
elderberry, and dwarf elde r.  Taxonomically, there 
have been recent changes in this elderberry species.  
It was previously divided into  Sambucus coriacea, 
Sambucus orbiculata , Sambucus velutina , and 
Sambucus caerulea  (Munz 1968).  This species is 
known in some floras as  Sambucus mexicana. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Only the blue or purple berries of 
elderberry are edible.  Edib le berries and flower are 
used for medicine, dyes for basketry, arrow shafts, 
flute, whistles, clapper sticks, and folk medicine.  
The active alkaloids in elderberry plants are 
hydrocyanic acid and sambucine.  Both alkaloids will 
cause nausea so care should be observed with this 
plant.  Elderberries are high in Vitamin C.  
The red 
berries of other species are toxic and should not be 
gathered. 
 
The wood is hard and has been used for combs, 
spindles, and pegs, and the hollow stems have been 
fashioned into flutes and blowguns.   
 
Elderberries are quite edible.  The blue or purple 
berries are gathered and made into elderberry wine, 
jam, syrup, and pies.  The entire flower cluster can be 
dipped in batter and fried while petals can be eaten 
raw or made into a fragrant and tasty tea. The flowers 
add an aromatic fl avor and lightness to pancakes or 
fritters. 
 
The elderberry is of well-known value to the Indians 
of North America and the many purposes it serves 
(Barrow 1967).  Elderberry is highly prized by both 
Spaniards and Cahuillas.  Throughout the months of 
July and August the small clusters of berries are 
gathered in large quantities.  These clusters are dried 
carefully on the drying floor and preserved in 
considerable amounts.  When wanted, they are 
cooked into a rich sauce that needs no sweetening.  A 
Cahuilla family during this season of the year will 
subsist largely on these messes of "sauco."  
Frequently, the elderberry was so greatly enjoyed that 
families would live for weeks on little else.  Many 
were dried for use in the winter, and were either re-
cooked or eaten raw.  Elderberries are still highly 
prized for food by modern Indian people.  
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Elderberry twigs and fruit  are employed in creating 
dyes for basketry.  These st ems are dyed a very deep 
black by soaking them for a week or so in a wash 
made from the berry stems of the elderberry 
(Barrows 1967).  The Cahuilla split basketry 
materials from the aromatic sumac ( Rhus trilobata).  
 
Elderberry branches were used to make the shaft of 
arrows.  Flutes and whistles were constructed by 
boring holes into stems hollowed out with hot sticks. 
Clapper sticks were made by splitting the stem and 
clapping the two halves against each other. Clapper 
sticks were used ceremonially in the round-house to 
accompany singing and danc ing. The pith of the 
stems was used as tinder, and the stem itself was 
employed as a twirling stick for starting the fire. 
Hollowed-out elderberry st ems can be made into 
squirt guns.  
 
In the middle ages elderberry was considered a Holy 
Tree, capable of restoring good health, keeping good 
health, and as an aid to longevity. 
 
Fruits of elderberry are ga thered from the wild for 
wine, jellies, candy, pies, and sauces. The plants are 
commercially cultivated for fruit production in

Oregon.  Sambucus canadensis and  S. nigra have 
long been used in the same way, and cultivars of both 
have been developed.  All parts of the elderberry 
plant are considered to be  a valuable healing plant in 
many folk medicine traditions (Hutchens 1991, 
Walker et al. 1993; Barrett et al. 1933; Clarke 1977). 
Elderberry flowers contai n flavenoids and rutin, 
which are known to improve immune function, 
particularly in combination with vitamin “C.”   The 
flowers also contain tannins, which account for its 
traditional use to reduce bleeding, diarrhea, and 
congestion. 
 
The flowers are the mildest part of the plant and 
prepared as a tea, are used to break dry fevers and 
stimulate perspiration, aid headache, indigestion, 
twitching eyes, dropsy, rheumatism, appendix 
inflammation, bladder or kidney infections, colds, 
influenza, consumption (bleeding in lungs), and is 
helpful to newborn babies (Hutchens 1991).  Used as 
a wash, the flowers or leav es are good for wounds, 
sprains, and bruises, as well as for sores on domestic 
animals.  The leaves, which are stronger, have a 
slightly laxative property.  Applied externally, leaves, 
flowers, bark and twigs ar e excellent as a poultice, 
mixed equally with chamomile, for soreness, 
inflammations, joint stiffness, and to reduce the 
swelling of bee stings.  The flowers and berries, 
employed as a diuretic, can aid arthritis and 
rheumatism.  Steeped in water, the flowers are used 
externally to aid in complexion beauty, tone and 
soften the skin, and lighten freckles or spots.  The 
berry juice made into salve aids burns and scalds.  
The juice taken internally will act as a purgative. 
 
Livestock : Elderberry is a useful range plant for 
domestic livestock, but is not equally palatable 
during all seasons.  It is usually receives limited 
browsing in the spring and  to a much greater extent 
in the late summer and fall.  The leaves are eagerly 
devoured after the first heavy frost in the fall.  
Because many branches are beyond the reach of the 
animals, utilization is less destructive.  Browse 
rating: Good for goats; good to fair for sheep; good to 
poor for deer; fair for cattle; and fair to poor for 
horses (Sampson and Jesperson 1981). 
 
Wildlife : Structurally complex riparian vegetation 
communities provide many different habitats and 
support a diverse array of  animal species.  Different 
groups of animals occupy or use the different layers 
of vegetation, and this multi-story arrangement is 
often present nowhere else  in the arid landscapes.  
Canopies of plants growing on stream banks provide 
shade, cooling stream water, while roots stabilize and  create overhanging banks, providing habitat for fish 
and other aquatic organisms. 
 
Game birds, squirrels and other rodents, and several 
kinds of browsers also feed on the fruit or foliage of 
elderberry.  Bears love to 
eat the elderberry fruits 
while deer, elk, and moose browse on the stems and 
foliage.  The elderberries are important sources of 
summer food for many kinds of songbirds.  For 
example, the western bluebird, indigo bunting, 
common house finch, red-shafted flicker, ash-
throated flycatcher, black -headed grosbeak, scrub 
jay, Stellar jay, ruby-crowned kinglet, mockingbird, 
red-breasted nuthatch, Bullock’s oriole, hooded 
oriole, song sparrow, white-crowned sparrow, 
western tanager, California thrasher, russet-backed 
thrush, brown towhee, Audubon warbler, cedar 
waxwing, Lewis and Nutta ll's woodpecker, wren-tit, 
grouse, pheasant, and pigeons all eat elderberries 
(Martin et al. 1951).  
 
The valley elderberry longhorn beetle (VELB) 
( Desmocerus californicus dimorphus ) was listed as 
threatened under The Endangered Species Act on 
August 8, 1980.  The elderberry beetle is endemic to 
moist valley oak riparian woodlands along the 
margins of rivers and streams in the lower 
Sacramento and upper San Joaquin Valley of 
California where elderberry grows.  The primary 
threat to the VELB is loss of habitat, insecticide and 
herbicide use, and lack of el derberry shrubs/trees as a 
food plant for the beetle. The mitigation for VELB 
habitat loss, considered a taking under The 
Endangered Species Act, is  quite stringent (U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service Mitigation Guidelines). 
 
In general, longhorn beetles are characterized by 
somewhat elongate and cylindr ical bodies with long 
antennae, often in excess of 2/3 of the body length.  
Male VELB have a metallic-green pattern of 4 
oblong maculations, surrounded by a bright red-
orange border. The body length is about 13-21 mm, 
and antennae are about a lo ng as the body.  Females 
are more robust, with body length about 18-25 mm, 
and the dark pattern is not reduced. 
 
Elderberry is planted because of its forage and cover 
value, productivity, adaptability, and ease of 
establishment.  It is a useful ground cover for 
stabilizing streambanks and eroding sites.  It provides 
food, cover, perching, and nesting sites for many 
species of birds and food and cover for various other 
wildlife, and it is important as browse for mule deer 
and elk.  In the spring  the leaves may be strongly 
scented and less palatable, but they sweeten and 
become more palatable by fall.

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, wetland indicator values.  
Western riparian ecosystems have been greatly 
altered by human activity.  Riparian forests have been 
reduced to fragmented, discontinuous patches 
because of human interv ention.  For example, 
estimates are that 70 - 90  percent of the natural 
riparian ecosystems in the U.S. have been lost to 
human activities.  Regional losses in these 
ecosystems have been estimated to exceed 98% in the 
Sacramento Valley in Califor nia.  Many factors have 
contributed to these resource losses, including the 
following: natural resource use; urbanization; 
alteration of stream flows through dam construction 
and ground-water withdrawal; modification of biotic 
conditions through grazing, agriculture, introduction 
of non-native species;  and alteration within 
watersheds.  
 
Description 
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Native shrubs growing 2-4(-8) m tall, less commonly 
small single-stemmed trees, young twigs soft and 
pithy but the wood hard; bark thin, grayish to dark 
brown, irregularly furrowed and ridged.  The 
pinnately compound leaves are deciduous, opposite, 
about 15-35 cm long, odd-pinnate with (3-)5-9 
serrate leaflets 2-15 cm long, often with a long stalk, 
often asymmetrical at the base.  Elderberry leaves, 
especially on seedlings or  shrub-sized plants (without 
fruits or flowers) resemble California walnut 
( Juglans hindsii ) and Oregon ash ( Fraxinus latifolia).  
The inflorescence is flat-top ped, 4-20(-30) cm across, 
broader than high; flowers bisexual, the corollas 
small, white to cream, rotate, 5-lobed, with a 
pleasant, yet slightly rancid odor.  Fruit is berry-like, 
5-6 mm wide, with 3-5 nutlets, blue- to purple-black 
at maturity with a white-waxy bloom and appearing 
powder blue.  The common name “elder” is from the 
Anglo-Saxon “ellen,” meaning fire-kindler, the dry, 
pithy stems; blue from the fruit color.   
 
Distribution : Common elderberry is common along 
stream banks, river banks, an d open places in riparian 
areas lower than < 3000 m.  From west Texas north 
to Montana, western Alberta, and southern British 
Columbia, and all other western states, south into 
northwest Mexico.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Elderberry grows on moist, well-drained sunny sites, 
usually occurring in early seral communities or in 
openings in moist forest habitats (slopes, canyons, 
cliff bases, streamsides, streambanks) and moist areas 
within drier, more open habitats (sagebrush, 
mountain brush, pinyon-juniper, ponderosa pine, 
often along fence rows and ro ads); at elevations of 3-
3000 meters.  Elderberry is a dominant understory 
species in riparian woodlands.  It can persist past 
seral stages as scattered individuals in open forests, 
woodlands, chaparral, or ripa rian zones.  This species 
flowers from May to September and fruits from July 
to October.  Common elderberry is more common on 
warmer sites than red elderberry ( Sambucus 
racemosa ), although they overlap in habitat 
preference.   
 
In California, common ripari an woodland associates 
are valley oak ( Quercus lobata), interior live oak 
( Quercus wislizenii ), California walnut ( Juglans 
hindsii ), and California sycamore (Platanus 
racemosa ).  Box elder (Acer negundo ), Oregon ash 
( Fraxinus latifolia), alder ( Alnus rhombifolia), and 
willow ( Salix gooddingii, Salix exigua, Salix 
lasiandra, and Salix laevigata ) are particularly 
prevalent in the subcanopy.  Understory species are 
mostly shrubs, including elderberry ( Sambucus 
mexicana) , buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis) , 
blackberry (Rubus  spp.), and California rose ( Rosa 
californica ).  Lianas, such as poison oak 
( Toxicodendron diversiloba ) and California grape 
( Vitis californica ) are a dominant feature.  
Herbaceous vegetation is 1% cover except in 
openings where tall forbs may occur.  
 
Establishment 
Elderberry produces a good  seed crop almost every 
year.  The seeds are dispersed by birds and other 
animals that eat the fruit.   The seeds have a hard seed 
coat and embryo dormancy and may remain viable 
for up to 16 years in storage.  Without pretreatment, 
seed germination may be delayed from 2 to 5 years 
after planting.  Plants may flower and fruit after only 
2-3 years and can reach full  size in 3-4 years.  They 
are said to be “short-lived .”  Vegetative reproduction 
is limited to coppicing if the stems are killed or 
injured.   
 
Seeds: 
Elderberry grows best from seed.  
Elderberry fruits are collect ed when ripe and spread 
in thin layers to dry. 
To separate seeds from fruits either 1) run fruit  through a macerator with  water and the pulp and 
empty seeds float; 2) crush, dry and use without

separating fruits and seeds; and 3) for small 
amounts of fruit they can be cleaned in a fruit 
blender. 
•  Elderberry seed can be stored dry at 41 °F for several years. 
•  Elderberry seeds can be sown in the fall soon after collection, or stratified and sown in the 
spring.  In either case, germination is often not 
complete until the second spring.  
•  A seedling density of 35 plant per square foot is sought.  Seeds are sown 1/4 inch deep in drills 
and covered with about 3/8 inch of sawdust 
mulch. 
•  In the greenhouse, seed s are warm stratified for 
two months in a mixture of peat, vermiculite, and 
sand at 21° to 30°C; (70 to 85°F).  Seeds are then 
placed close to the soil surface in flats in the 
greenhouse.  There are usually several hundred 
seeds in one seed flat. 
•  Seedlings are then potted from the flats in deep  3" pots.  
•  After one season of growth, the seedlings are field planted in the fall or spring when they are 6 
to 8 months old.  If planted in the fall irrigation 
may not be necessary in moist sites.  In drier 
sites or with spring planting, irrigation will be 
required for seedling establishment. 
 
Cuttings : 
•  Cuttings of elderberry tend to have lower 
survival success than es tablishment from seed. 
•  Use hardwood cuttings from previous seasons 
growth.  
•  Take "heel cuttings" from older wood, so inner pith is not exposed. 
•  Cuttings should be at least 10", and have at least two nodes.  Cuttings are placed in 4" pots with 
perlite and peat.  Plants are kept moist.  
•  Cuttings have a fragile root system, with high mortality occurring when transplanted. Care 
should be taken to be very gentle with delicate 
roots when transplanting. 
•  The cuttings, which do survive, seem to establish 
and grow faster.  Plant biomass production, 
height, flowering and seed set is more rapid than 
with seedlings. 
 
Transplanting Trees and Stems : 
•  All elderberry plants with evidence of valley 
elderberry longhorn beetle use (i.e. emergence 
holes or presence of adults) should be 
transplanted, as they provide habitat for a 
threatened species under The Endangered 
Species Act.  For furthe r technical information, 
call a representative of the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service. 
•   Cut tree back to 3 to 6 feet from the ground or to 
50 percent of its height (whichever is greater) by 
removing branches and stems above this height.  
The trunk and all stems greater than 1.5 inches in 
diameter can be replanted. 
•  If the presence of tunnels excavated by the beetle 
larvae inside the elderberry stem and trunk are 
detected, place pruned material next to 
transplanted elderberries. 
•  Move plant by the root ball. Keep the root ball 
wet. 
•  Place transplant in holes 3 to 4 feet deep. 
•  Construct circular water retention basin from the 
excavated earth about 8-10 feet in diameter and 
12 to 14 inches high. Plant the main trunk of an 
elderberry in the center  of each water basin. 
Plant other stems that have been rooted around 
the circumference of the basin.  
•   Saturate soil with water.  Irrigate as necessary, 
especially through first growing season. 
 
Management 
In six riparian restoratio n projects carried out in 
California, competition from exotic weed species was 
a key factor in mortality and  site failure (Baird 1989).  
On small sites, hand weeding around trees and shrubs 
is the most effective mean s of weed control.  One 
way to avoid competition from weeds on larger sites 
is to remove the surface soil, although this has the 
disadvantage of removing nutrients, mycorrhizal 
fungi, bacteria, and insect and invertebrate 
populations critical to a healthy habitat.  A cover crop 
of native wildflowers was also used to control weeds, 
with wildflower seeds hand-broadcast over the site.  
On wetter, heavier soils this does not seem to provide 
effective weed control. 
 
There is considerable evidence that fertilization can 
favor exotic weeds over native plants. Inoculation 
with mycorrhizal fungi enables seedlings of some 
species to better utilize limited supplies of both water 
and nutrients.  Inoculation of transplanted shrubs may 
be accomplished through inclusion of large (1.2 m 
deep by 2.8 m wide) root balls with plants.  Smaller, 
more economical soil plugs scattered throughout the 
site serve the same purpose.  The number of soil 
plugs needed to ensure the establishment of soil flora 
is directly related to the distance of the restoration 
site from a similar, mature community. 
 
Given that elderberry provides habitat for the 
federally listed valley longhorn elderberry beetle, 
livestock grazing of elderbe rry is not recommended.   
Livestock grazing can alter vegetative structure and 
composition of riparian habitat.  Overgrazing by

livestock and big game frequently changes plant 
species composition and growth form, density of 
stands, vigor, seed production of plants, and insect 
production.  
 
Clear-cutting or seed tree cutting with high soil 
disturbance sometimes favors the development of 
elderberry in a seral community.  It recovers well 
from heavy grazing in the Great Basin.  For use in 
site stabilization or rehabilitation, seeds may be 
planted directly or seedlings and 1-2-year old stock 
may be transplanted.  It also grows from transplanted 
seedlings, cuttings, and rootstocks.    
  
Elderberry usually is not present in the understory of 
closed-canopy forests, and when fire occurs in these, 
regeneration occurs from seed banks that may occur 
between 2-10 cm deep in the soil, the seeds deposited 
from off-site dispersal or from plants of an earlier 
community.  Fire scarifies the hard seed coat of 
buried seeds and stimulates  their germination, which 
usually occurs the first grow ing season after the fire.  
Subsequent burns may elim inate elderberry since it 
spreads slowly by seed.  Fire kills above-ground parts 
but the root crown may sprout but a severe fire can 
kill the root and stem buds from which sprouting 
occurs.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Arnold, R.A. 1984.   Interim report for contract C-
616 with the California Department of Fish and 
Game .  14 pp. 
 
Baird, K. 1989.   High quality restoration of riparian 
ecosystems.  Restoration and Management Notes 
7(2):60-64. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture .  Indian Life of the Yosemite Region.  
Yosemite Association,  Yosemite National Park, 
California.  387 pp. 
 
Barrows, D.P. 1967.   Ethno-botany of the Coahuilla 
Indians .  Malki Museum Press. Banning, California.  
82 pp. 
 
Bolli, R. 1994.   Revision of the genus  Sambucus .  
Dissert. Bot. 223:1-227.   
 
Burke, H.E. 1921.   Biological notes on Desmocerus , 
a genus of roundhead borers, the species of which 
infests various elders.  J. Econ. Ent. 14:450-452.  
 
Clarke, C.B. 1977.  Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press.  280 pp. 
 
Crane, M.  F. 1989.  Sambucus cerulea .  IN: W.C. 
Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  USDA , Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory.  Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren et al. 
1984.   Intermountain flora: Vascular plants of the 
Intermountain West, U.S.A .  Vol. 4.  Subclass 
Asteridae,  (except Asteraceae ).  The New York 
Botanical Garden.  New York, New York. 
 
Eriksson, T. & M.J. Donoghue 1997.  Phylogenetic 
relationships of  Sambucus and Adoxa  (Adoxoideae, 
Adoxaceae) based on nuclear ribosomal ITS 
sequences and preliminary morphological data.  Syst. 
Bot. 22:555-574.   
 
Felter, H.W. & J.U. Lloyd 2000.   Sambucus.  IN 
King’s American Dispensatory.   Web site.  
<http://metalab.unc.edu/herbmed/eclectic/kings/samb
ucus.html> 
 
Finn, C. 1999.   Temperate berry crops .  Pp. 324–334.  
IN:  J. Janick (ed.),  Perspectives on new crops and 
new uses.  ASHS Press, Alexandria, Virginia.  
<http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings19
99/v4-324.html#elderberry> 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices .  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 647 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.   Indian herbalogy of North 
America .  Shambhala Books, Boston and London.  pp 
114-117. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food

habits.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1968.   A California flora.  University of 
California Press. 224 pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.   Tribes of California .  University of 
California Press. 480 pp. 
 
Roos-Collins, M. 1990 .  The flavors of home.  A 
guide to wild edible plants of the San Francisco Bay 
area .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  224 pp. 
 
Sampson, A.S. & B.S. Jesperson 1981.   California 
range brushlands and browse plants .  Agricultural 
Sciences Publications. University of California. 
Berkeley, California.  162 pp. 
 
Schopmeyer, C.S. 1974.   Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 450.  
Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.  
Washington, D.C. 883 pp. 
 
Walker, P.L. & T. Hudson 1993.   Chumash healing.  
Changing Health and Medical Practices in an 
American Indian Society.  Malki Museum Press, 
Banning, California.  161 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited 03apr01 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.