Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus californicus  
(C.A. Mey.) Palla 
Plant Symbol = SCCA11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Idaho Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Bulrush, tule, black root.  Known in most floras as 
Scirpus californicus. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Bulrush is similar to the cattail in 
edibility, although it is purportedly sweeter.  Young 
shoots coming up in the spring can be eaten raw or 
cooked.  Bulrush pollen is eaten as flour in bread, 
mush or pancakes.  Later in the season, the seeds can 
be beaten off into baskets or pails, ground into a 
similar meal and used as flour.  The large rhizomes 
are eaten raw or cooked; sometimes they were dried 
in the sun, then pounded into a kind of flour.  
Schoenoplectus validus  (synonym: Scirpus validus ),  a 
similar species,  has as much as 8% sugar and 5.5% 
starch in rhizomes, but less than 1% protein 
(Harrington 1972). 
 
The rhizome (underground stem) is used for the black 
element in basket design.  Rhizomes are obtained by 
digging around the plant and following them out 
from the parent plant.  Often the green stalks are cut, 
to make the rooting area  more accessible.  Bulrushes 
are called black root by Pomo basketweavers in 
California; the cream-colored rhizome is dyed black 
for basketry designs.  
 
Tule houses were common throughout many parts of 
California with the overlapping tule matters being 
well-insulated and rain-proof.  Willow poles, arched 
and anchored into the grou nd and tied with cordage 
or bark, formed the framework.  The walls were 
thatched with mats of tule or cattail and secured to 
the frame.  In Nevada, tules and willows were bound 
together in a sort of crude weaving for "Kani", the 
Paiute name for summerhouse.  
 
Tules and cattails were used as insulating thatch for 
structures, matting, bedding, and roofing materials.  
Shredded tule was used for baby diapers, bedding, 
and menstrual padding.  Women made skirts from 
tule.  During inclement weather, men wore shredded 
tule capes, which tied around the neck and was belted 
at the waist.  Duck decoys were made of tule.  
Several California Indian tribes made canoes of tule 
stems bound together with vines from wild grape.  
Groups located near the California coast used tule to 
make large round mud-shoes so they could walk 
without sinking.  
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos  
Other Uses : Streambank stabilization, wetland 
restoration, wildlife food an d shelter, edible (young 
shoots, pollen, seeds, rhizomes), and matting.  These 
native plants are especially good for stabilizing or 
restoring disturbed or degraded (including logged or 
burned) areas, for erosion a nd slope control, and for 
wildlife food and cover.  Bulrushes may be less 
suitable for general garden use. 
 
Wildlife : The seeds, being less hairy and larger than 
cattail, are one of the mo st important and commonly 
used foods of ducks and of certain marshbirds and 
shorebirds (Martin et al. 1951).  Bulrushes provide 
choice food for wetland bi rds: American widgeon, 
bufflehead, mallard, pintail, shoveler, blue-winged 
teal, cinnamon teal, greater scaup, lesser scaup, 
avocet, marbled godwit, clapper rail, Virginia rail, 
sora rail, long-billed dowitcher, and tricolored 
blackbird. canada geese  and white-fronted geese 
prefer the shoots and roots.  The stems provide 
nesting habitat for blackbirds and marsh wrens. 
 
Freshwater emergent wetlands are among the most 
productive wildlife habitats in California.  They 
provide food, cover, and water for more than 160 
species of birds and numerous mammals, reptiles and 
amphibians.  The endangered Santa Cruz long-toed 
salamander and rare giant garter snake use these

wetlands as primary habitat.  The endangered 
Aleutian Canada goose, bald eagle, and peregrine 
falcon use wetlands as feeding areas and roost sites. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General: Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  California 
bulrush, a perennial herbaceous plant, is 
distinguished by long triangular or subterete stems 
from 5 to 8 feet tall.  The  leaves are slender, v-shaped 
blades that are sheathed around the long stem.  The 
flowers are arranged in a spikelet and resemble 
orange-brown scales.  The inflorescence of California 
bulrush is a larger and more open panicle than 
hardstem bulrush, with 20 to many spikelets, and it is 
consistently a reddish brown color.  Bulrushes have 
clonal growth, with stout rootstocks and long, thick, 
brown rhizomes (underground stems). 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Bulrushes are often dominant emergent 
vegetation found in marshes and wetlands throughout 
temperate North America.  California bulrush, which 
often hybridizes with hardstem bulrush, is abundant 
in freshwater marshes alon g the California coast from 
San Diego County to Napa County, inland in the 
Central Valley, occasional in the Mojave Desert, east 
to South Carolina, Florida, temperate South America 
and the Hawaiian Islands (Hickman 1993). 
 
Establishment 
Schoenoplectus  species may be planted from bare 
rootstock or seedlings from container stalk or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Germination problems have 
been reported in the literature for some 
Schoenoplectus  (synonym: Scirpus) species.  
Consequently, live plant collections of this species 
are recommended.  
 
Live Plant Collections : No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected.  If no more than 
0.09 m 2 
(1 ft 2
)  are
 removed from a 0.4 m 2 
(4 ft 2
) 
area, the plants will grow back into the  hole in one 
good growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes  to grow back during the 
growing season.  Donor plants that are drought-
stressed tend to have higher re-vegetation success. 
 
Live transplants should be planted as soon as possible 
in moist (not flooded or anoxic) soils.  Plants should 
be transported and stored in  a cool location prior to 
planting.  Plugs may be split into smaller units, 
generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 in), with 
healthy rhizomes and tops.  The important factor in 
live plant collections is to be sure  to
 include
 a 
growing bud in either plugs or rhizomes.  Weeds in 
the plugs should be removed by hand.  Soil can either 
be left on the roots of harvested material or removed.  
For ease in transport, soil may be washed gently from 
roots.  The roots should always remain moist or in 
water until planted.  
 
Clip the leaves and stem fro m 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches).  This allows the plant to allocate more 
energy into root productio n.  Plant approximately 1 
meter apart.  Plants should be planted closer together 
if the site has fine soils such as clay or silt, steep 
slopes, or prolonged inundation.  Don't flood plants 
right away, or the seedlings will experience high 
mortality.  Get the roots started before flooding soils 
if possible.  Ideally, plants should be planted in late 
fall just after the first rains (usually late October to 
November).  This enables plant root systems to 
become established before heavy flooding and winter 
dormancy occurs.  Survival  is highest when plants are 
dormant and soils are moist.  Fertilization is very 
helpful for plant growth and reproduction.  Many 
more seeds are produced with moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections :  
•  Select seed collection sites where continuous 
stands with few intermixed species can easily be 
found. 
•  At each collection location,  obtain permission for 
seed collection. 
Seed is harvested by either taking hand clippers 
or cutting the stem off below the seed heads or 
stripping the seed heads off the stalk.  
•   Less than 1/2 hour is required to make a decent 
collection of 1 to 2 cups of seed.  The ease of 
collection is affected by water depth. 
•  Collect and store seeds in brown paper bags or 
burlap bags.  Dry the seeds in these bags. 
•  Seeds and seed heads need to be cleaned in a 
seed cleaner.  Plant cleaned  seed in fall.  Plant in 
clean, weed - free, moist seed bed.  Flooded or 
ponded soils will significantly increase seedling 
mortality. 
•   Broadcast seed and roll in or rake 1/4" to 1/2" 
from the soil surface.

•  Some seed may be lost due to scour or flooding.  
Recommended seed density is unknown at this 
time. 
 
   Seed germination in greenhouse : 
•  Clean seed - blow out light seed. 
•  To germinate seeds, plant in greenhouse in 1" x 
1" x 2" pots, 1/4" under the soil surface.  Keep 
soil surface moist at a temperature of 100 
degrees F (plus or minus 5 degrees).  Seeds 
begin to germinate after a couple weeks in warm 
temperatures.   
•  Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased re-vegetation success.  
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation, success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management.  
Heavy grazing will eliminate  Schoenoplectus species 
as well as other native species.  
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation for hut construction and for food.  
An area of open water is created around the huts, 
which  increase wetland diversity by providing 
opportunities for aquatic vegetation to become 
established.  Muskrats opening up the dense stands of 
emergent vegetation also create habitat for other 
species.  Both beaver and muskrats often improve 
wetland habitat. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: The plant must 
grow in coarse-textured so il that is free of gravel, 
clay and silt for the roots to be of the quality 
necessary for basketweaving.  Plants are tended by 
gathering rhizomes and reducing plant density.  
Sustainable harvesting of plants occurs through 
limiting harvest in any given  area.  Fire was also used 
to manage tule wetlands; fire eliminated decadent old 
stems and restored open water to the wetland.  This 
stimulates growth of new shoots from rhizomes and 
provides a bare soil substrate for seed germination.  
Many Native Americans feel the use of herbicides is 
inappropriate in traditional gathering sites.  Bulrush 
is densely rhizomatous with abundant seed  production.  In most cases, it will out-compete other 
species within the wetland area of the site, 
eliminating the need for ma
nual or chemical control 
of invasive species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available  from most nurseries within 
the species range that handles wetland plants.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Clarke, C.B. 1977.  Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 280 pp. 
 
Dahl, T.E. & C.E. Johnson 1991.   Status and trends 
of wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid-
1970s to mid-1980s.   USDI, Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Washington, D.C. 28 pp. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972.   Western edible wild plants .  
The University of New Mexi co Press, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico.  156 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California.  1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands.   Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7.  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. no date.  Indian uses of native 
plants .  Mendocino County Historical Society. 81 pp.  
 
Roos-Collins, M. 1990.  The flavors of home.  A 
guide to wild edible plants of the San Francisco Bay 
area.   Heyday Books, Berkeley , California.  224 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1984. Wetlands of the United States: 
Current status and recent trends .  USDI, FWS,

National Wetlands Inventory, Washington, D.C.  58 
pp. 
 
Timbrook, J.J. 1997.  California Indian 
Basketweavers.  California Indian Basketweavers 
Association newsletter.  
 
USDA, NRCS 2003.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 030127. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Chris Hoag 
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Project 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 27jan03 jsp; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.