Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CABBAGE 
PALMETTO  
Sabal palmetto  (Walt.) Lodd. 
ex J.A. & J.H. Schultes 
Plant Symbol = SAPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Palmetto, cabbage palm, cabbage tree, sabal palm, 
blue palm.   
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Seminole, Houma, Choctaw, and 
other Native American peoples in the southeastern 
United States used cabbag e palmetto for a wide 
variety of purposes.  The white, crisp palm hearts 
were eaten either raw or cooked by boiling or 
steaming.  The leaf buds  are purported to taste like 
cabbage. However, both of these food uses--the heart 
and the buds--result in the  death of the plant.  The 
palm fruits, which ripen in the fall, are small and 
mostly seed, but they are sweet with a slight bitter 
aftertaste.  The seeds and berries were used for 
headaches and to lower fevers.  The plants provided 
fiber and wood used to construct houses, make food 
paddles, drying frames for animal skins, potato 
drying mats, fish drags, fish poison, ballsticks, arrows 
and hunting dance staffs.  Most Seminole homes 
were built from the cabbage palm.  Logs would be 
used as poles for the framework of huts that were  thatched with the fan-shaped leaves.  Split logs were 
used for flooring.  Immature
 fronds were bleached in 
the sun, cut into strips, and plaited to make long 
strips, which were used for lashing or sewn together 
to make baskets.  The stiff midribs of the leaves were 
sometimes used to construct ball sticks or racquets.  
Palmetto-thatched houses may still be found in 
Houma country in Louisiana. 
 
Wildlife : Fruits ripen in the late fall and are eaten by 
crows, mockingbirds, warblers, pileated and red-
bellied woodpeckers and squirrels.  Palmetto fruits 
provide 10% to 25% of th e diet of raccoons and 
robins in the Southeast. 
 © Palm & Cycad Societies of Florida 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Palm family (Arecaceae).  Cabbage 
Palmetto is an evergreen palm tree that can reach 
20m in height.  The erect, unbranched trunk has 
grayish to brownish bark with distinctive pineapple-
like markings where the old leaf stalks were attached.  
Medium-green, stiff, fanlike leaves are palmately 
compound and spread in all directions as they emerge 
from the top of the trunk.  The fans, often wider than 
they are long (2-3 m wide), contain several long and 
pointed leaflets with prominent midribs.  During June 
and July, abundant, small (.5cm), fragrant, white 
flowers are borne upon drooping, branched clusters. 
The berry-like fruits are small (1.5cm), shiny and 
black.   Each fruit contains one seed. 
 
Similar species:  The shrub-like, dwarf palmetto 
( Sabal minor ) is common to freshwater wetlands of 
the southeastern United States.  The leaves lack the 
prominent midrib and it usually does not grow a 
stem.   
 
Distribution: Native to th e Gulf Coast states and 
Florida. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Cabbage palm grows in a wide variety of habitats in 
which the water table is fairly close to the surface.  It 
is found in the drier, upland areas of both fresh and

saltwater wetlands, wet hammocks, riverbanks, 
seasonally wet prairies, maritime forests and coastal 
plains.  In Florida and across the gulf states, cabbage 
palmetto is commonly found in transition zones 
between active floodplains and uplands.  It also 
occurs in maritime heath communities in the 
Carolinas and Virginia as well as the hardwood 
upland hammocks communities of the Everglades. 
 
Establishment 
Cabbage palmetto is widely planted for landscaping 
as an ornamental because of its stately structure and 
large, graceful fan-shaped fr onds.  It has a slow to 
moderate growth rate and is used for street trees as 
well as for the patio or terrace.  It can be grown in 
sun or in part shade.  The tree grows well in a wide 
variety of soils with medium to poor drainage and 
fertility in both moist and fairly dry areas.  It is 
recommended for seaside plantings, as it is tolerant of 
salt.  It is not hardy in mountain areas as it is 
sensitive to cold. 
 
Propagation by seeds : The trees may be easily 
propagated from seed, as they germinate readily.   
 
Transplantings: It is best to transplant cabbage 
palmettos in June or July.  Seedlings can be 
transplanted the year following germination although 
larger plants transplant more easily.  This is because 
increased food reserves stor ed in the main stem of 
larger transplants help in the regeneration of new 
roots.  Tie the leaves together before transplanting to 
protect the terminal bud.  After transplanting into a 
hole large enough to hold the roots, support the plant 
with stakes.  It is necessary to water frequently until 
you can observe growth, to ensure proper 
establishment of the root system. 
  
Management 
Established plants tend to self-sow.  Fruit drupes may 
be removed if self-sowing is not desired.  The plant 
has no serious pests.  Remove old leaf bases to 
control their use as hiding places for roaches and 
other insects. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. &  E.Z. Bailey  1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp.   
 
Barbour, M.G. & W.D. Billings, Editors  2000.  North 
American terrestrial vegetation , Second Edition. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.  708 pp. 
 
Brown, R.C.  1994.   Florida’s first people: 12,000 
years of human history .  Pineapple Press, Inc., 
Sarasota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W.  1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Flint, H.L.  1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America . Second Edition. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. &  J.W. Wooten  1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol. 1.  
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  712 
pp.  
 
Halfacre, R.G. &  A. R. Showcroft  1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast . Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp.  
 
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory & G.A. Stokes  1994. 
The historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana .  Louisiana 
State University Press, Bato n Rouge, Louisiana.  324 
pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim  & A.L. Nelson  1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998.   Native American 
ethnobotany .  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927  
pp. 
 
Neill, W.T.  1956.   The story of Florida’s Seminole 
Indians . Second Edition.  Great Outdoors Publishing 
Co., St. Petersburg, Florida.  128 pp. 
 
Ottesen, C. 1995.   The native plant primer .  Harmony 
Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Palm & Cycad Societies of Florida 2000.   Sabal 
palmetto.  Accessed: 21May2001.

<http://www.plantapalm.com/vpe/photos/Species/sab
al_palmetto.htm>  
 
Rogers, D.J. &  C. Rogers  1991.  Woody 
ornamentals for Deep South gardens .  University of 
West Florida Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C.  1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W.  1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst.  328 pp. 
 
Whitcomb, C.E. 1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants . Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma.  
740 pp.  
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 21May2001 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.