Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WAPATO 
Sagittaria cuneata E. Sheldon 
Plant Symbol = SACU 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Indian potato, arrowhead 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Sagittaria  is an aquatic plant with 
tuberous roots that can be eaten like potatoes.  The 
tubers of  Sagittaria  species were eaten by many 
different Indigenous groups in Canada, as well as 
many groups of Washington and Oregon (Kuhnlein 
and Turner 1991).  The tube rs were widely traded 
from harvesting centers to neighboring areas.  On the 
Lower Columbia in Chinook Territory, Katzie 
families owned large patches of the wapato plants.  
Family groups camped beside their harvesting sites 
for a month or more. 
 
Indian women collected wapato in shallow water 
from a canoe, or waded into ponds or marshes in the 
late summer and loosened the roots with their toes.  
The roots would rise to the top of the water where 
they were gathered and tossed into floating baskets.  
Today, the tubers are harvested with a hoe, pitchfork, 
or rake.  Tubers are baked in fire embers, boiled, or 
roasted in the ashes.  Tubers are skinned and eaten 
whole or mashed.  After cooking, some tubers were 
dried and stored for winter use.  The Chippewa 
gathered the "Indian potatoes" in the fall, strung 
them, and hung them overhead in the wigwam to dry.  
Later, they were boiled for use. 
 
Medicinally, the Maidu of California used an 
infusion of arrowhead roots to clean and treat 
wounds.  The Navaho use these plants for headaches.  
The Ojibwa and the Chippewa used  Sagittaria 
species as a remedy for in digestion.  The Cherokee 
used an infusion of leaves to bath feverish babies, 
with one sip given orally.  The Iroquois used wapato 
for rheumatism, a dermatological aid, a laxative, and 
as a ceremonial blessing when they began planting 
corn. 
© M. Kat Anderson USDA, NRCS, NPDC 
 @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife : The small, flattish seeds of arrowheads are 
eaten by ducks, and the tube rs are valuable to many 
species of wildlife.  Muskrat and porcupine are 
known to eat the tubers  Swans, geese, wood ducks, 
blue-winged teal, lesser and greater scaup, ruddy 
duck, ring necked duck, pintail, mallard, mottled 
duck, gadwall, canvasback, black duck and king rail 
are known to eat  arrowhead seeds and tubers (Martin 
1951). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Arrowhead Family (Alismataceae).   
Sagittaria cuneata  is an aquatic plant growing in 
swampy ground or standing water in ponds, lakes, 
stream edges, and ditches (Hickman 1993).  Wapato 
have white or bluish tubers, which are edible.  The 
leaves are sagittate, with 5-15 cm long erect or 
floating leaf blades; the lower lobes of the emergent 
leaf blades are less than the terminal lobe.  The 
inflorescence is simple or branching, often with the 
lower flowers pistillate and the upper ones staminate.  
The flowers are white, with three white petals and 3 
sepals.  Stamens are numerous and bright yellow.  
The pistils are numerous, spirally arranged on the 
receptacle.  The fruit is a greenish colored achene. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Sagittaria  species are obligate wetland plants 
found in marshes and wetlands throughout temperate 
North America.   Sagittaria cuneata is 
transcontinental, extending from north central Alaska 
to Labrador, extending south to California and

northern Texas.  In California, Sagittaria cuneata 
ranges from middle to high elevations < 2500 m.  
Sagittaria  species grow in ponds, slow streams, 
ditches and freshwater wetlands. 
 
Establishment 
Sagittaria  species may be planted from bare root 
stock, by transplanting the tubers, and by seeding 
directly into wetland soil.  Live plant transplants or 
transplanting tubers are preferred revegetation 
methods where there is moving water.  It takes two 
years for seed to germinate; planting bare root stock 
or tubers gives faster revegetation results. 
 
Live Plant Collections : No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected.  A depth of 15 
cm (6 in) is sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This 
will leave enough plants and rhizomes to grow back 
during the growing season. 
 
Wild plants should be collected from the time leaves 
emerge in spring until first frost. Plants can be pulled 
up easily from wet soil.  When collecting wild plants, 
rinse roots gently.  Leaves  and stems can be clipped 
from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 inches); this allows the 
plant to allocate more energy into root production.  
The roots should always remain moist or in water 
until planted.  Plants should be transported and stored 
in a cool location prior to planting.  Water depth 
should be 0 to 6" and the soils should be wet.  
 
Sagittaria  grows prolifically around ponds or 
wetlands in shallow water.  Plug spacing of 25-30 cm 
will fill in within one growi ng season.  Soil should be 
kept saturated, with approximately 1 cm of water 
over the surface of the soil after planting.  If water is 
low in nutrients (oligotrophic), fertilization will speed 
biomass production and revegetation.  Many surface 
waters are already rich in nutrients (eutrophic), and 
fertilization is not necessary. 
 
Transplanting tubers : Transplant success may be 
greater with the tubers than with bare root stock.  The 
little underground potatoes can be separated from the 
parent plants with a rake, hoe, or shovel.  In 
unconsolidated soils, the tubers can be pulled up by 
hand by searching around the roots of the plant. 
 
After collecting, the  Sagittaria tubers should be kept 
moist and cool, and stored in peat moss.  Wapato 
tubers are then planted in shallow water, in the same 
conditions as described above for the whole plants.  
Tubers should be collected and planted when plants 
are dormant, in the fall,  winter and early spring. 
 
Seeds: Seeds of Sagittaria species take two years to 
germinate, because they have a double dormancy 
requiring cold then warm then cold temperatures.  
Temperature has a multiple role in the regulation of 
timing of germination.  Dormant seeds become 
nondormant only at sp ecific temperatures, non-
dormant seeds have specific temperature 
requirements for germination, and nondormant seeds 
of some species are induced  into dormancy by certain 
temperatures.  Once  Sagittaria seeds germinate, they 
have fairly high viability.  
 
Procedures for growing  Sagittaria seeds in the 
greenhouse have not been developed at this time; 
however,  Sagittaria  seeds can be planted directly in 
wetlands or ponds.  Prepare the area by creating a 
washboard in shallow water, at mudflat consistency.  
Seeds should then be scattered on the surface of the 
soil, as the seeds need sunlight to germinate well.  
Light and temperature in natural conditions will 
promote seed germination, and in two years 
Sagittaria  plants will emerge. 
 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management.  
Sagittaria species require moist soils to standing 
water for successful revegetation. 
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrat eat-outs increase 
wetland diversity by opening up the dense tule and 
cattail stands, and providing opportunities for aquatic 
vegetation, such as  Sagittaria to become established 
in the open water.  Muskrat huts provide a substrate 
for shrubs and other plant species.  Caches of 
Sagittaria  tubers stored by muskrat and beaver were 
often sought by Indian people. 
 
We have no record of specific traditional resource 
management techniques other than anecdotal 
information of the use of fire to keep dense tule 
marshes open, which provided an opportunity for 
colonization and spread of  Sagittaria species.  The 
harvest of arrowhead was usually made in late 
summer as the stems and leaves were dying (and 
usually when the water table  was lower) (Balls 1962).

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily available from native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  
 
References 
Angier, B. 1974.  Field guide to edible wild plants .  
Stackpole Books.  255 pp. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933 .  Miwok material 
culture Indian life of the Yosemite region .  Yosemite 
Association.  Yosemite National Parks, California.  
388 pp. 
 
Clarke, C. B. 1977.   Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press.  280 pp. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine and crafts .  Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
 
Fowler, C. S. 1992 .  In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the Cattail-Eater Northern Paiute 
People of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
#5.  USDI, FWS, Stillwater National Wildlife 
Refuge.  264 pp. 
 
Gilmore, M. R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians 
of the Missouri River region.  University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln and London.  125 pp. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V. P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books.  Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972.   Western edible wild plants .  
The University of New Mexico Press.  156 pp. 
 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.   Sturtevant's edible plants of the 
world .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  686 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. E. Sellers 1995.   Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands .  
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant Development 
Project.  USDA, NRCS, Pl ant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1994 .  Seed and live 
transplant collection procedures for 7 wetland plant 
species.   Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant 
Development Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian Indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, Botany and Use .  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A. L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Mason, H.L. 1957.   A flora of the marshes of 
California .  University of California Press.  878 pp. 
 
Mayer, K.E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. (eds) 1988.   A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA, 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish and 
Game, and PG&E.  
 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.   Medicinal plants of Native 
America.   University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology.  Technical Reports, Number 19.  534 
pp. 
 
Peterson, L.A. 1977.   A field guide to edible wild 
plant.  Eastern and central North America .  
Houghton Mifflin Company.  330 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians. Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California's 
indigenous plants .  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of

race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.