Plant of Pineywoods dropseed.  
Photo courtesy: M.A. Gonter 
 
 
 
PINEYWOODS DROPSEED  
Sporobolus junceus  (P.Beav.) 
Kunth  
Plant Symbol = SPJU  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:  Pinewoods dropseed, blue dropseed, 
purple dropseed,  
Scientific Names:  Sporobolus gracilis (Trin.)  Merr. 
(Diggs et al.,  2006)  
 
Description  
General :  Pineywoods  dropseed is a native, warm season, 
perennial bunchgrass which grows 2 to 3 feet tall. The 
distinctive slender blue green leaves are 1/16” wide or 
less and 8 to 15 inches long. The conical shaped open 
panicle ranges in color from bronze to purple and is 4 to 6 
inches long. One to 3 seed stalks are produced by each 
clump (Leithead and Shiflet, 1971). In sufficient sunlight 
it forms large, dense clumps (Grelen and Duvall, 1966).  
 
Distribution :  It may be found from the Virginia coast 
west to Texas (Gould, 1975 ).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Pineywoods dropseed is adapted to well drained 
sandy loam soils, and seldom grows on wet or flooded 
sites (Leithead and Shiflet, 1971). In the western gulf 
region it is associated with broomsedge bluestem, various  panicums (
Panicum sp.), paspalums ( Paspalum sp.), 
carpetgrass ( Axonopus affinis ), threeawn (Aristida sp.), 
cut over muhly ( Muhlenbergia expansa), and beak rushes 
( Rhynchospora  sp.) (Cassady, 1951).  However, an 
abundance of this grass is an indication of a declining 
range (Leithead et al., 1971).  
Adaptation  
Pineywoods dropseed is found in pine and hardwood 
forests. In Texas it also grows with tall prairie grasses on 
sandy soils in the upper coastal plain and marshes in the 
southern part of the state. (Gould, 1975 and Diggs et al., 
2006).  
 
Uses  
Live stock  
Pineywoods dropseed is rated fair in terms of forage 
quality. It is utilized by livestock during the spring and 
early summer before the leaves mature and become tough. 
Plants often remain green into the winter. Even though 
palatability is decreased in winter; cattle are attracted by 
the green color and graze the plants (Grelen and Duvall, 
1966).   
 
Wildlife  
Pineywoods dropseed is grazed by deer in the spring 
(Leithead and Shiflet, 1971).  
 
Restoration  
Pineywoods dropseed may be used for habitat restorat ion 
in the longleaf pine ecosystem. This grass is a common 
co -dominant species in the northwest Florida sandhills 
(Pfaff and Gonter, 1996). It looks similar to wiregrass 
( Aristida beyrichiana) and fills the same role but is easier 
to plant with conventional equipment (Pfaff et al.,  2002).  
 
Landscape  
It is also used in natural landscapes and flower gardens 
and is considered an attractive grass  with showy, pinkish 
inflorescence (The Institute for Regional Conservation, 
2013).  
 
Status  
Threatened or Endangered: 
  
Tennessee  – special concern  (USDA, NRCS, 2014)  
Arkansas  – threatened  (USDA, NRCS, 2014)  
 
Wetland Indicator:
  
UPL  (Lichvar et al., 2014) 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Planting Guidelines 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary  soil amendments. Pineywoods 
dropseed grows on acidic to neutral pH soils (Florida 
Native Plant Society, 2014). For direct seeded stands, 
fertilization is not recommended until the  stand is 
established (Pfaff et al ., 2002).  
 
Seedbed preparation should begi n well in advance of 
planting. Planting can be scheduled for winter or early 
spring depending upon the location. In Florida, the 
optimum planting time is winter (December or January). 
Plantings completed in May in central Florida  were 
unsuccessful (Pfaff e t al., 2002). Establish a clean, weed 
free seedbed by tillage, burning,  or herbicides. Prior to 
planting, the site should be firm and have accumulated 
adequate soil moisture.  
 
Pineywoods dropseed is best seeded using a seed drill. 
Broadcast seeding may be used for areas not easily 
planted with a drill. Cu ltipacking or lightly drag the area 
to  ensure good  seed to soil contact.   
 
Seed should be planted no deeper than ¼  inch.  
Pineywoods   dropseed contains an average of 1,134,000 
seed per pound .The recommende d monoculture  planting 
rate is 1.25 lb Pure Live Seed (PLS) /acre (Pfaff et al., 
2002) . Adjust the seeding rate accordingly if this species 
is being used in a mix.  
 
Management  
Pineywoods dropseed should not be grazed the first year  
after planting. Studies of Louisiana rangeland, noted it 
comprised only 1 percent of total ground cover , but 
provided 3 to 5 percent of the livestock’s  diet.  This figure 
rose to approximately 10% in  January and February 
(Grelen and Duvall, 1966).   
 
Fertilization is not recommende d for newly seeded stands. 
After establishment, fertilize according to soil test 
recommendations. If soil testing is not available,  30  lb 
N/acre applied in earl y spring should supply  adequate 
fertility to maintain the stand. Pineywoods dropseed is 
tolerant  of low fertility and does not require large N 
applications (Pfaff et al., 2002).  
 
Adequate moisture should be supplied during 
establishment to e nsure a successful planting. Once 
established pineywoods dropseed is hardy and drought 
tolerant (Pfaff et al., 2002) . 
  Pineywoods dropseed is fire tolerant and provides a 
source of fine fuels for pine understory burn management 
(Pfaff et al., 2002).  
In a Florida study, the number of 
flowering culms increased when stands were burned in 
April, May, or July than in F ebruary (Shepherd et al., 
2011).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Staff at the Brooksville PMC  have not observed any 
serious pests in seed increase fields.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
No environmental concerns.  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Plant seed increase fields on a  12 to 36” row spacing 
using  a PLS seeding rate of 30- 35 PLS/ft.  Narrower rows 
can be used, but seed production may be reduced (Pfaff et 
al., 2002).  
 
  To promote seed production, irrigate between pollination 
and seed ripening (Pfaff et. al., 2002).  Seed increase fields 
are usually combine harvested in May or June 
(occasionally in July depending on genotype and weather 
conditions) when seed is in the medium dough to mature 
stage.   Mature seed is black or blue in color. Piney woods 
dropseed is susceptible to shattering. Seed ripens from the 
top of the panicle  downward over a 2 week period and 
when ripe , seed drops to the ground. After harvest, air -dry 
the material for 3 to 7 days  (Pfaff et al., 2002) . 
 
At the Brooksville, Florida Plant Materials Center stands 
have persisted for 5 years on well drained irrigated sites.  
Expec ted stand life  is 10 years under favorable conditions 
(Pfaff et al ., 2002).  
 
Kaeser and Kirkman (2010) studied the effects of 
chemical applications on longleaf pine understory plants. 
Pineywoods dropseed seedlings were not affected by 
applica tions of aminopyralid. Thirty day old seedlings 
exhibited sensitivity to imazapyr, sulfometuron -methyl, 
and hexazizone. The seedlings received little damage 
from butyric acid and triclopyr.   
 
 
Studies indicate Pineywoods dropseed has a low initial 
germinat ion rate and possible seed dormancy. Barbour 
(2006) had results of 0% and 1% using no prechill and 7

day prechill, respectively. Germinator settings were 
680/860F with 8 hours of light. Shepherd (2010) had 
increased seed germination rates ranging from 3% t o 
14%. The seeds were stratified at 40
0F for 30 days, and 
then subjected to germination settings of 680/860  with 12 
hours of light.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
Commercial availability of pineywoods dropseed seed 
and p lants is limited. Please contact your local NRCS 
Field Office.  
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area . 
 
Literature Cited  
Barbour, J. 2007. Seed cleaning and germination testing 
procedures for the restoration of ground layer plants 
in a longleaf pine ecosystem. p. 3 -7.  In Proc. Of the 
Sixth Longl eaf Alliance Regional Conference. 13 -16 
Nov. 2006. University of Georgia. Tifton, GA.  
Cassady, J.T. 1951. Bluestem range in the piney woods of  Louisiana and east Texas.  J. Range Management 
4:173- 177. 
Diggs, G.M., B. Lipscomb, M. Reed, and R. O’Kennon.  2006. Illustrated Flora of East Texas Vol.1 Botanical 
Research Institute of Texas. Fort Worth, TX.  
Florida Native Plant Society - Pineywoods dropseed. 
[Online]. Available at 
http://www.fnps.org/plants/plant/sporobolus -junceus
  
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M 
University Press. College Station, TX.  
Grelen, H.E . and V.L. Duvall.  1966. Common Plants of 
the Longleaf Pine -Bluestem Range. US Forest 
Service Research Paper SO -23. Sout hern Forest 
Experiment Station. New Orleans, LA  
Kaeser, M. and Kirkman, K.  2010. The effects of pre-  and post -emergent herbicides on non -target native 
plant species of the longleaf pine ecosystem. The 
Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society. 137(4):420-
430.  
Leithead, H.L., L. Yarlett, and T. Shiflet. 1971. 100  Native forage grasses in 11 southern states. USDA -
Soil Conservation Service. Agr. Handbook no. 389. 
U.S. Gov. Print Office. Washington, DC.   
Lichvar, R.W., M. Butterwick, N.C. Melvin, and W.N. 
Kirchne r. 2014. The National Wetland Plant List: 
2014 Update of Wetland Ratings. Phytoneuron 2014-
41:1- 42. 
Pfaff, S. and M.A . Gonter. 1996. Florida native plant 
collection, production and direct seeding techniques: 
interim report. United States Department of 
Agri culture Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Brooksville, Florida and Florida Institution of 
Phosphate Restoration, Bartow, Florida.  
Pfaff, S., M.A. Gonter, and C. Maura.  2002. Florida 
Native Seed Production Manual. USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation S ervice. Brooksville, FL. 
Shepherd, B., D.L. Miller, and M. Thetford. 2011. Fire  season effects on flowering characteristics and 
germination of longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) 
savanna grasses. Restoration Ecology 20:268- 276. 
USDA, NRCS. 2014. The PLANTS Dat abase 
( http://plants.usda.gov
, 15 May 2014). National Plant 
Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401- 4901 USA. 
The Institute for Regional Conservation.  Delray Beach, 
FL  Natives for Your Neighborhood –  Piney woods 
dropseed. [Online]. Available at 
http://regionalconservation.org/beta/nfyn/plantdetail.
asp?tx=Sporjunc  
Citation  
Brakie, M., 2013.  Plant Guide for Pineywoods dropseed 
( Sporobolus junceus ). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center. 
Nacogdoches, TX  75964.  
Published : June  2014  
 
Edited:
  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER