Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEW ENGLAND ASTER  
Symphyotrichum novae-anglia 
(L.) Nesom 
Plant Symbol = SYNO2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Aster novae-anglia 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: A decoction of the plant has been used 
in the treatment of weak skin (Moerman 1998).  A 
poultice has been used in the treatment of pain, 
fevers, and diarrhea. 
 
Wildlife : New England aster is known for attracting 
butterflies and moths to areas where it is found 
growing.  This is a good bee plant providing nectar in 
the autumn.  Most species in this genus seem to be 
immune to the predications of rabbits (Thomas 
1990). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Aster family (Asteraceae).  New England 
aster ( Aster novae-angliae ) is a perennial with several  erect stems in clumps, stems 0.8 to 2 meters, densely 
spreading pubescent, thirty or more nodes below the 
branches of the inflorescence (Radford, Ahles & Bell 
1968).  The leaves are lanceolate to elliptic 
lanceolate, two to nine centimeters long and one to 
two centimeters wide.  The disc flowers are yellow, 
hermaphrodite (having both male and female organs) 
and are pollinated by bees, 
butterflies, flies, beetles 
and moths.  
 
Distribution : Aster novae-angliae  ranges from 
Quebec to Alberta, south to North Carolina, 
Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Colorado, Wyoming 
and New Mexico (Steyermark 1963).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation 
This plant is commonly found in moist prairies, 
meadows, roadsides and streams (Dension 1998).  It 
requires well-drained soil and prefers sandy, loamy 
and clay soils.  This species can grow on nutritionally 
poor soil but prefers rich soil.  New England aster 
grows well in a sunny location and can succeed in 
partial shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Aster novae-angliae  seeds 
should be sown fresh in the fall or spring (Heuser 
1997).  Pre-chill spring  sown seeds to improve 
germination (Ibid.).  When the seedlings are large 
enough to handle, place them  into individual pots and 
plant them out in the summer. 
 
Division of this species should be done in the spring 
or autumn.  Large divisions can be planted into their 
permanent positions whereas smaller clumps should 
be kept in a cold frame until they are growing well. 
 
Management 
Divisions of  Aster novae-angliae  species should be 
done in the spring every three years to maintain vigor 
(Heuser 1997).  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available somewhat through native plant seed 
sources.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be

listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bruggen, T.V. 1976.  The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Dension, E. 1998.   Missouri wildflowers .  Missouri 
Department of Conservation, Jrfferson City, 
Missouri. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut.   
 
Huxley, A. 1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillan Press, New York, New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C. Bell 1968.   Manual 
of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Strausbaugh, P.D. & E.L. Core 1971.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp: 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.