Plant Guide
CANADA 
GOLDENROD  
Solidago canadensis  L . 
Plant Symbol = SO CA6 
 
Contributed by:   NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA  
 
 Solidago canadensis . www.discoverlife.org 
Alternate Names  
Canadian goldenrod, meadow goldenrod,  common 
goldenrod,  giant goldenrod, tall goldenrod, s horthair 
goldenrod ( S. canadensis var.  gilvocanescens ), 
Hager’s goldenrod ( S. canadensis  var.  hargeri ), 
rough goldenrod ( S. cana densis  var. salebrosa ). 
 
Uses  
Pollinator habitat:  Solidago  species provide vital 
sources of pollen and nectar for bees and other 
insects  in the late summer and fall throug hout North 
America (Mader et al.  2011).   Insect s known to visit 
Solidago  species include beneficial solitary wasps 
and  pollen -eating beetles such as the soldier beetle 
( Chauliognathus pennsylvanicus ) and the black blister beetle (
Epicauta pennsylvanica).  Goldenrod 
and aster species are believed to be the preferred 
floral sources of ma ny oligolectic bees such as 
Andrena hirticincta,  A. nubecula, A. placata, A. 
simplex, A. solidaginis, Colletes simulans armatus , 
and  Melissoides druriella (Mader et al.  2011) .  
H oney bees collect large amounts of nectar from 
goldenrod prior to winter, and  other bees use pollen 
from goldenrods to provision  late -season nests 
(Mader et al.  2011).  
 
Rangeland revegetation:  Canada  goldenrod can be 
used for revegetation of disturbed areas, for 
minespoil reclamation, and  soil stabilization . 
 
Forage:   This plant is considered to have fair to good 
palatability for cattle, sheep and horses ( Dittberner et 
al .1983, as cited by Colandonato 1993).  White -tailed 
deer will selectively forage on Canada goldenrod in 
the late summer and fall ( Sauer et al. 1969, as cited 
by Wern er et al. 1980).  
 
Ethnobotanical:   The Iroquois made infusions and 
compounds with the flowers and roots of this plant 
and used them as emetics, sedatives, gambling 
medicine and to counteract love potions.  The 
Okanagan -Colville made infusions of the flowers and 
roots to treat diarrhea, fevers, and the flu.  The 
Potowatomi also made infusions of the flowers to 
treat certain fevers, and the Shuswap used the plant in 
baths for women giving birth.   Zunis chewed crushed 
flowers to treat sore throats, and drank infusions of 
the flowers for body pain.  People of the Gosiute tribe 
ate the seeds, and Navajo p eople ate the roots.  The 
Navajo  also smoked the root with other plants  and 
used the plant as a charm for success in gambling. 
(Native American Ethnobotany Database 2011).  
 
Ornamental:  Canada  goldenrod is not typically 
planted in a landscaped setting due  to its spreading  
rhizomatous growth.   However, it may be possible to 
manage  plants  by planting in a pot submersed in  the 
ground, or by removing new growth each year .  Seed 
dispersal can be controlled by removing flower heads 
prior to seed ripening.  
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural  Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).