Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ALKALI SACATON 
Sporobolu airoides (Torr.) 
Torr. 
Plant Symbol = SPAI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
giant sacaton, finetop saltgrass, hairgrass dropseed, 
zacaton alcalino 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Hopi Indians use the seeds in 
times of famine (Whiting 1939).  They were ground 
into flour, eaten dry or made into a mush. 
 
Wildlife : Alkali sacaton’s abundant herbage is eaten 
by cattle, sheep, and horses (Hitchock 1951).  This 
species is used as a good  forage or grazing grass in 
lowland and in alkali regions (Gates 1937). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Alkali sacaton is a 
tough perennial two to three and a half feet tall, 
growing in large bunches.   The culms are erect to 
spreading and range in height from 50 to 100 
centimeters tall.  The blades are elongate, flat, soon 
becoming involute, and usually less that four 
millimeters wide (Hitchcock 1951).   
 
Distribution : Alkali sacaton ranges from South 
Dakota to Washington, south to Missouri, Kansas, 
Texas, and Mexico (Steye rmark 1963).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 R. Mohlenbrock USDA,NRCS,Wetland Sciences Institute 
                                  @PLANTS 
 
Adaptation 
Alkali sacaton grows on dry to moist sites with sand 
or gravelly soil.  This species is often found growing 
on alkaline flats, prairies,  and sandy plateaus.  It is 
common along drainage in desert and semi-desert 
areas. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Alkali sacaton seeds should be 
sown in the spring in a greenhouse.  Cover the seeds 
with a light layer  of the growing media.  
Germination for this species should take place within 
two weeks.  When seedlings are large enough to 
handle, plant them directly into their permanent 
positions in the summer. 
 
Large divisions can be planted directly into their 
permanent positions.  However, smaller divisions 
should be placed in individual pots in a cold frame, 
planting them when they are well established in the 
summer. 
 
Management 
Once  Sporobolus airoides  plants are well established 
little maintenance is required.  It is best that the 
stands of this species is grazed in the spring and 
summer when growth is active. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Commonly available thro ugh commercial seed 
vendors.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be

listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.  An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Gates, F.C. 1937.   Grasses in Kansas.  Kansas State 
Printing Plant, Topeka, Kansas. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1951.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  Misc. Publ. No. 200.  U.S. 
Department of Agricultural, Washington, D.C. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1971.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States.  Dover Publications,  New York, New 
York. 
 
Kearney, T.H.; R.H. Peebles; J. T. Howell; & E. 
McClintock 1960.  Arizona flora .  2nd ed.  University 
of California press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1974.   A flora of southern California .  
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Whiting, A.F. 1939.   Ethnobotany of the Hopi .  North 
Arizona Society of Science and Art. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all  prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.