Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMALL BURNET 
Sanguisorba minor Scop. 
Plant Symbol = SAMI3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office & 
the National Plant Data Center 
Alternative Names 
This species is recognized  as having the following 
subspecies occurring in the U.S.:  Sanguisorba minor 
ssp.  muricata . 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland: Small burnet is noted to have 
well to excellent forage value for livestock and 
wildlife during all seasons.  It stays green throughout 
the growing season and into winter until heavy snow 
cover occurs, providing forage and seed to livestock 
and wildlife.  It provides excellent diversity to the 
seeded plant community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Small burnet is noted 
for value in mixes for erosion control and 
beautification. 
 
Wildlife : Small burnet is considered very desirable 
forage for elk, deer, antelope and birds either as 
herbage or seed. Birds use the seed in fall, winter and 
spring.  It also provides co ver for selected small bird 
species.  It provides divers ity to the plant community. 
 Robert Mollenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Ethnobotanic: The leaves of small burnet can be 
added to salads, ice drinks, vinegar, butter, and cream 
cheese to add a fresh, pleasant, cucumber-like flavor. 
 
Status 
This is an introduced plant.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status, such 
as, state noxious status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Rose Family (Rosaceae).   Sanguisorba 
minor is an introduced, hardy, herbaceous, relatively 
long-lived, evergreen, non-leguminous, perennial 
forb.  It is usually a branched caudex (thick base of 
stems) with a prominent taproot and sometimes-
weakly rhizomatous.  
 
Small burnet plants have alternate pinnately 
compound leaves. Leaflets are mostly 9 to 17, oval to 
oblong, 4 inches long and coarsely serrate.  Total 
height varies from 6 inches on droughty sites to 
approximately 25 inches on irrigated sites.  The 
flowers are sessile and closel y packed in head-like to 
elongate spikes, which are 3 to 8 inches long.  The 
flowers are mostly imperfect, the lower ones 
staminate and the upper ones pistillate with no petals 
and about 12 stamens, which are filiform.  Native 
burnet species have two to fo ur stamens.  The seed is 
an achene, oblong, about 4 to 5 mm long, woody, 
papillate-warty, between and along rather prominent 
ridges, which are four in number. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Small burnet does best on well-drained 
soils and infertile to disturbe d soils.  It can be planted 
and will establish in 12 inches or more rainfall areas,

but generally does not persist below 14 inches.  It has 
excellent cold winter and drought tolerance.  It 
tolerates weakly saline to weakly acidic sites.  Small 
burnet is not tolerant of poor drainage, flooding or 
high water tables.  It is usually used in open areas, 
but will tolerate minor semi-shaded conditions.  It is 
considered fire resistant due to leaves and stems 
staying green with relatively high moisture content 
during the fire season.  
 
Planting: Small burnet should be seeded with a drill 
at a depth of 1/4 to 3/4 inch into a firm seedbed or 
broadcast using seed dribblers or aerial applications.  
Small burnet is not recommended for single species 
seedings.  The full seeding rate (not recommended) 
for this forb is 20 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre or 20 PLS per square foot.  When used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired. 
In most cases a rate of 2 to 5 pounds per acre would 
be adequate in mixtures with other species. For 
mined lands and other harsh critical areas, double the 
seeding rate component of small burnet.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
late fall to very early spring (because of grass 
component of mix) on heavy to medium textured 
soils and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Late summer (August - mid September) seeding is 
not recommended unless site is irrigated.  Mulching, 
irrigation and weed control all benefit stand 
establishment.  Seedling vigor is excellent, but the 
plant establishes slowly.  Germination normally 
occurs the first growing season if adequate moisture 
is available.  Full flowering should not be expected 
until at least the second growing season. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because sm all burnet is a broadleaf, 
use of 2,4-D is not recommended.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage.  Grasshoppers and other 
insects may also damage new stands and pesticides 
may be needed. 
 
Management 
Growth of small burnet begins in early spring and 
flowers appear in late Ma y through June.  The plant 
establishes slowly and should not be grazed until at 
least the second growing season.  Small burnet plants 
have been known to persist for more than 20 years on 
western rangelands.  As with other species, the life of 
the plant can be prolonged if it is permitted to set 
seed on a rotational basis.  
 
Weed control and removal of very competitive 
species may improve establishment.  Damage from 
wildlife and rodents may occu r and they may need to  be controlled.  Disease problems are minimal with 
small burnet. 
 
Seed Production
: Small burnet should be seeded in 
30 inch rows at the rate of 12 pounds PLS per acre to 
42 inch rows at the rate of 10 pounds PLS per acre 
(25 to 30 seeds per linear foot of row) to allow 
mechanical weed control.   It should be seeded in 
early spring (April - May). 
 
Hand rouging within row and cultivation between 
rows may be required after plants have reached 2 to 3 
inches in height.  Split applications of nitrogen in 
spring and fall and application of phosphorus in fall 
will enhance production following the establishment 
year.  For optimum production, do not stress plants 
for moisture during late bud stage, pollination and re-
growth.  
 
Bees are very active in seed fields when plants are in 
full bloom and therefore it is considered a good 
nectar producer. 
 
Seed is generally harvested in mid to late August by 
direct combining with platform set high enough to 
get most of the seed while leaving as much green 
material as possible.  Seed development occurs 
progressively from the bottom of plant to the top and 
is mature when dry and seed is hard and dark in 
color.  Harvest when approximately 80 percent of 
seed clusters are ripe.  Seed shatter is not a serious 
problem with this species.  Seed should be allowed to 
dry to 12 to 15 percent moisture and then stored in a 
cool dry area.  Seed retains viability for several years 
under these conditions. 
 
Seed yields of 700 to 1000 pounds per acre can be 
expected under irrigated conditions and 250 to 350 
pounds per acre under dryland conditions.  Seed 
production under dryland conditions is not 
recommended below 14 inches of average annual 
rainfall. 
 
Environmental Concerns : Small burnet establishes 
and spreads relatively quickly via seed distribution.  
Generally, it is not considered "weedy" or an invasive 
species, but can spread into adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions.  There have been reports of it having 
invasive weedy characteristics in Wyoming. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Please read label and safety instructions for each

control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named 
and other products may be equally effective.  
 
The following was provided by Holzworth (2000).  
Using 2 qt Roundup and 1 pt 2,4-D to kill seed fields 
can accomplish eradication and the fields are also 
plowed under.  Of course, this herbicide mixture 
would kill desirable plants as well.  Pam Hutchinson, 
Herbicide Specialist at Aberdeen R & E Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho, recommended the following to 
control small burnet in a pasture situation: A tank 
mix of Escort, Banvel, 2,4-D and a surfactant.  The 
addition of 2,4-D may make the mix hot enough to 
kill the burnet.  Also suggested was a mix of Stinger 
(0.5-1.5 pt) and 2,4-D (1-2 pt).  This mix is labeled 
for knapweed.  Another suggestion was using 
Tordon, but only as a last resort.  Specific 
information should be obtained through your local 
agricultural extension office. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
'Delar' small burnet is a selected release from seed 
originating from European sources.  The name 'Delar' 
denotes pleasing or alluring after the attractive green 
lush appearance of the plant.  Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center developed the release for 
outstanding seed and forage production, good cold 
tolerance, and palatability for both livestock and 
wildlife.  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service and the University  of Idaho Agricultural 
Experiment Station released it in 1981. 
 
'Delar' is a hardy, relativ ely long-lived, evergreen, 
non-leguminous, introduced, perennial forb from 6 
inches tall on droughty sites to approximately 25 
inches tall on irrigated sites.  It is well adapted to 
sunny flatlands to open slopes, well-drained soils 
from moderately basic to weakly acidic, 12 to 18 inch 
rainfall areas, at 1,000 to 6,000 feet elevation.  It will 
easily establish at the lower rainfall zones, but may 
not persist below 14 inches. It is not tolerant of 
shade, poor drainage, flooding, or high water tables.  
It does well seeded in mixtures with other species.  
Its intended uses are eros ion control, reclamation, 
rangeland improvement, wildlife forage, and site 
diversity.  Certified seed is readily available through 
commercial sources and breeder seed is maintained 
by Aberdeen Plant Materials Center.  
 
Alternative native Sanguisorba  species that might be 
considered include the following:  Sanguisorba annua 
(prairie burnet),  Sanguisorba canadensis  (Canadian 
burnet),  Sanguisorba menziesii  (Menzies’ burnet), 
Sanguisorba occidentalis  (western burnet), and 
Sanguisorba officinalis  (common burnet).  Please 
check PLANTS for the speci es that occur in your 
area.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Holzworth, L. 2000.   Personal communication .  Plant 
Materials Specialist.  USDA, NRCS, Montana State 
Office, Bozeman, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000510.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
J. Scott Peterson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Edited 18jan01 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.