Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TRAILING 
FUZZYBEAN  
Strophostyles helvula  (L.) Ell. 
Plant Symbol = STHE4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Wild bean, sand bean, trailing bean, trailing 
wildbean, pink wild bean 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The Houma, Choctaw, Iroquois, and 
other Native American tribes used trailing fuzzybean 
for food as well as various medicinal uses.  The 
Choctaw would boil and mash the roots for food.  
The Houma combined trailing fuzzybean with Cassia 
Tora (Indian Coffee) to make a tea for treating 
typhoid.  The Iroquois treated poison ivy and warts 
by rubbing the whole leaves  on the affected areas.   
 
Wildlife: Bobwhites, quail and turkeys are among the 
birds that feed on the seeds of trailing fuzzybean.   
 
Other : In areas where it is adapted, the trailing fuzzy 
bean is used in reseeding mixtures, to prevent 
erosion.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Legume Family (Fabaceae).  Trailing 
fuzzybean is an native, herb aceous annual vine.  The 
plant has a fuzzy stem from 1-3 m in length.  Young 
stems are erect and become trailing or twining as they 
grow.  Leaflets are 2-5.5 cm long and ovate to ovate-
oblong in shape.  The leaves can often have three 
lobes.  The purple-pea flower s are borne at the top of 
long, naked stalks.  Blooms fade with time to include 
shades of green.  The flowers are 8-13mm long.  The 
long, fuzzy pods (4-10 cm long) contain several 
pubescent seeds that are black and shiny with 
removal of the fuzzy outer coat.  The plants bloom 
from summer to fall.  The seed pods shatter, 
dispersing the seeds, when the seeds are ripe.   
 ©William S. Justice  @PLANTS 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Trailing fuzzybean can be found along the 
banks of rivers, in damp thicket, in open woodlands, 
low places between coastal dunes, fields, abandoned 
cropland and roadsides.   
 
Adaptation 
Trailing fuzzybean is a “p ioneer” plant, which is 
often found colonizing open sites in either moist or 
dry conditions.  Although it prefers sandy soils, it can 
be found on a wide range of medium to fine-textured 
upland soils.   
 
Establishment 
Seeds may be planted in April or May.  You may 
plant trailing fuzzybean in the same manner as any 
garden bean.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
These plant materials are not generally available from 
commercial sources.  Seed  from the “Hopefield 
selection,” developed for erosion control, is available 
from the USDA-NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Rt. W Box 215-A, Coffeeville, 
Mississippi 38922 (Tel. 601 675-2588).  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Duncan, W.H. & L.E. Foote 1975.  Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Press,  Syracuse, New York.  278 
pp.   
 
Isley, D. 1990.   Vascular flora of the Southeastern 
United States, Volume 3, Part 2, Leguminosae 
(Fabaceae).   University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  258 pp.   
 
Jamie L. Whitten Plant Material Center 1997.  
Planting guide:  Strophostyles helvula  Hopefield 
selections (trailing wildbean) (ID#2273).  
http://www.nhq.nrcs.usda .gov/BCS/PMC/pubs/allpub
s.html.  (12 June 2001).   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(13 June 2001) 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana .  Primitive 
Man Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference 14(4): 49-75. 
 
Taylor, K.S. and S.F. Hamblin 1963.   Handbook of 
wild flower cultivation .  The Macmillan Company, 
New York, New York.  307 pp.   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 
Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.