Pinehill bluestem    
    
Schizachyrium scoparium (Michx.) Nash var. 
divergens (Hack.) Gould       
Plant Symbol = SCSCD     
      
Common Names:  Pinehill bluestem, eastern little bluestem 
         
Scientific Names:   
Andropogon divergens (Hack.) Andersson ex Hitchc. 
Andropogon scoparius Michx. var. divergens Hack. 
Andropogon scoparius Michx. var. virilis Shinners 
Schizachyrium scoparium (Michx.) Nash subsp. divergens (Hack.) Gandhi & 
Smeins 
Schizachyrium scoparium (Michx.) Nash var. virile (Shinners) Gould 
   
Description 
General:  Pinehill bluestem is a native, warm season perennial grass with 
short rhizomes.  Pinehill bluestem has erect stems averaging 4 feet in height.  Leaves are 
narrow, 1/8 to 1/4 inch wide and 10 to 24 inches long.  The leaves can be flat or folded with 
long or short fine pubescence.  Basal leaves are numerous, but decrease as they progress up the 
plant. Pinehill bluestem appearance varies from pubescent to almost glabrous and in color from 
green to glaucous.  The seedhead is composed of sessile spikelets 1/4 to 5/16 inch long with stiff 
awns. The pedicellate and sessile spikelets are equal in length and the glumes, lemma, and palea 
are well developed (Grelen and Duvall 1966) (See illustration at right). 
Distribution:  Pinehill bluestem is found throughout the pinelands of the southeastern United 
States, predominantly in Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, eastern Texas, and 
southwestern Arkansas (McMillan 1964).  It has been reported as far north as Illinois and east as 
North Carolina (Grelen 1974).  For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site: http://plants.usda.gov/core/profile?symbol=SCSCD 
Habitat:  Pinehill bluestem is found on upland sites and is usually the dominant native grass in 
shaded mature pine forests.  In open areas it shares dominance with slender bluestem 
(Schizachyrium tenerum) (Grelen and Duvall 1966).   Panicums (Panicum spp.), paspalums (Paspalum spp.), pineywoods 
dropseed (Sporobolus junceus), swamp sunflower (Helianthus angustifolius), and hairy small-leaf ticktrefoil (Desmodium 
ciliare) also grow in association with pinehill bluestem in the western gulf region (Cassady 1951). 
Adaptation 
Pinehill bluestem grows best on well drained, medium to coarse textured soils and does not tolerate excessive wetness.  It 
tolerates up to 60% shade (Leithead et al 1971).   
Uses 
Livestock: Pinehill bluestem is a valuable native forage grass for cattle during spring and summer in southern pine forests 
west of the Mississippi River (Grelen and Duvall 1966).  Because of its moderate shade tolerance (Halls et al. 1964), pinehill 
bluestem may have application for silvopasture in the southern U.S.   
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Pinehill bluestem during seed set. 
Pinehill bluestem spikelet 
illustration (Grelen and Duvall 
1966).

Wildlife: Bluestem grasses provide protection for small mammals, nesting areas for ground nesting birds, and a food source 
for turkey (Grelen 1973; Harshbarger and Simpson 1970; USDA-NRCS 1999).  Native bees use bluestems for nesting 
materials (Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center 2016). 
Native habitat restoration: Pinehill bluestem can be used for native habitat restoration.  It is one of the dominant grasses of 
native longleaf pine-bluestem range, and an important fine fuel source for reintroducing fire back into the longleaf eco-
system (Grelen 1973). 
Ethnobotany 
Native Americans used bluestems for moccasin insulation in the winter.  Ashes from the burnt stems were applied on open 
sores or mixed with water and drunk to treat indigestion (Casey and Wynia 2010). 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:   No. (US Fish and Wildlife Service 2016)  
Wetland Indicator: Pinehill bluestem is considered a facultative upland (FACU) plant in the continental United States (US 
Army Corps of Engineers 2014). 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weedy or Invasive:  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  The seed is light and may spread to surrounding areas, especially a garden or landscaping area. Please consult with 
your local USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Planting Guidelines 
Begin seedbed preparation well in advance of planting.  Establish a weed free seedbed by tillage or herbicides.  Prior to 
planting in the spring, the seedbed must be firmed and have accumulated soil moisture for improved establishment success. 
Pinehill bluestem seed is fluffy which makes it difficult to plant with a conventional grain drill. Native grass drills equipped 
with picker wheels or a fluffy seed box is the preferred method for planting pinehill bluestem seed. When using a seed drill 
without picker wheels or a fluffy seed box, seed should be debearded to facilitate seed flow through the planter.  Seed 
lubricants such as powdered graphite may also reduce bridging inside the seed box and drop tubes.  Seed should be planted 
approximately 1/8 inch deep.  Planting into a fluffy or loose seedbed may cause soil to sluff off into tracks left by the planter 
press wheels and bury the seed too deeply after the first rain event.  It is better to plant shallow than too deep.   
Pinehill bluestem seed may also be broadcast planted but is not recommended.  If seed is broadcast planted, a carrier agent 
such as sand or cat litter is required to help seed flow more easily through spreaders and for improved seed distribution.  If 
possible, seed should be incorporated with a drag or cultipacker after broadcast planting.  Seeding rates should be increased 
by 25% or more.  Timing broadcast plantings to rain events will help incorporate seed into the soil and improve 
establishment.  Spraying slurry mixtures through hydromulchers may also be more effective in certain situations such as 
steep slope seedings.   
For calibration purposes, a pinehill bluestem ecotype in seed production at the East Texas Plant Materials Center contains 
approximately 270,000 seeds per bulk lb. A seeding rate of 5.6 PLS lb/acre is recommended. When planting seed mixes, 
adjust the seeding rate according to the percent of pinehill bluestem in the mixture.         
Management 
Contact your local NRCS field office for assistance in developing a prescribed grazing plan. Do not graze pinehill bluestem 
during the year of planting.  Pinehill bluestem is a key management forage plant on the longleaf and slash pine woodlands 
within its range and often accounts for over 50% of the total grass herbage weight (Grelen and Duvall 1966; Grelen and 
Enghart 1973). It is grazed primarily in the spring and summer when approximately 70% of the forage is produced (Cassady 
1953).  Pinehill bluestem averages up to 10% crude protein in young leaves, but is reduced to 5% or less in mature summer

foliage (Campbell et al. 1954).  This grass may also be used as standing forage in late fall and winter (Byrd et al. 1984) but 
may require a protein supplement depending on the nutritional needs of the livestock.  
Pinehill bluestem is not tolerant of continuous or close grazing.   A short grazing season beginning on or before April 1 until 
the cattle stop gaining weight in the summer is the best use of bluestem ranges within the longleaf pine belt. Therefore for 
maximum production and to maintain stand health, only 50% of the current growth by weight should be harvested during a 
growing season.  To control weeds, mow the stand at 8-10 inch stubble height or apply herbicides as labelled for grass.  
Pinehill bluestem responds to prescribed burning in the dormant season and allow at least 60 days deferment before grazing 
is initiated in the spring (Leithead et al. 1971).  
Pests and Potential Problems 
 Phyllosticta andropogonivora has been reported to cause leaf spot on little bluestem (Schizachyrium spp.) (Horst 2001 and 
Krupinsky and Tober 1990).  
Environmental Concerns 
Pinehill bluestem produces light, fluffy seeds that are wind distributed.  Pinehill bluestem is a native grass species and its 
escape from planted areas would not be considered hazardous or detrimental to the natural landscape. 
Control 
Pinehill bluestem may be controlled by mechanical means such as mowing or by applying a broad spectrum herbicide which 
are labelled for control of grasses.  Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.   
Seeds and Plant Production 
Use soil test recommendations to determine soil fertility and pH of the site to be planted.  If needed, amend pH to a level of 
6.0 to 7.0 with lime according to soil test recommendations.  For commercial plant or seed production, amend fertility (N, P, 
and K) according to soil tests after plants have had at least one growing season to establish.  This will minimize competition 
from warm season weeds during the growing season.  
Pinehill bluestem will be most productive in fields that receive partial shade (50% - 60%) during all or a portion of the day.  
Native species such as pinehill bluestem may be transplanted as seedlings to establish seed production fields where 
applicable.  Transplanting reduces the time needed to achieve a solid stand, allows for use of pre-emergent herbicides, and 
reduces the amount of weed competition typically seen in fields planted from seed.   Transplants may be grown in the 
greenhouse using standard greenhouse production practices.  At the USDA-NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center, seeds 
are planted in propagation trays in February to coincide with increasing day length.  Seed is sown into trays filled with a 
soilless potting mix and sand and allowed to grow in the greenhouse for 10 to 12 weeks or until the seedlings develop a dense 
fibrous root plug.  Before planting to the seed production field, seedlings are hardened off in a shade house for approximately 
two weeks.  
Once transplants are beyond the seedling stage, cultivation and post-
emergence herbicides are recommended to reduce weed competition and 
maintain stand integrity.  Consult your local extension weed specialist for 
recommended herbicides.  Always read and follow label directions when 
applying herbicides.   
Pinehill bluestem is an indeterminate in seed maturity.  Seed can be 
harvested using a combine or flail harvester.  When harvesting with a 
combine, use low volume air settings to minimize seed loss.  In contrast to a 
combine, the flail harvester is a nondestructive harvest method allowing 
multiple harvests of seed production fields.  This machine harvests mature 
seed, leaving the immature seed for a later harvest.  After harvest, the seed 
should be dried and debearded to partially remove awns and other seed 
appendages before cleaning.  A seed cleaner with air adjustments and Harvesting fluffy seed of splitbeard bluestem with 
a flail harvester.

separation screens is used to remove stems, chaff, and unfilled seed. To enhance seed longevity, store seed in a humidity and 
temperature controlled environment. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Currently pinehill bluestem cultivars and improved materials are not available in the commercial market (Native Seed 
Network 2016). Pinehill seed procured for planting purposes should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local 
pests, and intended use. Consult your local USDA- NRCS office for recommendations when considering using native 
harvested seed for planting. 
 
Literature Cited 
 
Byrd, N., C. Lewis, and H. Pearson. 1984. Management of southern pine forests for cattle production. Gen. Rep. R8-GR-4. 
USDA-USFS Southern Region. Atlanta, GA. 
Campbell, R., E. Epps, Jr., C. Moreland, J. Farr, and F. Bonner. 1954. Nutritive values of native plant on forest range in 
central Louisiana. Louisiana Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 488. 18 p. 
Casey, P. and R. Wynia. 2010. Culturally significant plants. USDA-NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center. Manhattan, 
KS. 
Cassady, J. 1951. Bluestem range in the piney woods of Louisiana and east Texas. J. Range Mgt. 4:173-177. 
Cassady, J. 1953. Herbage production on bluestem range in central Louisiana. J. Range Mgt. 6:38-43. 
Grelen, H. 1973. Pinehill bluestem, Andropogon scoparius var. divergens Anderss. Ex. Hack., and anomaly of the A. 
scoparius complex. The Amer. Midland Nat. 91:438-444. 
Grelen, H. 1974. Variation in pinehill bluestem, a southern ecotypes of the Andropogon scoparius complex. J. Range Mgt. 
27:283-284. 
Grelen, H. and H. Enghart. 1973. Burning and thinning maintain forage in a longleaf pine plantation. J. Forest. 71:419-425. 
Grelen, H. and V. Duvall. 1966. Common plants of the longleaf pine-bluestem range. US Forest Service Research Paper SO-
23. Southern Forest Experiment Station. New Orleans, LA. 
Halls, L., R. Hughes, R. Rummell, and B. Southwell. 1964. Forage and cattle management in longleaf-slash pine forests. 
Farmers Bull. No. 2199. USDA. Washington, D.C.  
Harshbarger, T., R. Simpson. 1970. Late summer nesting sites of quail in south Georgia. Res. Note SE-131. Asheville, NC. 
USDA-US Forest Service. Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. 4 pg. 
Horst, R. (ed.) 2001. Westcott’s Plant Disease Handbook. 6th ed. Vol.1. Springer Science and Business Media, LLC. New 
York, NY. 
Krupinsky, J. and D. Tober. 1990. Leaf spot disease of little bluestem, big bluestem, and sand bluestem caused by 
Phyllosticta andropogonivora. Plant Dis. 74:442-445. 
Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center. 2016. NPIN: native plant database-Schizachyrium scoparium. Ladybird Johnson 
Wildflower Center. Austin, TX. 
Leithead, H.L., L. Yarlett, and T. Shiflet. 1971. 100 Native forage grasses in 11 southern states. USDA-Soil Conservation 
Service. Agr. Handbook no. 389. U.S. Gov. Print Office. Washington, DC. 
McMillan, C. 1964. Ecotypic differentiation within four North American prairie grasses. I. Morphological variation within 
transplanted community fractions. Amer. J. Bot. 51:1119-1128.

Native Seed Network. 2016. Plant detail-little bluestem-Schizachyrium scoparium var. divergens. Accessed online 
4/22/2016: http://www.nativeseednetwork.org/viewtaxon?taxon_code=SCSCD 
US Corps of Engineers. 2014. Wetland status indicator. Accessed online 4/27/2016: 
http://rsgisias.crrel.usace.army.mil/nwpl_static/viewer.html# 
US Fish and Wildlife Service. 2016. Environmental conservation online system species report. Dept. of the Interior-US Fish 
and Wildlife Service. Washington, D.C. Accessed online 4/25/2016: http://ecos.fws.gov/tess_public/reports/ad-hoc-
species-
report?kingdom=P&status=E&status=T&status=EmE&status=EmT&status=EXPE&status=EXPN&status=SAE&status=
SAT&mapstatus=3&fcrithab=on&fstatus=on&fspecrule=on&finvpop=on&fgroup=on&ffamily=on&header=Listed+Plan
ts 
USDA-NRCS. 1999. Wild Turkey (Meleagris gallopavo). Fish and Wildlife Habitat Management Leaflet No. 12. 
Citation 
Brakie, M.  2016. Plant Guide for pinehill bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium var. divergens). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center. Nacogdoches, TX. 75964. 
Published: July 2016   
 
Edited:  
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information.
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER