Plant Guide
LATE LILAC 
Syringa villosa Vahl 
Plant Symbol = SYVI3  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS P lant M aterials  Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota   
 
Photo  Credit:  Lincoln -Oakes Nursery, Bismarck, North Dakota  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Villous lilac   
S cientific Alternate Names: N one 
Uses  
Conservation:  Late lilac is recommended for windbreak 
plantings  in field s and farmstead s.  The dense growth 
habit is well suited for providing wind and snow 
protection.  
 
Wildlife and Recreation: It provides escape cover and 
habitat for  songbirds and various small mammals.   Lilac 
species are rated excellent for pollen  availability when 
bees firs t emerge in the spring (Henderson, 1987).  The 
attractive whitish, lavender, or rose -colored blooms add 
beauty to recreational plantings.  
 
Ethnobotany : Medicinal use included  a tonic made from  
leaves and fruit used for the treatment of sore throats.  
Extracts from  Syringa  species are known to be toxic to 
various insect pests  (Herman et al., 1996).  
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plants current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).   Weediness
 
T his plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.   It does not sucker extensively 
and its fruit is  not desired  by  birds so  the degree of spread 
is generally not a problem.   Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
O ffice, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description 
Late lilac is na tive to northern China  and is a medium to 
large, hardy shrub with stout spreading branches.  It has 
an oval to irregularly shaped crown.  Flowers are white, 
or rose  to pale  lavender.  It generally flowers 1 - 2 weeks 
“later” than common lilac, and the color  fades quickly  
(Eisel, 1997).   Spreading branches sprout  from the base.  
P lant s of this species  w ere  10 feet tall and 12 feet wide 
after 1 4 years on loam  soils in Conservation Tree and 
Shrub  G roup 3 in central South Dakota  (Knudson,  2004 ).   
This  species  will coppice back after a light  fire or 
mowing .  It is long -lived.  
 
The brown buds  are opposite. Bu ds are ⅛ to  ½ inch  long.  
The  entire  leaves are simple  and broad-elliptic to oblong.   
The surface is  usually pubescent near the  midrib  and 
wrinkled.   Margin s are entire.   The large and deep -veined  
green leaves are 3  to  7 inches long and 1 ½ inches  to  4 
inches  wide.  The flowers  which are not as fragrant as 
common lilac , are borne in large terminal panicles.   White 
to  lav ender  flowers fo rm woody capsules with  smooth, 
brown  seeds  (Herman  et al., 1996).   There are 41,000 
seeds per pound (Knudson, 2000).  
 
The growth habit is  upright with a  rounded to oval  profile.   
It has a coarse summer and winter texture.   The young 
bark is green -brown, and older bark is gray -br own.  Late 
lilac has a dense, fibrous and shallow root system.   It does 
not form suckers (Herman  et al., 1 996).  
 
The coarse leaves and short -lived flowers are undesirable 
for landscaping.   This is not a good landscape plant 
because it lacks other good orna mental characteristics 
(Knowles, 1995).  
Distr ibution  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.