Plant Guide
LAMBSTONGUE 
RAGWORT  
Senecio integerrimus  Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = SEIN2  
Including:  
S. integerrimus Nutt. var . exaltatus (Nutt.) Cronquist . 
( SEINE) 
S.  integerrimus  Nutt. var.integerrimus  (SEINI) 
S. integerrimus Nutt.  var . major  (A. Gray) Cronquist 
(SEINM) 
S. integerrimus Nutt.  var . ochroleucus  (A. Gray) 
Cronquist (SEINO) 
S. integerrimus Nutt.  var . scribneri  (Rydb.) T.M. Barkley 
(SEINS)
 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
 
Lambstongue ragwort. Photo by Paul Slichter . 
  Alternate Names
 
Gauge  plant , one-stemmed butterweed, single -stemmed 
groundsel, w estern groundsel , wet-the -bed  
Columbia ragwort= S. integerrimus  var.  exaltatus  
Pale yellow ragwort= S. integerrimus  var.  ochroleucus  
Scribner’s ragwort= S. integerrimus var.  scribneri  
Uses  
Wildlife:  Lambstongue ragwort attracts a variety of 
pollinators  including bumblebees, butterflies and flies 
(Schmitt, 1980) . 
 
Livestock:  CAUTION  Lam bstongue ragwort and other 
members of the genus have been found to contain toxic  
alkaloids  (Tilley and St. John 2011) , and presents a risk to 
livestock  ( Clawson, 1933;  Talcott, 2003).  
 
Other : Lambstongue ragwort was u sed by settlers and 
ranchers  to determ ine range  “readiness”. When it was in 
flower, the range was  believed to be sufficiently 
developed for grazing to begin, hence the common name 
“gauge plant”  (Welsh and others, 2003). In western 
folklore it was blamed for causing bedwetting (Welsh and 
others, 2003).  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Lambstongue ragwort is a perennial forb in the 
sunflower family (Asteraceae). It has a short semi -
rhizomatous  caudex giving rise to 1 or more  upright stems 
growing 1 0 to 60 cm (4 to 24 in) tall. The basal and lower 
stem leaves are petiolate, 3 to 20 cm (1 to 8 in) long and 1 
to 4 cm (0.4 to 1.6 in)  wide. The leaves are lanceolate to 
oblong in outline. The margins are typically entire, but 
sometimes serrate or dentate.  The upper stem leaves are 
smaller.  The herbage is covered with cobwebby hairs 
when young. The stems and leaves become more glabrous 
as the plant matures. The inflorescence is a compact to 
loose cyme. The flower heads have ray and disk flowers. 
The ray flo wers have yellow petals, 4 to 15 mm (0.2 to 
0.6 in) long. The bracts surrounding the floral head have 
black tips. The fruit is an achene with a white pappus 
(Welsh and others, 2003).  There are approximately 
400,000 seeds/lb (USDA -NRCS, 2012).  
 
Five varieties of lambstongue ragwort are currently 
recognized. Barkley (1997) provides a taxonomic key to 
varieties.