Plant Guide
COMPASS PLANT  
Silphium laciniatum  L.  
Plant Symbol = SILA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA / NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 
Alan Shadow, NRCS, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX  
 
Alternate Names  rosinweed, gum weed, cut -leaf 
silphium, or turpentine pl ant 
 
Uses  
Livestock: It is reported that compass plant is palatable 
and nutritious and grazed by livestock especially in a 
juvenile state. It will decrease in heavily grazed pastures 
and eventually disappear from the site  (Haddock, 2005). 
Eddy (1992) found  it along roadsides in the Kansas Flint 
Hills, but rarely found it in pastures.  
Native American uses : The pounded root of compass plant 
was used by the Pawnees to make a tea for “general 
debility ”. This tea was also used by the Santee Dakotas to 
rid horses  of worms and by the Omahas and Poncas as a 
horse tonic (Kindscher, 1992).  The Indian children of 
several tribes used the resinous sap as a chewing gum to 
cleanse their teeth and sweeten their breath.  Preparations 
from compass plant were used by nineteent h century 
doctors as an antipyretic, diuretic, emetic, expectorant, 
tonic, styptic, antispasmodic,  and stimulant and for their 
diaphoretic properties (Kindscher, 1992).  
Wildlife:  Birds and small mammals eat the seeds (Art, 
1991). In grasslands, devoid of w oody species, the 
compass plant provides a sturdy perch for prairie 
songbirds . Eastern k ingbirds use the compass plant as a 
perch to locate and capture grassland insects (Platt and 
Harder, 1991).  
 
 
  Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Compass plant is a long lived perennial member 
of the sunflower or composite  family (Asteraceae). The 
basal leaves and stems all arise from an underground 
crown. A large reddish brown tap root 2.54 to 5.08 
centimeters (cm) is located just below the crown, but 
rapidly looses diameter as it descends into the soil 
(Weaver, 1954).  The tap root  extends from 3 to 4 meters 
(m) deep into the soil with a few branching roots 
extending out  into a column of soil  from 2 to 3 m in 
diameter.  Basal leaves of y ounger plants are large (.6 m) 
deeply cut, angularly lobed, clasping, hairy, and are 
orien ted vertically instead of horizontally. The leaf blades 
tend to point north and south, thereby avoiding the heat of 
the noonday sun and earning the plant its common name 
(Art,  1991) . Stems are erect and number from one to 
several with total height between 1 and 3.5 m. Simple 
l eaves have an alternate arrangement on the stem and are 
large and deeply lobed at the stem base and less divided, 
smaller leaves  exhibit sessile attachment higher up on the 
stem.  Leaves are leathery and stiff with rough surfaces 
and ha irs located on the main veins. Large  yellow flower 
heads (5 to 10 cm ) are borne along the upper half to two 
thirds of the stem in small clusters, on short stalks, from 
the axils of the reduced leaves or the stem apex. Flower 
blooming begins in late June and proceeds through 
August. The flower heads begin to open at the top of the 
stem. There are 15 to 34 narrow yellow “petals” (ray 
florets), 2.5 to 5.0 cm long, and numerous  disk florets  
with yellow corollas  in the center of the flower  (Platt and 
Harder, 199 1). The fruits are a chenes, flattened, about 1.3 
cm  long with notched tips.  The achenes only develop on 
the outside of the head since only the ray florets have 
fertile pistils and produce seed units (Platt and Harder, 
1991).  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Compass plant grows in the eastern half of Kansas. It 
is found in the eastern section of the Great Plains from 
North Dakota to Texas and eastward to Ohio and 
Alabama.  
 
Habitat : Compass plant grows in full sun in tallgrass and 
mixed grass prairies  and in moderately disturbed areas 
such as roadsides. It is found on a variety of soil types 
from clay loams to silt loams, but thrives  where there is 
moist,  deep subsoil presen t. It can tolerate a wide pH