Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LILAC 
Syringa vulgaris  L. 
Plant Symbol = SYVU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Name 
common lilac 
 
Uses 
Economic: A green dye is obtain ed from the flowers 
and the leaves and a yellow- orange dye is obtained 
from the twigs (Grae 1974).  An essential oil is 
obtained from the flowers and used in perfume 
fragrances. 
 
Ethnobotanic : The bark and leaves has been chewed 
as a treatment for sore mouth (Moerman 1998). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Olive Family (Oleaceae).  Lilac is an 
introduced, perennial, deci duous shrub that grows 
between twelve to sixteen feet tall.  The leaves are 
simple, ovate to broadly ovate, and five to twelve  centimeters long.  The flowers are mostly white, lilac, 
or purple, pleasantly fragrant in long terminal 
panicles (Copperrider 1995).  The fruiting capsules 
are one to 1.5 centimeters long, with flat winged 
seeds (Bruggen 1976). 
 
Distribution
: Common lilac is native of Europe, 
introduced and naturalized in the United States, 
escapes from cultivation from New York to North 
Dakota, south to Georgia and Kansas (Steyermark 
1963).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 Conservation Trees & Shrubs for Montana USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office 
 
Adaptation 
Lilac is easily grown on most soil types but prefers 
neutral to slightly acid soil.  This species does not 
tolerate poorly drained soils.  It performs best in a 
warm sunny position. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Lilac seeds should be sown in 
March, or as soon as they are ripe, in a cold frame.  
The seeds should be pre-treated for four weeks of 
warm stratification and then three weeks cold 
stratification to improve germination.  Place the 
seedlings into individual pots when they are large 
enough to handle.  If sufficient growth is made by the 
summer it is possible to out-plant otherwise grow 
seedlings in a cold frame for the first winter and out-
plant in late spring the next year. 
 
Management 
Common lilac should be planted in areas with good 
air circulation to reduce problems with powdery 
mildew.  The first year after planting,  Syringa 
vulgaris  will probably not produce many, if any 
blooms; only after it has adapted itself to its new 
surroundings will it begin to produce flower clusters 
with vigor.  Pruning should be done yearly to 
maintain desired height and improve form. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Commonly available through commercial nurseries.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Bruggen, T.V. 1976.  The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.   Trees and shrubs on New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Cooperrider, T.S. 1995.   The dicotyledoneae of Ohio 
part 2: linaceae through campanulaceae .  Ohio State 
University Press, Columbus, Ohio. 
 
DeWolf, G.P., Jr. 1987.   Taylor’s guide to shrub’s .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
Grae, I. 1974.  Nature’s colors-dyes from plants .  
MacMillan Publishing Company, New York, New 
York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Press, B & D. Hosking. 1993.   Photographic field 
guide: trees of Britain and Europe .  New Holland 
Publishers, London. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   Conservation trees and shrubs 
for Montana .  Custer County Soil Conservation 
District & Montana State Of fice, Bozeman, Montana.  
Accessed: 14jan02.  
<www.mt.nrcs.usda.gov/pas/forestry/lilac.html> 
 
Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.