Plant Guide
GOOSEBERRYLEAF 
GLOBEMALLOW  
Sphaeralcea grossulariifolia  
( Hook. & Arn. ) Rydb.  
Plant Symbol = SPGR 2 
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen , ID  
 
Gooseberryleaf globemallow. Photo by Clint Shock. Malheur 
Experiment Station, Oregon State University.  
Alternate Names  
Currant -leaf globemallow  
 
Uses  
Forage :  Globemallow  species  are grazed 
opportunistically by pronghorn  antelope,  deer , elk, 
and  bighorn sheep  (Beale  and Smith , 1970; 
Rumbaugh  and others, 1993). The leaves , fruit s and 
seeds are eaten by rodents , rabbits  and birds (Pendery 
and Rumbaugh, 1986).  Palatability  of globemallow  
species  has been rated desirable to preferred in spring 
and sum mer for sheep and antelope and  desirable in 
spring, summer and fall for cattle, horses, deer and 
elk  (Ogle and Brazee, 2009).  Globemallow is 
preferred over grass but not alfalfa during the spring,  but is less desirable than grass and alfalfa during the 
fall (Rumbaugh and others 1993). 
 
 
Pollinator habitat:   Globemallow species  flower in 
the spring and are known to attract  numerous species 
of  native  bees including  Diadasia,  Agapostemon, 
Halictus, Melissodes  and  Calliopsis  (Pendery and 
Rumbaugh, 1986) . Some bee species are specialists 
which only forage pollen and nectar from 
Sphaeralcea  and related taxa of the mallow family  
(Tepedino, 2011).   
 
Range revegetation:  Gooseberryleaf  globemallow is 
well adapted to arid to semi -arid environments in the 
western  United States. It establishes fr om seed and 
also by  transplanting and has been shown to be 
competitive against cheatgrass and other  winter 
annuals (Stevens and Monsen, 2004).  
 
Ethnobotanical:  Hopi  Indians used  boiled or chewed 
roots for bowel problems  and f or broken bones 
(Colton, 1974) . 
Status  
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Descriptio n 
General :  Mallow family (Malvaceae).  
Gooseberryleaf globemallow i s a native perennial 
forb  to subshrub  with few to many stems arising from 
a  deep, branched  woody caudex. Mature plants range 
from 35 to 75 cm ( 14 to 30 in) in height. This species 
is morph ologically diverse. Stems and leaves can be 
white to gray with dense stellate hairs, or green and 
sparsely hairy. The leaves are typically 3 to 5 lobed 
with the lobes distinct to the base, the blades 1.2 to 5 
cm ( 0.5 to 2.0  in) long. Flowers are orange or rarely 
rose pink with 5 petals ranging from 8 to 18 mm ( 0.3 
to 0.7 in) in length. The fruit is a schizocarp with 8 to 
20 carpels (Welsh and others , 2003). 
 
Distribution :  Gooseberryleaf globemallow is native 
to western  North America  from Idaho south to New 
Mexico and west to arid regions of Washington, 
Oregon and California. For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Gooseberryleaf globemallow occurs in cool 
and warm desert shrub communities in western North 
America. It is commonly found in salt desert shrub

and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.    
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER