Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HARDSTEM BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus acutus  (Muhl. 
ex Bigelow) A. & D. Love var.  occidentalis  (S. Wats.) S.G. 
Sm. 
Plant Symbol = SCACO2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Idaho Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Bulrush, tule, black root.  Known in some floras as 
Scirpus acutus  Bigelow var. occidentalis (S. Watson) 
Beetle. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Hardstem bulrush is similar to the 
cattail in edibility, although it is purportedly sweeter.  
Young 
shoots coming up in the spring can be eaten 
raw or cooked.  Bulrush pollen 
is eaten as flour in 
bread, mush or pancakes.  Later in the season, the 
seeds can be beaten off in to baskets or pails, ground 
into a similar meal and used as flour.  The large 
rhizomes are eaten raw or cooked; sometimes they 
were dried in the sun, then pounded into a kind of 
flour.   Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani  (synonym: 
Scirpus validus) ,  a similar species, has as much as 
8% sugar and 5.5% starch in rhizomes, but less than 
1% protein (Harrington 1972). 
 
The rhizome (underground stem) is used for the black 
element in basket design.  Rhizomes are obtained by 
digging around the plant and following them out 
from the parent plant.  Often the green stalks are cut, 
to make the rooting area  more accessible.  Bulrushes 
are called black root by Pomo basket weavers in 
California; the cream-colored rhizome is dyed black 
for basketry designs.  The rhizomes are soaked from 
3 to 6 months with acorns and a piece of iron, ashes 
or walnut husks until a dark brown to black color is 
obtained.  Rhizomes are then stored in coils to dry, 
then woven into coiled baskets.  Only about the 
thickness of a toothpick, the split rhizomes are both 
flexible and strong. 
 
Tule houses were common throughout many parts of 
California; the overlapping tule matters were well-
insulated and rain-proof.  Willow poles, arched and 
anchored into the ground and tied with cordage or 
bark formed the framework.  The walls are thatched 
with mats of tule or cattail and secured to the frame.  
In Nevada, tules and willows  were bound together in 
a sort of crude weaving fo r "Kani", the Paiute name 
for summerhouse.  Tules and cattails were used as 
insulating thatch for structures matting, bedding, and 
roofing materials.  As thatching material, these 
bulrushes were spread out  in bundles, tied together, 
then secured in  place with poles. 
Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Several California Indian tribes make canoes of tule 
stems bound together with vines from wild grape.  
Groups located near the California coast, on mud 
flats and in marshes, used tule to make large round 
mud-shoes for their feet so they could walk without 
sinking.  They also make dwellings of tule.  Shredded 
tule was used for baby diapers, bedding, and 
menstrual padding.  Women made skirts from tule.   
During inclement weather, men wore shredded tule 
capes, which tied around the neck and was belted at 
the waist.  Duck decoys were made of tule. 
 
Other Uses : Streambank stabilization, wetland 
restoration, wildlife food an d shelter, edible (young 
shoots, pollen, seeds, rhiz omes), basketry, houses, 
roofing material, matting, bedding, canoes.  These 
native plants are especially good for stabilizing or 
restoring disturbed or degraded (including logged or 
burned) areas, for erosion a nd slope control, and for 
wildlife food and cover.  Bulrushes may be less 
suitable for general garden use.

Wildlife: The seeds, being less hairy and larger than 
cattail, are one of the mo st important and commonly 
used foods of ducks and of certain marshbirds and 
shorebirds (Martin et al. 1951).  Bulrushes provide 
choice food for wetland birds: American wigeon, 
bufflehead, mallard, pintail, shoveler, blue-winged 
teal, cinnamon teal, greater scaup, lesser scaup, 
avocet, marbled godwit, clapper rail, Virginia rail, 
sora rail, long-billed dowitcher, and tricolored 
blackbird.  Canada geese and white-fronted geese 
prefer the shoots and roots.  The stems provide 
nesting habitat for blackbirds and marsh wrens.  
Fresh emergent wetlands are among the most 
productive wildlife habitats in California.  They 
provide food, cover, and water for more than 160 
species of birds and numerous mammals, reptiles and 
amphibians.  The endangered Santa Cruz long-toed 
salamander and rare giant garter snake use these 
wetlands as primary habitat.  The endangered 
Aleutian Canada goose, bald eagle, and peregrine 
falcon use these wetlands for feeding and roosting. 
 
Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation for hut construction and for food.  
Typically, an area of open water is created around the 
huts. Areas eaten out by muskrat increase wetland 
diversity by providing opportunities for aquatic 
vegetation to become established in the open water 
and the huts provide a substrate for shrubs and other 
plant species.  Muskrats opening up the dense stands 
of emergent vegetation also create habitat for other 
species.  Both beaver and muskrats often improve 
wetland habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Hardstem 
bulrush, a deciduous herbaceous plant, is 
distinguished by their long cylindric stems from 5 to 
8 feet tall.  The shoots senesce in the winter.  The 
leaves are slender, v-shaped blades that are sheathed 
around the long stem.  The flowers are arranged in a 
spikelet and resemble orange-brown scales.  
Hardstem bulrush has a tight panicle with 3 to many 
spikelets, and the flower  bracts are prominently 
spotted.  Bulrushes have clonal growth, with stout 
rootstocks and long, thick, brown rhizomes 
(underground stems). 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Bulrushes are often dominant emergent 
vegetation found in marshes and wetlands throughout 
temperate North America.  Hardstem bulrush occurs 
across temperate North America to British Columbia 
and east to the Atlantic coast (Hickman 1993).  
 
Establishment 
Schoenoplectus  species may be planted from bare 
rootstock or seedlings from container stalk or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Germination problems have 
been reported in the literature for  S. acutus.  
Consequently, live plant collections of this species 
are recommended.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are 
preferred re-vegetation methods where there is 
moving water. 
 
Live Plant Collections : No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected.  If no more than 
0.09 m 2 
(1 ft 2
)  should
 be removed from a 0.4 m 2 
(4 
ft 2
) area, the plants will grow back into the  hole in 
one good growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes  to grow back during the 
growing season.  
 
Donor plants that are drought-stressed tend to have 
higher revegetation success.  Live transplants should 
be planted as soon as possible in moist (not flooded 
or anoxic) soils.  Plants should be transported and 
stored in a cool location prior to planting.  Plugs may 
be split into smaller units, generally no smaller than 6 
x 6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 in), with healthy rhizomes and tops.  
The important factor in live plant collections is to be 
sure  to
 include
 a growing bud in either plugs or 
rhizomes.  Weeds in the plugs should be removed by 
hand.  Soil can either be left on the roots of harvested 
material or removed. For ease in transport, soil may 
be washed gently from roots.  The roots should 
always remain moist or in water until planted.  
 
Clip leaves and stems from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches); this allows the plant to allocate more energy 
into root production.  Plant approximately 1 meter 
apart.  Plants should be pl anted closer together if the 
site has fine soils such as clay or silt, steep slopes, or 
prolonged inundation. 
 
Don't flood plants right away, or the seedlings will 
experience high mortality.  If possible, get the roots 
started before flooding the soils.  Ideally, plants 
should be planted in late fall just after the first rains 
(usually late October to November).  This enables

plant root systems to become established before 
heavy flooding and winter dormancy occurs.  
Survival is highest when pl ants are dormant and soils 
are moist.  Fertilization is very helpful for plant 
growth and reproduction.  Many more seeds are 
produced with moderate fertilization. 
 
Seed Collections : Select seed collection sites where 
continuous stands with fe w intermixed species can 
easily be found.  At each  collection location, obtain 
permission for seed collection. 
•   Seed is harvested by taking hand clippers and 
cutting the stem off below the seed heads or 
stripping the seed heads of f the stalk.  Hardstem 
bulrush plants tend to hold the seed for a long 
period of time after seeds are mature, so 
harvesting time is more flexible. 
•   Less than 1/2 hour is required to make a decent 
collection of 1 to 2 cups of seed.  The ease of 
collection is affected by water depth. 
•  Collect and store seeds in brown paper bags or 
burlap bags.  Seeds are then dried in these bags. 
•  Seeds and seed heads need to be cleaned in a 
seed cleaner like a Crippen Cleaner. 
•  Plant cleaned seed in fall.  Plant in a clean, 
weed-free, moist seed bed.  Flooded or ponded 
soils will significantly increase seedling 
mortality. 
•  Broadcast seed and roll in or rake 1/4" to 1/2" 
from the soil surface. 
•  Some seed may be lost due to scour or flooding.  
Recommended seed density is unknown at this 
time. 
 
Seed germination in greenhouse : 
•  Clean seed - blow out light  seed.  To grow seeds, 
plant in greenhouse in 1" x 1" x 2" pots, 1/4" 
under the soil surface.  Keep soil surface moist.  
Put in temperature of 100 degrees F (plus or 
minus 5 degrees).  Seeds begin to germinate after 
a couple weeks in warm temperatures. 
•   Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.  
•  In one study, greenhouse propagated transplants 
of hardstem bulrush appeared more vigorous 
than wild selected plan ts (Hoag et al. 1995).  
However, there were no si gnificant differences in 
height or shoot density (spread) between 
greenhouse propagated and wild transplants.  
Wild collected transplants had a higher 
percentage of shoots flower and set seed.  Greenhouse propagated transplants produced 
more above ground biomass (were more robust). 
 
Management
  
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation, success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management.  
 
Traditional Resource Management: The plant must 
grow in coarse-textured soil free of gravel, clay and 
silt for the roots to be of  the quality necessary for 
basket weaving.  Plants are tended by gathering and 
reducing the density betw een plants for longer 
rhizome production.  Sustainable harvesting of plants 
occurs through limiting harvest in any given area.  
Fire is used to manage tule wetlands to remove old 
stems and restore open water to the wetland.  This 
stimulates growth of new shoots from rhizomes and 
provides a bare soil substrate for seed germination.  
 
Many Native Americans feel the use of herbicides is 
inappropriate in traditional gathering sites.  Bulrush 
is densely rhizomatous with abundant seed 
production.  In most cases, it will out-compete other 
species within the wetland area of the site, 
eliminating the need for ma nual or chemical control 
of invasive species.  Heavy grazing will eliminate 
Schoenoplectus  species as well as other native 
species.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily available from most nurseries.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Clarke, C.B. 1977.  Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press.  280 pp. 
 
Dahl, T.E. & C.E. Johnson 1991.   Status and trends 
of wetlands in the coterminous United States, mid-
1970s to mid-1980s .  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
USDI, Washington, D.C.  28 pp.

Harrrington, H.D. 1972.  Western edible wild plants .  
The University of New Mexi co Press. Albuquerque, 
New Mexico. 156 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual:  
Higher plants of California.   University of California 
Press. 1399 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands .  Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7.  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951 .  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc. New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Murphy, E.V.A. no date.  Indian uses of native 
plants .  Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 
pp. 
 
Roos-Collins, M. 1990.   The flavors of home:  A 
guide to wild edible plants of the San Francisco Bay 
area .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  224 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1984.   Wetlands of the United States: 
Current status and recent trends.   USDI, FWS, 
National Wetlands Inventory, Washington, D.C.  58 
pp. 
 
Timbrook, J. (June) 1997. California Indian 
Basketweavers Association Newsletter.   
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Chris Hoag 
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Project, USDA, 
NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 27jan03 jsp; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.