Plant Guide
IDAHO  
BLUE- EYED GRASS  
Sisyrinchium idahoense  E.P. 
Bickn ell 
Plant Symbol = SIID  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center , Oregon  
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011  
Alternate Names 
There are at least four varieties of Idaho blue- eyed grass 
occurring throughout the species’ range   
(var.  idahoense , var. macounii , var. occidentale , var. 
segetum ). 
Uses  
Restoration : Sisyrinchium idahoense  is a prime candidate 
for wetland or riparian zone restoration sites , such as for 
W etland  Reserve  Program  (WRP)  and Wetland Reserve 
Enhancement Program (WREP)  projects .  It attracts 
multiple pollinators and beneficial ins ects, provides cover 
for smal l animals, and its clumpy root structure  provides 
soil stability.  It grows in full sun to shaded areas  and is 
highly desirable because of its productive versatility.  
 
Pollinator habitat : This plant is a highly attractive necta r 
and pollen plant for n ative bees and other beneficial 
insects.   It is also  reported as a nectar source for the 
mardon skipper ( Polites mardon),  a butterfly listed as 
endangered in the state of Washington , and a candidate 
species  for enlistment on the Federal endangered species 
list  (Black & Vaughan, 2005).  
  Ornamental
: Idaho blue -eyed grass makes a pleasing 
addition to any garden landscape.   The plant is evergreen 
and , due to a  short stature,  is  a suitable border highlight 
for all seasons.  Small but a ttractive bluish flowers bloom 
mid -spring to mid -summer and compl iment other floral 
variety.  Once established  in a seasonally  moist or well-
watered area, it is relatively  low maintenance and will add 
plant and insect biodiversity.    
Status  
This forb has facultative  wetland indicator  status in 
Oregon, Idaho,  Washington,  western Montana and 
western Wyoming (region 9) , and  obligate wetland 
indicator status  in Nevada, Utah, western Colorado, 
California, Arizona and New Mexico (regions 7,8, and 9) , 
meaning  that it almost always naturally occurs in 
wetlands  throughout its native range .  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious statu s, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  
General : Idaho  blue -eyed grass is a perennial forb/herb , 
not a grass  as the common name suggests .  Part of the iris 
family  (Iridaceae) , it is a monocot  and has thin, erect, 
grass -like leaves  growing from the base.   As it  mature s it 
will  grow to be 6 to 18 inches tall, and its small  blooms 
are light blue to deep blue or purple , six -petaled , star -
shaped  flowers with a yellow center  (Cholewa, 2012).  
Flowers will begin to bloom late spring  through mid -
summer (Turner & Gustafson, 2006).   Seeds will form in 
round capsules and ,  when ripe, pods  turn  tan to dark 
brown or black  and begin to split.  
Distribution : The four  varieties of this plant are  found 
throughout the western half of the United States , from 
northern Cal ifornia and Nevada throughout Oregon and 
Washington into British Columbia, east across northern 
Idaho into western Montana and south into western 
Wyoming and Colorado, eastern Utah, Arizona and 
northern New Mexico.  For current distribution, please 
consult  the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Plants  are common  in moist meadows and on 
the edges of wetlands  or stream  banks , in a range of  mid 
to lower elevations, but mostly in open meadows  and  
mountainous  forests (Turner & Gustafson, 2006) .  This 
species pr efers subalpine climates and  seasonally moist 
soils  like those of the Pacific Northwest.  
Adaptation