DESERT GLOBEMALLOW 
Sphaeralcea ambigua A. Gray 
Plant Symbol = SPAM2 
Common Names:  apricot mallow, roughleaf apricot mallow, desert mallow, 
sore-eye poppy, mal de ojo, Parish mallow, desert hollyhock 
 
Scientific Names:  Subspecies   
Sphaeralcea ambigua subsp. ambigua   
Sphaeralcea ambigua subsp. rosacea   
Sphaeralcea ambigua subsp. rugosa  
Description  
General :  Desert globemallow is a native perennial sub -shrub with numerous, 
slightly woody stems . Each plant grows in a large, rounded clump to a height 
of 20- 40 inches, and  may have over a hundred stems growing from the same 
root . Desert globemallow is known for its brilliant apricot to orange colored 
flowers . A subspecies, Sphaeralcea ambigua  subsp. rosacea, has petals that 
are lavender, pink, or white . Plants bloom most hea vily in the spring, but 
continue to bloom throughout the year in response to precipitation . Desert 
globemallow is the largest -flowered globemallow . Each bowl -shaped flower 
has 5 petals that are up to 1.5” long . The flowers are arranged in clusters on 
the upper stems in an open panicle . The fruit is a brown, globe -shaped 
schizocarp that breaks into several segments, each containing 0 -2 seeds . 
Leaves are simple, 3 -lobed, 0.5 to 2 inches long, grayish green, and triangular, 
with a wavy margin . Star -like hairs  covering the leaves give a grayish tone . Desert globemallow is the most xerophytic of the 
Southwest globemallows . (Kearney & Peebles, 1969; La Duke, 2016; Epple & Epple, 1995; Baldwin et al., 2002; Wall & 
McDonald, 2009)  
Distribution :  Desert globemallow is found in southwest Utah to southern California, southern Nevada, Sonora, and Northern 
Baja, California . Please refer to the PLANTS Database for the most current map of species distribution.  
Habitat :  Desert globemallow is found in desert scrub below 3500  ft. on dry, rocky slopes, edges of sandy washes, roadsides, 
and disturbed areas.  
Adaptation  
This plant is found in the Mojave Desert in creosote bush scrub and Joshua tree woodlands . In the Sonoran Desert and 
Colorado Plateau, it is common in desert scrub , interior chaparral, and semidesert grasslands. Associated plants include: 
Creosote bush ( Larrea tridentata), Brittlebush ( Encelia spp.), Yucca ( Yucca ssp.), Ocotillo ( Fouquieria splendens ), 
Paloverde ( Parkinsonia  spp.), Ironwood ( Olneya tesota), Pinyon pine (Pinus monophylla). (California Native Plant Society, 
2016)  
Uses  
Range revegetation: Desert globemallow is an early colonizing species, and can suppress invasive exotic species in areas 
affected by fires or other disturbance (Abella et al. 2009; Abella  et al. 2012). Seeds can be used on construction sites where 
erosion control and plant community restoration are desired (James, 1998) . Desert globemallow seedlings have been used to 
revegetate abandoned mines (Rodgers, 1994)  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide 
Desert globemallow,  Photo by  Heather Dial, USDA NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center