Plant Guide
SALTMEADOW 
CORDGRASS 
Spartina patens (Aiton) Muhl. 
Plant Symbol = SPPA 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center .   
Alternate Names  
Marshhay cordgrass  
Uses  
Saltmeadow cordgrass is used for shoreline protection and 
tidal marsh restorations, and is often utilized for levee 
stabilization and dune stabilization plantings nea r coastal 
beaches and on barrier islands. It is an important species 
for dissipating wave energy in low topography relief 
coastlines (Stallins, 2002).  Saltmeadow cordgrass is an 
effective stabilizer used on interior mud flats, dredge fill 
sites, and other areas of loose and unconsolidated soils 
associated with marsh restoration (Burger and Shisler, 
1983).   However, saltmeadow cordgrass colonies can be 
barried and killed by sand accumulation of 3 feet or more 
(Courtemanche et al., 1999).   Saltmeadow cordgrass has 
been observed  to inhibit the spread of aggressive 
rhizomatous species.  Encroachment of Phragmites 
australis  was blocked by saltmeadow cordgrass in 
restored marshes in New Jersey (Wang et al., 2006).  Saltmeadow cordgrass may play an important role f
or 
remediating and restoring mars hes after oil spills.  
Saltmeadow cordgrass dominated coastal  wetlands are 
predicted to recover from oil spills without additional 
intervention procedures (DeLaune et al., 2003).  
Saltmeadow cordgrass also provide s food and cover to 
many terrestrial and aquatic species of wildlife  including 
muskrats, nutria, rabbits, ducks, white -footed mouse and 
meadow vole (Stutzenbaker, 1999; Abuzeineh et al., 
2007). In Canada, saltmeadow cordgrass is known to be a 
larval host o f the endangered maritime ringlet butterfly 
(Sei, 2009).  Saltmeadow cordgrass  is considered an 
important forage species to livestock producers along the 
gulf coast  (Stutzenbaker, 1999) and is cut and dried for 
hay in New England and Newfoundland (Stalter, 2003) .  
This species is the primary component of salt hay, which 
is utilized in the landscape and vegetable trade industry as 
weed seed free mulch.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s cu rrent 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.   It is considered an invasive 
plant in Washington and Oregon (Washington 
Administrative Code, 2005; Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 
2006).  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture  department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
Description  
This warm season, native, perennial grows from 1 to 4 
feet tall, and spreads extensively by long slender 
rhizomes.  Dark  green stems emerge from the rhizomes.  
The rolled leaf blades are typically 1/2 to 1 foot long, and 
0.1 to 0.2 inches wide.  Leaf blades are shiny, dark green 
on the upper surface and rough with prominent veins on 
the lower surface.  Leaves are drooping an d wiry in 
appearance.  From late June to October an inflorescence 
emerges at the end of the stem, which is composed of 2 to 
10 two -inch -long spikelets.  The numerous florets are 0.3 
to 0.4 inches long and arranged in an overlapping scale -
like fashion on ea ch spikelet.  The flowers are wind 
pollinated  and  self-sterile  (Barkworth, 2003; Gould, 
1975) . 
 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center  
Beltsville, MD

Distribution:    
Saltmarsh cordgrass has been observed from the Atlantic 
shorelines in Newfoundland, Canada to the coastlines of 
Florida and Texas and as far south as Quintana Roo in 
Mexico (Stalter, 1993; Gould, 1975; Sauer, 1967).  
Saltmarsh cordgrass has also been observed along Lake 
Huron in Michigan (Voss, 1972).   It also occurs in 
Oregon and Washington where it is considered invasive.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Adaptation  
Saltmeadow cordgrass is commonly found growing in 
saline to brackish marshes, sandy beaches and low dunes, 
tidal flats and marsh ridges .  It can inhabit  fored unes and 
primary dunes, and can survive in saturated soil 
conditions (Stalter, 1974; Stalter and Lamont, 1997; van 
der Valk, 1975).  This grass is adapted to a wide range of 
soils from coarse sands to silty clay sediments with a  pH 
range of   4.5 to 7 .1 (Martin, 1959) .  Saltmeadow 
cordgrass will tolerate irregular inundations with 0 to 35 
parts per thousand salinity  and the concentration required 
for 50% above ground tissue death is about 65 parts per 
thousand (Hester et al., 2005) .  Leaf blades have a  thick 
cuticle and usually are involute when fully developed 
which helps protect the plant from salt spray injury 
(Oosting, 1945).  
Establishment  
S altmeadow  cordgrass is usually established by vegetative 
means .  Depending on the energy affecting  the planting 
site, either containerized (high impact sites) or bare root 
(mild impact sites) plants can be utilized.  Bare root 
material  should contain 3 to 5 stems per planting unit, 
while containers should have at least 5 to 8 healthy stems.  
Bare root plugs are gen erally limited to planting sites that 
are exposed to little or no wave energy.  Since most marsh 
sites are irregular and difficult to access, hand planting is 
normally employed, using spades, dibbles, or planting 
bars.  If site conditions are right, planti ng can be carried 
out with a mechanical, tractor drawn transplanter.  Plant 
spacing should be between 18 and 36 inches; up to 2 feet 
of lateral spread can be expected annually  (Craig, 1991; 
USDA, 2007) . 
Pests and Potential Problems  
The toxic ascomycete erg ot (Claviceps purpurea) has 
been observed to parasitize the ovaries of saltmeadow 
cordgrass.  The infection can be transferred to other grass 
species including big cordgrass ( Spartina cynosuroides) 
and smooth cordgrass ( Spartina alterniflora) (Eleuterius  
and Meyers, 1974).  
Environmental Concerns  
None at this time . 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your  area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method
. 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Saltmeadow cordgrass is commonly propagated 
vegetatively. It has little ability to spread through seed 
production and  the seedlings have low vigor.  In nursery 
rows, plants of saltmeadow cordgrass should be spaced 6 
to 12 inches apart.  Under ideal nursery conditions, each 
planting unit should be able to yield up to 50 stems in a 
single growing season.  Effective weed control is essential 
to producing quality plants.  
 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selec ted Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Saltmeadow cordgrass is eas ily found in nurseries, garden 
stores and other plant dealers and distributors.  There are 
several named cultivars available on the commercial 
market.  In 1986, ‘Avalon’ (New Jersey ) saltmeadow 
cordgrass was released for use in the coastal area north of 
the Carolinas by the Cape May Plant Material Center 
(PMC), in Cape May Court House, New Jersey.  Soon 
after, ‘Flageo’ (North Carolina) was released by the 
Americus, Georgia and Brooks ville, Florida PMCs for use 
on southern Atlantic and Gulf coasts.  ‘Sharp’ (Louisiana) 
was released in 1994 by the Florida and Georgia PMCs 
for coastal back dune stabilization in the southern Atlantic 
and Gulf coast counties from Florida to Texas.  It is a lso 
suited for use in inland areas from southern Georgia to 
southern Arkansas to stabilize shorelines, gullies, road 
banks, mine spoils, saline oil seep areas, and for nutrient 
reclamation in agricultural and municipal waste water 
irrigated fields.  In 200 3, ‘Gulf Coast’ marshhay 
cordgrass was released from the Golden Meadow PMC 
near Galliano, Louisiana for marsh restoration, shoreline 
and levee stabilization, stabilizing dredge fill sites, and 
restoration of coastal beaches and dunes. ‘Gulf Coast’ is 
found  to be adapted to the coastal areas of Louisiana, 
Mississippi, and Texas.  
References  
Abuzeineh, A. A., R. D. Owen, N. E. McIntyre, C. W. 
Dick, R. E. Strauss, and T. Holsomback.  20 07.  
Response of marsh rice rat  (Oryzomys palustris) to 
inundation of habita t.  Southwestern Naturalist 
52(1):75- 78. 
Barkworth, M. E.  2003.  Spartina  Schreb.  In:  
Barkworth, M. E., K. M. Capel s, S. Long, and M. B. 
Piep eds .  Magnoliophyta:  Commelinidae (in Part):  
Poaceae, Par t 2, Flora of North America North  of 
Mexico, Volume 25.  New York:  Oxford University 
Press.  240 –  250.  
Burger, J. and J. Shisler.  1983.  Succession and  productivity on perturbed and natural Spartina  salt-
marsh areas in New Jersey.  Estuaries  6(1)50- 56. 
Courtemanche Jr, R. P., M. W. Hester, and I. A.  Mendelssohn.  1999.  Recovery of a Louisiana marsh

plant community following extensive hurricane-induced 
overwash.  Journal of Coastal Research 15(4):872- 883. 
Craig, R. M.  1991.  Plants for coastal dunes of the Gulf  and South Atlantic Coasts and Puerto Ri co.  USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service.  Agriculture 
information Bulletin 460.  41pp.  
DeLaune, R. D., S. R. Pezeshki, A. Jugsujinda, and C. W.  Lindau.   2003.  Sensitivity of US Gulf of Mexico 
coastal marsh vegetation to crude oil:  comparison of 
greenhouse and field responses.  Aquatic Ecology 
37(4):351- 360. 
Eleuterius, L. N. and S. P. Meyers.  1974.  Claviceps  purpurea  on Spartina  in coastal marshes.  Mycologia 
66(6):978- 986. 
Gould, F. W.  1975.  The Grasses of Texas.  College  Station, Texas.  Texas A&M University Press.  653 pp.  
Hester, M. W., E. A. Spalding, and D. D. Franze.  2005.   Biological resources of the  Louisiana coast:  Part 1.  An 
overview o f coastal pl an t communities of the  Louisiana 
Gulf shoreline.  Journal of Coastal Research Special 
Issue No. 44:134- 145. 
Martin, W. E.  1959.  The vegetation of Island Beach 
State Park.  Ecological Monographs 29(1):2- 46. 
Oosting, H. J.  1945.  Tolerance to salt spray of plants of  coastal dunes.  Ecology 26(1):85- 89. 
Oregon Department of Agriculture.  2006.  Noxious weed  policy and classification system . 
http://www.oregon.gov/ODA/PLANT/WEEDS/Pages/li
sts.aspx .  Oregon Department of Agriculture.  Verified 
25 Fe bruary, 2013.  
Sauer, J.  1967.  Geographic reconnaissance of seashore  vegetation along the Mexican Gulf Coast.  Baton 
Rouge,  Louisiana :  Louisiana State University Press.  
59pp.  
Sei, M.  2009.  Flight and oviposition behavior of the  adult maritime ringlet ( Coenonympha nipisiquit 
McDunnough) females in response to microhabitat.  
Journal of Insect Behavior 22(2): 87- 100. 
Stallins, J. A.  2002.  Dune plant species diversity and 
function in two barrier island biogeomorphic systems.  
Plant Ecology 165:183- 196. 
S talter, R.  1974.  Vegetation in coastal dunes in South 
Carolina.  Castanea 39(1): 95 -103.  
Stalter, R.  1993.  Barrier  Island Botany.  The 
So utheastern United States.  Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. 
Brown.  164pp.  
Stalter, R.  2003.  Barri er Island Botany –  A Guide to 
Barrier Island P lants from Cape  Cod,  Massachusetts  to 
Assateague Island, Virginia.  Fort Washington, 
Pennsylvania:  Eastern National.  72pp.  
Stalter, R. and E. E. Lamont.  1997.  Flora of North  Carolina’s Outer Banks, Ocracoke Island to Virginia.  
Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 124(1): 71- 88.  Stutzenbaker, D. D.  1999.  Aquatic and Wetland Plants in 
the Western Gulf Coast.  Austin, Texas:  University of 
Texas  Press.  465 pp.  
USDA.  2007.  Planting Guide for Establishing  Coastal 
Vegetation on the Mississippi  Gulf Coast.  USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service Jamie L. 
Whitten Plant Materials Cente r, Coffeeville, 
Mississippi.  38 pp. 
van der Valk. A. G.  1975.  The floristic composition and  structure of foredune plant communities of Cape 
Hatteras National Seashore.  Chesapeake Science 
16(2):115- 126. 
Voss, E. G.  1972.  Michigan Flora –  A Guide to the 
Identification and Occurrence of Native and 
Naturalized Seed -Plants of the State.  Bloomfield Hills, 
Michigan:  Cranbrook  Institute of Science and 
University of Michigan Herbarium.  488pp.  
Wang,  J., D. M. Seliskar, J. L. Gallagher, and M. T. 
League.  2006.  Blocking  Phragmites australis 
reinvasion of restored marshes using plants selected 
from wild populations and tissue culture.  Wetlands 
Ecology and Management 14(6):539- 547. 
Washington Administrative Code.  2005.  State noxious  weed list and schedule of monetary penalties, Chapter 
16- 750.    
http://apps.leg.wa.gov/WAC/default.aspx?cite=16 -750  .  
State of Washington.  Verifie d 25 February, 2013. 
 
Prepared By :  USDA Rose Lake Plant Materials Center.  
East Lansing, Michigan.  
Citation  
Leif, J.  2013.  Plant  Guide for saltmeadow cordgrass  
( Spartina patens ). USDA- Natural Resources 
Conservation Service,  Rose Lake Plant Materials  Center.  
East Lansing, Michigan  48823  
Published  March, 2013.  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials P rogram Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER