Plant Guide
MISSOURI 
GOLDENROD  
Solidago missouriensis  Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = SOMI2  
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA  
 
 Solidago missouriensis.  Jim Pisarowicz, USDI  National 
Park Service
 
Alternate Names  
Prairie goldenrod , Tolmie’s goldenrod ( S. 
missouriensis  var. tolmieana )  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat:  Solidago  species provide vital 
sources of pollen and nectar for bees and other 
insects  in the late  summer and fall throughout North 
America (Mader et al. 2011).   Insect s known to visit 
Solidago  species include beneficial solitary wasps 
and  pollen -eating beetles such as the soldier beetle 
( Chauliognathus pennsylvanicus ) and the black 
blister beetle ( Epicauta pennsylvanica).  Goldenrod 
and aster species are believed to be the preferred  floral sources of many oligolectic bees such as 
Andrena hirticincta, 
A. nubecula, A. placata, A. 
simplex, A. solidaginis, Colletes simulans armatus , 
and  Melissoides druriel la (Mader et al. 2011) .  
H oney bees collect large amounts of nectar from 
goldenrod prior to winter, and other bees use pollen 
from goldenrods to provision late -season nests 
(Mader et al. 2011).  
 
Rangeland revegetation:  Missouri goldenrod can be 
used for re vegetation of disturbed areas, for 
minespoil reclamation, and soil stabilization (Walsh 
1993).  
 
Forage:  This plant has poor forage value, however 
cattle and sheep will graze it in the spring and early 
summer, and deer and antelope will graze the lower 
leaves (Stubbendieck et al. 2003).  The plant may be 
toxic to sheep (Stubbendieck et al. 2003).    
 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans chewed leaves 
and flowers of this plant to relieve sore throats, and 
chewed roots to relieve toothache (Stubbendieck et 
al.  2003).  
 
Ornamental:  Missouri gol denrod is not typically 
planted in a landscaped setting due  to its spreading 
rhizomatous growth.   However, it may be possible to 
manage  plants  by planting in a pot submersed in  the 
ground, or by removing new growth each year .  Seed 
dispersal can be controlled by removing flower heads 
prior to seed ripening.  
Status  
Missouri goldenrod is  the state flower of Nebraska, 
and is listed as threatened in Michigan.  C onsult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resou rces for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to 
their rhizomatous growth, which enables them to 
rapidly colonize  disturbed sites and causes them to be 
difficult to control.  In stable rangeland 
environments, however, they seldom achieve 
densities that are a problematic (Whitson et al 2004).  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Ser vice office, state natural 
resource, or state agri culture department regarding 
this plant’s status and management .