Plant Guide
PLAINS BRISTLEGRASS 
Setaria vulpiseta (Lam.) Roemer 
& J.A. Schultes  
Plant Symbol = SEVU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS , E. “Kika ” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS  
Alternate Names 
S etaria macrostachya  Kunth in H.B.K.  
 
Setaria vulpiseta (plains bristlegrass), Setaria leucopila 
(streambed bristlegrass)  and  Setaria texana  (Texas 
bristlegrass) are all  sometimes included under the 
common name  of p lains  bristlegrass.   It is suspected that 
all three species, along with S. scheelei,  may hybridize.  
(W hen ordering plains bristlegrass seed, it should be 
realized  that the seed may belong to any of the se three 
species .  Much of the seed industry still uses the common 
name plains bristlegrass to include Setaria macrostachya, 
S. leucopila,  and  S. texana.  However, t here are notable 
morphological differences between the three species 
which may affect the suitability of the pl ants for a specific 
site or project ). 
 
Uses  
Livestock:   Plains bristlegrass  makes up an appreciable 
part of the forage on southwestern ranges .  It provides 
moderate to high quality forage for  all types of grazing 
livestock  ( Gay, and Dwyer,   1980).   
 
Wild life:  Plains  bristlegrass  provides fair to good forage 
for wildlife.  It is a good seed producer, and its seeds can 
provide a source of food for wildlife.  This species shows 
promise as a plant for both  wildlife and range use.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values).
 
 
Description  
General : Plains bristlegrass is a native , warm season, 
p erennial bunchgrass  which turns a pale yel low at 
maturity.  It has stiffly erect stems and  can grow  up to 
four  feet in height . Lea f blades are narrow, about ¼ inch 
wide,  3 to 10  inches long, with a ligule that has dense 
hairs.  The upper sides of the leaf blades  have abundant 
hairs.   Plants produce a  densely flowered , compressed 
seedhead that is 3 -5 inches long and only about a ¼ inch 
thick  (Gould,  1975).  
 
Distribution :  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Its natural range is southern Texas and Arizona 
south to central Mexico.  
 
Habitat :   Plains bristlegrass is  found in the dry 
rangelands of  Texas  to  Arizona  with annual rainfall of 10 
to  26  inches.  It is located on bottomlands and all uvial 
flats subject to floodin g.  However, i t predominates on 
loamy bottomland, clay flat, and saline clay  range sites.  It 
is associated with f alse Rhodes  grass, pink pappusgrass, 
and Arizona cottontop . 
 
Adaptation  
Plains bristlegrass is found on op en dry ground, in dry 
woods, and on well drained soils along gullies, stream 
courses, and other areas occasionally wit h abundant 
moisture .  It can often be found on clay to clay loam soils 
as an early successional plant on disturbed prairie sites 
along the  mid to lower Texas Gulf Coast  ( Hatch, Schuster 
and  Drawe,  1999). 
 
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting ca n be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weeds,  plains bristlegrass  
can be planted in the fall.  Establish a clean, weed -free 
seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, 
the site should be firm and have accumulated soil 
moisture.   
 
Plains bristlegrass  is best seeded using a grass  drill to 
ensure a good planting of the small  seed.  Broadcast 
seeding may be used in areas not easily planted with a 
drill, but some type of additional coverage  such as culti-
packing or light dragging  will be beneficial to ensure 
good seed to soil contact.    
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 t o 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to 
plant too shallow than too deep.  For calibration purposes,