Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CUP PLANT 
Silphium perfoliatum  L. 
Plant Symbol = SIPE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternate Names 
Carpenter’s weed, cup rosinweed,  Silphium 
perfoliatum  L. var. connatum  (L.) Cronq. (SIPEC2), 
Silphium perfoliatum L. var.  perfoliatum (SIPEP) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Cup plant’s young leaves were cooked 
in the spring as an acceptable green (Kindscher 
1987).  This species was also used as a chewing gum 
to help prevent vomiting (Runkel & Roosa 1989).  
The Winnebagos tribe believed that this species has 
supernatural powers.  They would drink a concoction 
derived from the rhizome to purify them before going 
on a buffalo hunt.  It is used in the treatment of liver 
and spleen disorders and has also been used to treat 
morning sickness (Moerman 1998).  A decoction of 
the root has been used as a face wash and to treat  paralysis, back and chest pain, and lung hemorrhages 
(Ibid.).   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
© William S. Justice Botany Department, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Description 
General
: Composite family (Asteraceae).  Cup plant 
( Silphium perfoliatum ) is a tall perennial native that 
grows up to eight feet tall.  This species has square 
stems and leaves that are mostly opposite, egg-
shaped, toothed, with cuplike bases that hold water 
(Kindscher 1987).  The flower heads are rich, golden 
yellow, 2.5 centimeters in diameter, and closely 
grouped at the tips of the stems (Hunter 1984).  The 
small, tubular disk flowers are in the middle of the 
flower and is sterile and does not produce fruits 
(Ladd, 1995).   
 
Distribution : Cup plant ranges from Ontario to South 
Dakota, south to Georgia, Mississippi, Missouri, and 
Oklahoma (Steyermark 1963).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation 
Silphium perfoliatum occurs on low ground, in moist 
areas, along prairie stream s, alluvial thickets, 
floodplains, and along the edges of wet woodlands.  
This species is found throughout the tall grass region, 
but more sporadic northward (Ladd 1995).   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Seeds are best sown as soon as 
they are ripe in a greenhouse.  If the seeds are 
collected in the fall, they should be stratified for 
twelve weeks and then sown at 24 to 32ºF for four to 
eight weeks, and then moved to 68ºF for germination.  
When the plants are large enough to handle, place 
them into individual pots and plant them out in the 
summer.   
 
Management 
Silphium perfoliatum  species should be transplanted 
when they are young.  Th is species is much easier 
when transplanted young b ecause it is very difficult 
to transplant once it is older due to its extensive root 
system.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Materials are occasionally  available through native 
plant seed sources and nurseries.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Dension, E. 1998.  Missouri wildflowers .  5th ed.  
Missouri Department of Conservation, Jefferson City, 
Missouri. 
 
Fisher, T.R. 1988.   The dicotyledoneae of Ohio part 
III: Asteraceae .  Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Freeman, C.C. & E.K. Schofield 1991.   Roadside 
wildflowers of the southern Great Plains .  University 
Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.  
 
Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1993.   The Illustrated book of 
wildflowers and shrubs .  Stackpole Books, 
Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania. 
 
Hunter, C.G. 1984.   Wildflowers of Arkansas .  The 
Ozark Society Foundation, Little Rock, Arkansas. 
 
Hylander, C.J. 1954.   The MacMillan wildflower 
book .  The MacMillan Company, New York, New 
York. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie: an ethnobotanical guide .  University of 
Kansas Press, Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Ladd, D. 1995.   Tallgrass prairie wildflowers .  
Falcon Press, Helena, Montana. 
 
Moldenke, H.N. 1949.   American wildflowers.  D. 
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Runkel, S.T. & D.M. Roosa. 1989.   Wildflowers of 
the tallgrass prairie: the upper Midwest .  Iowa State 
University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Strausbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.