Plant Guide
UTE LADYS’ TRESSES  
Spiranthes diluvialis Sheviak   
Plant Symbol = SPDI6 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
Teresa Prendusi, USDA Forest Service   
Uses  
Ute Ladies’ -Tresses is a showy, perennial flowering 
orchid that has not been successfully propagated.  It was 
first described by C.J. Sheviak in 1984.  Ute Ladies’ -
Tresses are found in open wetland and riparian areas and 
is pollinated mostly by bumblebees ( Bombus spp.).  This 
species has scientific significance in studies addressing its 
evolutionary isolation, which has been an important 
subject in conservation biol ogy research.  It has no known 
agricultural, economic, or other human uses at this time.   
   
Status   
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state nox ious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  In 1992, it was designated 
as Threatened in its Entire Range by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service.   
  
Description  
Ute Ladies’ -Tresses is a perennial, terrestrial orchid with 
mainly 1 stem 12 -50 cm tall, arisin g from tuberously 
thickened roots.  Its linear -lanceolate (1cm wide) leaves 
can reach 28 cm long and persist during flowering.  Basal 
leaves are the longest and become reduced in size up the 
stem. The inflorescence consists of few to many white or 
ivory fl owers clustered in a spike of 3 -ranked spirals at 
the top of the stem.  The sepals and petals are oriented 
perpendicular to the stem, the lateral sepals often 
spreading abruptly from the base of the flower and all 
sepals are free to the base.  The lip petal is somewhat 
constricted at the median.  Flowering occurs in early 
August and may persist into early September barring frost 
or drought.  Flowers are faintly fragrant with the scent of 
coumarin. The seed is ellipsoidal and dust -like, very well 
adapted to  being carried by the wind.  
   
Adaptation and Distribution  
Ute Ladies’ -Tresses occurs along riparian edges, gravel 
bars, old oxbows, high flow channels, and moist to wet 
meadows along perennial streams.  It typically occurs in 
stable wetland and seep areas  associated with old 
landscape features within historical floodplains of major 
rivers.  It also is found in wetland and seep areas near 
freshwater lakes and springs  
 
 
Teresa Prendusi, USDA Forest Service 
 
Populations of Ute Ladies’ -Tresses are known from three 
broad general areas of the interior western United States.  
Near the base of the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains 
in southeastern Wyoming and adjacent Nebraska and 
north central and central Colorado; in the upper Colorado 
River Basin, particularly the Uinta Basin; and in the 
Bonneville Basin along the Wasatch Front and westward 
in the eastern Great Basin, in north -central and western 
Utah,  extreme eastern Nevada and southeastern Idaho.  It  
has also been discovered in southwestern Montana and in 
the Okanogan area and along the Columbia River in