Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SITKA WILLOW 
Salix sitchensis Sanson ex 
Bong. 
Plant Symbol = SASI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
satin willow, silky willow 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The inner bark was dried, grounded 
into a powder and then a dded to cereal for use in 
making bread.  Willow branches and bark was used 
for making ropes for nets, tying, and bending.  The 
Straits Salish used the bark to make a gray dye for 
mountain goat wool (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).   The Haida used the spring catkins or pussy willows 
of this species as decoration (Ibid.).  The Indians used 
the wood and twigs in drying fish, stretching skins, 
and basket making (Viereck & Little 1972). 
 
Medicinal
: Willows are the source of the natural 
precursor to aspirin, salicylic acid, found in leaves 
and bark (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The bark can 
be pounded and applied to wounds as a healing agent 
(Moerman 1998).  An infusion of the stems has been 
used in the treatment of stomach complaints (Ibid.). 
 Handbuch der Laubholzkunde (1889) © Kurt Stubel’s Online Library 
 
Conservation : Sitka willow is used in forested 
riparian buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, 
protect aquatic environments, enhance wildlife, and 
increase biodiversity. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Willow Family (Salicaceae).   Salix 
sitchensis  is a large shrub or small tree, six to twenty-
five feet high.  The leaves are alternate, oblonceolate 
or narrowly ovate, two to five inches long, and 
usually sharp-pointed.  The flowers appear before or 
with the leaves, on short leafy shoots, males are five 
centimeters long, and the females are eight 
centimeters long (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The 
bark is smooth, slightly furrowed, and scaly. 
 
Distribution : Salix sitchensis is native to stream 
banks from southern Alaska to southwestern Oregon 
(Viereck & Little 1972).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Sitka willow is found on or near lake shores, wetland 
margins, forest edges, wet  openings, and clearings at 
low to middle elevations.  This species prefers damp, 
heavy soil but will succeed in most soils.  It grows 
best in sunny locations but will tolerate some shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Seeds must be surface sown as 
soon as they are ripe in late spring.  Seeds are viable 
for only a few days and the maximum storage period 
is four to six weeks with germination rates dropping

off fast after ten days at room temperature (Dirr & 
Heuser 1987).  Willow seeds have no dormancy and 
germinate within twelve to twenty-four hours after 
falling on moist ground (Ibid.).  Seedbeds must be 
kept moist until seedlings are well established. 
 
Propagation by cuttings: Sitka willow can be 
propagated through hardw ood cuttings that can be 
collected and prepared for  insertion when they are 
well ripened, from November to March.  Cuttings 
seven to ten inches long and a half to one inch thick 
are initially stuck in the ground at close spacing and 
lifted after one year (Dir r & Heuser 1987).  Willow 
cuttings have a rooting percentage of ninety to one- 
hundred percent without the use of rooting hormones 
(Ibid.). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Somewhat available in native plant nurseries within 
its area of distribution.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.   North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dippel, L. 1889.   Handbuch der laubholzkunde .  
From Kurt Stuber’s Online Library, Max-Planck-
Institut fur Zuchtungsforschung, Koln, Germany.   
Accessed: 11jan02.  <http://caliban.mpiz-
koeln.mpg.de/~stueber/dippel/band2/127.html> 
 
Dirr, M.A. & M.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens, Georgia. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Lauriault, J. 1989.   Identification guide to the trees of 
Canada .  Fitzhenry & Whiteside, Ontario, Canada. 
 
MacKinnon, A., J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of the northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine 
Publishing, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of pacific coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Nelson, R.A. 1992.   Handbook of rocky mountain 
plants .  Roberts Rinehart Publishers, Niwot, 
Colorado. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the pacific 
northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook No. 410, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.