Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MACKENZIE WILLOW  
Salix prolixa Anderss. 
Plant Symbol = SAPR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
Alternate Names 
diamond willow, yellow willow 
 
Uses 
Reclamation:   Mackenzie willow is used for 
revegetation of riparian areas, native plant 
community restoration and wildlife food, cover and 
browse. 
 
Livestock/Wildlife:   All classes of livestock eat 
willows in the West, but cattle consume more than 
others because they frequent riparian areas.  
Mackenzie willow is palatable to livestock, but its 
importance in their diets is not reported. 
 
Beavers prefer willo ws as food and building material. 
Ducks and grouse, other birds and small mammals 
eat willow shoots, catkins, buds and leaves.   
 
Moose and elk use this species for both summer and 
winter forage and browse.  Winter elk use may be 
heavy.  Dense stands provide excellent thermal and 
hiding cover for many wildlife species.  Songbirds 
use Mackenzie willow for nesting and feeding. 
 
Ethnobotany:  Native Americans and others have  long used willows for basket making.  Willows are 
also a well-known source of salacin, which is 
chemically closely related to aspirin.
  Willows have 
also been used by Native Americans for bows, 
arrows, scoops, fish traps and other items. 
 
Other:   Mackenzie willow is used in furniture and 
picture frames in Montana (and perhaps other places) 
where it is valued for its diamond shaped bud scars 
which are prominent after bark is stripped from the 
wood. 
W. Crowder 
USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Pullman, WA 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Mackenzie willow was named in honor of 
Alexander Mackenzie (1755?-1820), Scotch fur 
trader and explorer in Canada.  The type specimen 
was collected along the M ackenzie River, which he 
discovered. 
 
Mackenzie willow is a coarse multi-stemmed shrub 
that grows from 6 to 30 feet tall.  Catkins usually 
appear with new leaves.  Twigs of the current season 
are glabrous or very sparsely puberulent.  Mature 
leaves are green above, pale  and glaucous beneath.  
Margins are finely toothed except near the apex or 
sometimes inconspicuously toothed or entire.  
Stipules are present but are eventually deciduous.   
 
Distribution :  Mackenzie willow occurs in western 
Wyoming, western Montana, north to the Yukon 
Territory, west across central Idaho (north of the 
Snake River plains) and central Oregon to the east 
base of the Cascade Mountains in Oregon and 
Washington and in the valleys of southern British 
Columbia to southern Vancouver Island. 
 
Habitat:  It occurs on rocky stream and river edges to 
moist alluvial terraces from low to moderate 
elevations.  It seems to be most productive on fine-
textured soils with moderate to high levels of 
available water. 
 
It is a pioneer or early se ral species on newly exposed 
streambanks, sometimes replacing coyote willow ( S. 
exigua ).  Stands occur also on well-developed soils, 
indicating Mackenzie willow is relatively long-lived.

Associated Species:  Associated species include a 
widely scattered overstory of black cottonwood 
( Populus trichocarpa ) or water birch (Betula 
occidentalis ).  Common willows are coyote willow 
( S. exigua ), Drummond willow ( S. drummondiana) 
and whiplash willow ( S. lasiandra).  Other species 
include redosier dogwood (Cornus stolonifera ), 
Wood's rose  (Rosa woodsii ) and inland gooseberry 
( Ribes setosum).  Beaked sedge ( Carex rostrata) and 
horsetail ( Equisetum arvens e) are frequent understory 
species in the wettest stands. 
 
Adaptation 
Mackenzie willow is adapted to a wide variety of soil 
textures from coarse-texture d, gravelly areas to silt 
loams.   
 
Establishment 
Mackenzie willow may be propagated via seed or 
cuttings.  Seed is used to produce containerized 
plants.  Cuttings may either be planted directly at the 
site or greenhouse planted to produce bareroot plants 
or containerized plants.  On-site wild hardwood 
cuttting collections may not root as well as nursery 
grown stock where gr owing conditions are 
maintained at a more optimum level. 
 
Mackenzie willow should be established in the 
capillary zone in riparian revegetation plantings.  
Plantings should be prot ected with appropriate 
physical barriers such as wire cages or tree protector 
tubes where there is rodent or beaver activity.   
 
Much information is available for willow 
establishment, primarily in riparian zones.  See 
reference section. 
 
Management 
Mackenzie willow provides important streambank 
protection by effectively stabilizing soils.   Heavy 
grazing in moist Mackenzie willow communities can 
lead to soil compaction, streambank sloughing, and 
damage to willow plants.  Grazing is particularly 
detrimental to the establishment of willows.  Plants 
recover rapidly when browsing is excluded.   
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Mackenzie willow is easily propagated with 
hardwood cuttings without use of rooting hormone.  
It can also be propagated w ith seed but seed must be 
collected as soon as the fru its ripen.  Mature seed 
loses germination ability rapidly, so planting soon 
after collection is necessary.  Moistened seed may be 
stored for up to a month if  refrigerated in sealed 
containers.  Seeds of willow are not known to exhibit  dormancy.  Some native pl
ant propagators prefer 
seed propagation for added diversity of genetic 
material and less labor requirement for handling of 
materials during collection, storage and propagation.  
(See reference section for production of hardwood 
cuttings in cutting blocks or stooling beds.) 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Poplar/willow borers are potential problems in stands 
of Mackenzie willow maintained for cutting 
production.  Borers must be controlled prior to 
entering the stems.  D ecadent stems with borer 
infestation should be pruned from commercial cutting 
production sites.  Consult local/state pesticide 
recommendations for further control. 
 
Willows plantings, especially during establishment, 
can be damaged by rodents including beaver, 
muskrat, mice, voles, etc. cutting off or girdling 
stems. 
 
Cultivars 
'Rivar' Mackenzie willow was released as a cultivar 
in 1993 by the NRCS Pullman, WA Plant Materials 
Center for use in riparian revegetation projects in 
Eastern Washington, Eastern Oregon and North 
Idaho.  'Rivar' originated  from an area along the 
Tucannon River near Starbuck, Washington at an 
elevation of 800 feet.  Mature height is 12 feet and 
canopy width is 15 feet at  Pullman, WA.  'Rivar' has 
a rapid growth rate, growing to a height of over 12 
feet and a canopy width of ne arly 8 feet in 3 years at 
Pullman.  'Rivar' will grow in moist sands and gravel 
to silt loam soils.  It easily roots from hardwood 
cuttings without use of rooting hormone treatment.  A 
rooting trial conducted at Pullman indicated rooting 
of over 80 percent of hardwood cuttings used in the 
study.  'Rivar' is available commercially. 
 
References 
Brinkman, K. A.  1974.  Salix L. willow.   In:  
Schopmeyer, C. S.   Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook 450.  USDA, 
Forest Service.  Washington, DC. p. 746-750. 
 
Brunsfeld, S.J. & F.D. Johnson  1985.   Field guide to 
the willows of East-Central Idaho .  Bulletin Number 
39.  Forest, Wildlife and Range Experiment Station.  
University of Idaho.  Moscow, Idaho.  95 pp. 
 
Crowder, W.A. & D.C.Darris  1999.   Producing 
Pacific Northwest native trees and shrubs in 
hardwood cutting blocks or stooling beds .  Plant 
Materials Technical Note 38.  USDA, NRCS.  
Spokane, WA.  12 pp.

Edelen, W.J.  1996.  Beaver damage prevention 
alternatives for riparian revegetation projects in 
Washington State.  Biology Technical Note 19.  
USDA, NRCS.  Spokane, WA  4 pp. 
 
Hansen, P.L.; S.W. Chadde & R.D. Pfister  1988.  
Riparian dominance types of Montana.  
Miscellaneous Publication 49.  Montana Forest and 
Conservation Experiment Station.  University of 
Montana.  Missoula, Montana.  411 pp. 
 
Hayes, D.W. & G.A Garrison  1960.   Key to 
important woody plants of eastern Oregon and 
Washington.   Agriculture Handbook 148.  USDA.  
US Gov't. Printing Office.  Washington, D.C.  227 
pp. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist  1964.   Vascular 
plants of the Pacific Northwest .  Part 2:  Salicaceae to 
Saxifragaceae. Univ. of Washington Press.  Seattle, 
WA.  597 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C.  1993.   How to plant willows and 
cottonwoods for riparian rehabilitation.   Plant 
Materials Technical Note 23.  USDA, SCS.  Boise, 
ID.  13 pp. 
 
Kirkwood, J.E.  1930.  Northern Rocky Mountain 
trees and shrubs.  Stanford University Press.  
Stanford University, CA.  340 pp. 
 
Lambert, S.M.  1989.   Streamside revegetation .  Plant 
Materials Technical Note 12 (Revised).  USDA, 
NRCS.  Spokane, WA.  9 pp. 
 
Little, E.L. Jr.  1979.   Checklist of United States trees 
(native and naturalized).  Agriculture Handbook 541.  
USDA, Forest Service.  US Gov't Printing Office.  
Washington, D.C.  375 pp. 
 
USDA, NRCS  2003. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 <
(http://plants.usda.gov)>.  National 
Plant Data Center.  Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:   
Wayne Crowder  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Pullman, Washington 
 Drafted 21jan03 wac;  Edited 13feb03 jlk; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.