Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DWARF PALMETTO 
Sabal minor (Jacq.) Pers. 
Plant Symbol = SAMI8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Bluestem, scrub palmetto, bush palmetto. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  
The Houma used juice crushed from the small roots 
as an eye medicine to relieve irritation.  Dried roots 
were taken for high blood pressure.  A tea from the 
dried roots was taken for kidney ailments and as a 
stimulant for “swimming in the head.”  The fresh 
roots were baked and served as “palmetto bread.”  
The small fruits, sometimes called “famine food” 
were also eaten.  The Seminoles, Houma, Choctaw, 
and other Native American tr ibes used the leaves of 
dwarf palmetto much in the same way that they used 
the leaves of the related tree, cabbage palmetto 
( Sabal palmetto ).  The fan-shaped leaves were used 
to thatch homes.  Immature  blades from the leaves 
were prepared by sun-bleaching and then braided into 
thin strips for use as lashings or sewn together to 
make baskets and other useful articles.  Leaves were 
used to make fans that were carried during certain 
dances.  Coiled-grass baskets tied with palmetto were 
made by the Houma as late as the 1930s.  These 
unique baskets were made only in Louisiana and 
Tierra del Fuego.  Contemporary people use the  palmetto leaves to weave baskets and make small 
dolls with hair of Spanish moss. 
 
Wildlife
:  The fruits are an important food for robins 
and raccoons, providing from 10% to 20% of their 
diet.  Fish crows, mockingbirds, myrtle warblers, 
pileated and red-bellied woodpeckers, and gray 
squirrels also eat the fruits. 
 
 
Livestock : This plant is reported to be frequently 
grazed by cattle, more so than any other palm. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
 
Description 
General:  This shrub-like palm generally reaches a 
height of only 0.5 to 2 m.  The stem is usually not 
visible, being either buried or very short, although it 
has been reported to occasionally reach 8m tall in 
Louisiana and Texas.  The circular, fan-like leaves 
are composed of 16 to 40 pale- or blue-green blades 
that are 15dm wide.  These stiff, nearly flat blades do 
not have a prominent midrib.  The white flower 
petals are 2 to 3 mm long.  The small fruits (6-8mm 
in diameter) are glossy black in color and enclose a 
large seed (5-6mm).  The fruits ripen in the fall. 
 
Similar species:  Cabbage palmetto ( Sabal palmetto) 
is a palm tree that can reach 20 m in height.  Saw 
palmetto ( Serenoa repens ) often has a similar 
appearance as dwarf palmetto as it has a short or 
horizontal stem.  It grows in the same native range 
but is less cold hardy. 
 
Distribution : Native to the Gulf Coast States and 
Florida.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Dwarf palmetto grows along streams, in swampy or 
rocky hammocks and in maritime heaths along the 
coastal plain in the southeastern United States.  It is 
common to freshwater wetlands and floodplain 
forests where it often forms dense thickets.  It rarely 
occurs in upland woodlands.  This is the hardiest of 
the  Sabal  genus as well as one of the hardiest of 
palms.

Establishment 
Dwarf palmetto is simple to grow and can be grown 
in a wide variety of soils with medium drainage and 
fertility in both moist and fairly dry areas.  It has a 
slow to moderate growth rate.  
 
Seeds: May be easily propagated from seed as fresh 
seed germinates readily.  Transplant in the following 
year.   
 
Transplanting: It is best to transplant in June or July. 
Water frequently until the plant shows growth to 
ensure proper establishment of the root system. 
 
Management 
Established plants tend to self-sow.  Fruit drupes may 
be removed if self-sowing is not desired. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. &  E.Z. Bailey  1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp.  
 
Barbour, M.G. &  W.D. Billings, Editors  2000. 
North American terrestrial vegetation , Second 
Edition.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK.  708 pp. 
 
Brown, R.C.  1994.   Florida’s first people: 12,000 
years of human history .  Pineapple Press, Inc., 
Sarasota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W.  1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns .  Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp.  
 
Flint, H.L.  1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America . Second Edition.  John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp.  
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten  1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of Southeastern United States .  Vol. 1.  University of Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  712 
pp. 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft  1979.  
Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325  pp. 
 
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory & G.A. Stokes  1994. 
The historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana .  Louisiana 
State University Press, Bato n Rouge, Louisiana.  324 
pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim  &  A.L. Nelson  1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998.   Native American 
ethnobotany .  Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 
pp. 
 
Neill, W.T.  1956.   The story of Florida’s Seminole 
Indians . Second Edition. Great Outdoors Publishing 
Co., St. Petersburg, Florida.  128 pp.  
 
Ottesen, C.  1995.   The native plant primer . Harmony 
Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Rogers, D.J. &  C. Rogers  1991.   Woody 
ornamentals for Deep South gardens . University of 
West Florida Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K.  1933.   Manual of  Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G.  1941.   A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma  Indians of Louisiana .  Primitive 
Man: Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference Vol. XIV(4): 49-75. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C.  1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Tiner, R.W. 1993.   Field guide to coastal wetland 
plants of the Southeastern United States .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, Massachusetts.  
328 pp. 
 
Whitcomb, C.E.  1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants . Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma.  
740 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel

Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 21May2001 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.