Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DRUMMOND WILLOW 
Salix drummondiana  Barratt 
ex Hook. 
Plant Symbol = SADR  
 
USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
 
Alternate Names 
beautiful willow, blue willow, handsome willow 
 
Uses 
Native Americans and other have long used willows 
for basket making.  Willows are also a well-known 
source of salacin, which is chemically closely related 
to aspirin.  Willows have also been used by Native 
Americans for bows, arrows , scoops, fish traps and 
other items. 
 
Drummond willow is used for revegetation of 
riparian areas, native plant community restoration, 
and wildlife food, cover, and browse. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Drummond willow is a multi-stemmed 
native shrub.  It reaches a mature height of 12 feet.  
Flowers appear before or with new leaves.  Twigs are 
glabrous or glaucous.  Leav es are entire with revolute  margins and are dense persistent white-hairy beneath. 
 
Distribution
:  Drummond willow occurs in the 
Yukon Territory, Alberta, British Columbia, east of 
the Cascades in Washington, Montana, Wallowa and 
Steens Mountains in Oregon, Idaho, California, 
Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming and New 
Mexico. 
 
Habitat:  Drummond willow commonly dominates or 
co-dominates shrubby communities along middle 
elevation mountain streams.  It frequently mixes with 
ecologically similar Booth willow ( S. boothii).  It 
occurs on streambanks and in moist meadows, less 
often on open slopes, from foothills to moderate or 
high elevations in the mountains, descending to the 
Palouse prairie in eastern Washington. 
 
Associated Species :  Associated shrubs include 
Booth, Barclay ( S. barclayi), Geyer (S. geyeriana ), 
mountain ( S. eastwoodii ), and Wolf willow ( S. 
wolfii ); mountain gooseberry ( Ribes montigenum); 
whitestem currant ( Ribes rubrum); thinleaf alder 
( Alnus incana  ssp. tenuifolia ); red-osier dogwood 
( Cornus sericea ); alder buckthorn ( Frangula alnus) 
and marsh cinquefoil ( Potentilla ).  Understory 
species include bluejoint reedgrass ( Calamagrostis 
canadensis), beaked sedge ( Carex rostrata), water 
sedge ( C. aquatilis ), tufted hairgrass (Deschampsia 
caespitosa ), Kentucky bluegrass ( Poa pratensis), and 
field mint ( Mentha arvensis ). 
 
Importance to Livestock and Wildlife 
All classes of livestock eat willows in the West, but 
cattle consume more than others because they 
frequent riparian areas.  Drummond willow is 
palatable to livestock, but its importance in their diets 
is not reported. 
 
Moose consume large amounts of Drummond willow 
during the winter, while use by other ungulates is 
generally light.  It is used by elk and white-tailed 
deer. 
 
Beaver prefer willows as f ood and building material.  
Ducks and grouse, other birds, and small mammals 
eat willow shoots, catkins, buds and leaves.  Red-
naped sapsuckers, warblers, humming birds, 
chipmunks, and red squirrels also use Drummond 
willow.

Drummond willow often forms thickets that provide 
good cover for a variety of wildlife species including 
moose, and good nesting and foraging habitat for 
ducks, shore birds, vireos, warblers, and sparrows.  
Dense overhanging branches provide shade for 
salmonids. 
 
Adaptation 
Drummond willow is adapted to fine, medium, and 
coarse-textured soils with a pH of 5.2 to 7.4 and 
annual precipitation from 16 to 40 inches.  It 
typically grows on moist, well-aerated mineral soils.  
Textures vary from cobbles and gravels immediately 
adjacent to waterways to sandy or clay loams in 
broad valleys.  Shade tolerance is intermediate.   
 
Establishment 
Drummond willow may be propagated via seed or 
cuttings.  Seed is used to produce containerized 
plants.  Cuttings may either be planted directly at the 
site or planted to produce bareroot plants or 
containerized plants.  Drummond willow should be 
established in the capillary zone in riparian 
revegetation plantings.  Much information is 
available for willow establishment, primarily in 
riparian zones. See reference section. 
 
Management 
Drummond willow provides important streambank 
protection by effectively stabilizing soils.   Heavy 
grazing in moist Drummond willow communities can 
lead to soil compaction, streambank sloughing and 
damage to willow plants.  Cattle or wild ungulate 
overgrazing of Drummond willow causes it to 
become decadent or stunted.  Plants recover rapidly 
when browsing is excluded.  Grazing is particularly 
detrimental to the establishment of willows. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Drummond willow is easily propagated by use of 
hardwood cuttings without use of rooting hormone.  
It can also be propagated w ith seed but seed must be 
collected as soon as the fru its ripen.  Mature seed 
loses germination ability rapidly, so planting soon 
after collection is necessary.  Moistened seed may be 
stored for up to a month if  refrigerated in sealed 
containers.  Seeds of willow are not known to exhibit 
dormancy.  Some native pl ant propagators prefer 
seed propagation for added diversity of genetic 
material and less labor requirement for handling of 
materials during collection, storage and propagation.  
(See reference section for production of hardwood 
cuttings in cutting blocks or stooling beds.) 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Poplar/willow borers are potential problems in stands  of Drummond willow maintained for cutting 
production.  Borers must be controlled prior to 
entering the stems.  D
ecadent stems with borer 
infestation should be pruned from commercial cutting 
production sites.  Consult local/state pesticide 
recommendations for further control. 
 
Willow plantings, especially during establishment, 
can be damaged by rodents including beaver, 
muskrat, mice, voles, etc. either cutting off stems or 
girdling. 
 
Weediness 
This plant is not considered a weed in its native 
habitat.  It spreads slowly by seed and does not 
spread vegetatively by rootstock.   
 
Control 
Mechanical or chemical control methods seem to 
adequately control Drumm ond willow.  Contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for each control method.   
 
Cultivars 
The NRCS Pullman, WA Plant Materials Center 
released as a cultivar 'Curlew' Drummond willow in 
1993.  'Curlew' originated from a riparian site near 
the Curlew River in Ferry County, Washington at an 
elevation of 2135 feet.  Mature height is 9 feet and 
canopy width is 15 feet at Pullman, WA.  'Curlew' is 
relatively low-growing with striking yellow to 
yellow-orange stems which may provide appeal for 
ornamental use, especially when contrasted with 
material such as red-osier dogwood.  'Curlew' has 
outstanding foliage density when grown on good sites 
in silt loam soils.  It easily roots from hardwood 
cuttings without use of rooting hormone treatment.  
'Curlew' is available commercially. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brinkman, K. A.  1974.  Salix L. willow.   In:  
Schopmeyer, C. S.   Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook 450.  
Washington, DC. USDA, Forest Service, p. 746-750. 
 
Crowder, W.A. and D.C.Darris.  1999.   Producing 
Pacific Northwest native trees and shrubs in

hardwood cutting blocks or stooling beds.  Plant 
Materials Technical Note 38.  USDA, NRCS.  
Spokane, WA. 
 
Hayes, D.W. and G.A Garrison.  1960.   Key to 
important woody plants of eastern Oregon and 
Washington.   Agriculture Handbook 148.  USDA.  
US Gov't. Printing Office.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist  1964.  Vascular 
plants of the Pacific Northwest .  Part 2:  Salicaceae to 
Saxifragaceae.  Seattle, WA:  Univ. of Washington 
Press. 
 
Hoag, J.C.  September, 1993.   How to plant willows 
and cottonwoods for riparian rehabilitation.   Plant 
Materials Technical Note 23.  USDA, SCS.  Boise, 
ID. 
 
Lambert, S.M.  January, 1989.   Streamside 
revegetation .  Plant Materials Technical Note 12 
(Revised).  USDA, NRCS.  Spokane, WA. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research  Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory (2003, January). Fire Effects Information 
System, [Online]. Available: 
<
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis> [January 6, 
2003].  
 
Uchytil, R.J.  1991   Salix drummondiana .  In :  
USDA, Forest Service Fire Effects Information 
System Database.  
<
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis>  [January 6, 
2003].  Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2003. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 <
http://plants.usda.gov>.  National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490  
 
Prepared By 
Wayne Crowder , USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Species Coordinator:    
Wayne Crowder, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 Drafted 14jan03 wac;  Edited 15jan03 jlk; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of  race, color, national or
igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.