Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHINING WILLOW 
Salix lucida Muhl. 
Plant Symbol = SALU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Illinois State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
willow 
 
Uses 
Willows were used for making dye, furniture, mats, 
baskets, drums, stirrups, tipi pegs and pins, fox and 
fish traps, hunting lodge poles, and meat-drying racks 
(Kindscher 1992).  Willows were and still are used 
for baskets throughout their range.  The Paiute, Ute, 
Shoshone, Hopi, Havasupai, Mandan, Cheyenne, 
Arapaho, Kiowa, and others use  Salix lucida for 
basketweaving (James 1972, Mason 1988). 
 
Kelly Kindscher(1992) wrote in  Medicinal Wild 
Plants of the Prairie : "The Blackfeet made a tea from 
the fresh root of  Salix species to treat internal 
hemorrhage, throat constrictions, swollen neck 
glands, and bloodshot or irritated eyes.  The twigs 
were also gathered and preserved.  Steeped in boiling 
water, they were made into a tea to cure fever or 
alleviate pain." 
 
Salix  species were used as chew sticks to clean teeth 
by many other Indian tribes, including the Choctaw, 
Delaware, and Cheyenne.  The shining willow was 
favored by the Osage, Delaware, and Cherokee for 
this purpose (Elvin-Lewis 1979).  The Kiowa made a 
tea of willow leaves, which they rubbed on the body 
to cure pneumonia and relieve rheumatic aches.  
They also chewed the ba rk to relieve toothache  (Vestal and Shultes 1939).  The Comanche burned 
the stems of the willow and used the ashes to treat 
sore eyes (Carlson and Jones 1939).  To restore 
themselves both physically and mentally, the Dakota  
drank a willow-bark tea (Andros 1883).  The Ojibwe 
used shining willow bark externally to treat skin 
rashes. 
 
Aspirin is the pharmaceuti
cal equivalent of willow 
bark tea, which is an eff ective remedy for headache, 
fever or sore throat.  More than 2,400 years ago, the 
Greeks learned to use extracts of several native 
willow species to treat pain, gout, and other illnesses.  
In more recent times, 1839, salicylic acid was 
isolated from wild pl ants and manufactured 
synthetically.  Early salicylic acid-based products had 
unpleasant side effects.  Sixty years later, the Bayer 
Company developed a derivative of salicylic acid, 
called it aspirin, and the rest is history. 
 Robert Mollenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS  
Tea made from willow leaves will cure laryngitis.  
Willow reduces inflammation of joints and 
membranes (Moore 1979).  When used as an 
analgesic, willow treats urethra and bladder irritation, 
infected wounds, and eczema.   Willow is used as an 
over-all treatment of many diseases, including hay 
fever, diarrhea, prostatitis, satyriasis, and ovarian 
pain.  A poultice is made for treating gangrene and 
skin ulcers.  
 
Young willow shoots can be stripped of their bark 
and eaten.  The young leaves may be eaten in case of 
emergency.  The inner bark can be eaten raw, 
prepared like spaghetti, or made into flour. 
 
Riparian : Riparian ecosystem functions provided by 
willows include the following: 1) Riparian vegetation 
traps sediments and nutrients from surface runoff and 
prevents them from entering the aquatic system; 2) 
the dense matrix of roots in the riparian zone can 
serve as an effective filter of shallow groundwater; 3) 
water quality is improved through filtration and the 
trapping of sediment, nutrients (particularly nitrogen 
dissolved in groundwater), and pollutants; and 4) 
riparian areas act as a sponge by absorbing 
floodwaters.  The water is then slowly released over a 
period of time, which minimizes flood damage and 
sustains higher base flows during late summer. 
 
Wildlife : Structurally complex riparian vegetation 
communities provide many different habitats and 
support a diverse array of animal species.  The layers

of vegetation provide multiple niches for many 
species of insects and wildlife.  Canopies of plants 
growing on streambank provide shade, cooling 
stream water, while roots stabilize and create 
overhanging banks, providing habitat for fish and 
other aquatic organisms. 
 
Rabbits and many ungulates (including deer, moose, 
and elk) browse on willow twigs, foliage, and bark 
(Martin 1951).  Beaver love willow branches.  
Several species of birds eat willow buds and young 
twigs.  Riparian forests support a high diversity of 
breeding birds (Miller 1951).  The percentage of 
breeding individuals, which are migratory, is very 
high in the cottonwood-willow habitat.  Moister 
conditions in the cottonwood-willow forest may 
promote lush plant growth, higher invertebrate 
populations and, therefore,  more available food for 
flycatchers, warblers,  and other migratory, 
insectivorous birds.  Ripa rian areas support up to 
10.6 times the density of mi grant birds per hectare as 
adjacent non-riparian areas (Stevens et al. 1977).  
Most of these migratory birds belong to the foliage 
insect (47%) or air insect (34%) foraging guilds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Willow Family (Salicaceae).  Shining willow is a 
shrub or small tree to 4 m (13 feet) (McGregor et al. 
1986, Stephens 1973).  The twigs are gray to 
yellowish-brown.  Leaves are yellowish green to 
green and semi-glossy above, pale beneath, initially 
reddish-pubescent, soon glabrous.  Leaves are lance-
shaped, 4-12 cm (1.2-4.7") long and finely glandular-
serrate.  The petioles are glandular above.  Catkins 
emerge with the leaves; pistillate (female) catkins are 
1-3 cm long, on leaf branch lets 1-3 cm long.  Bracts 
are deciduous, pale yellow, and villous on the inside.  
The fruits are ovoid capsules 4-6.5 mm long, with a 
long neck.  When ripe, the capsules open to release 
tiny wind-born seeds with silky hairs at their base.  
Shining willow flowers in May and fruits in June.  
 
Distribution 
Shining willow grows in  swamps, shores and wet 
meadows.  It occurs in Minnesota, north Iowa, North 
Dakota, Labrador, Newfoundland to Saskatchewan, 
south to Delaware, Ohio, Iowa, and South Dakota.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Willows root freely from cuttings, and are easy to 
propagate.  Willows are  difficult to propagate in 
quantity by seed. 
 
The NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, New 
Mexico, in cooperation with the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, developed a pole planting technique 
for establishing willow (Hoag 1993a).  We reprint 
this procedure below.  "Trial planting on well adapted 
sites indicate more that 80 % survival of cottonwood 
and willow poles when dormant poles are cut and 
planted between November and February.  It is 
essential to monitor the water tables at proposed 
planting sites for at least one year before planting.  
Poles planted where the water table fluctuates widely 
will have lower survival rates than those planted 
where water table is relatively stable.  If groundwater 
monitoring shows the water level will drop more than 
3 feet during the growin g season (May-October), 
another site should be selected.  Monitoring of 
observation wells for at least one calendar year 
before planting will allow better planting depth to 
ensure establishment."  
 
Steps for Successful Pole Plantings 
•   Select collection sites as close to the area as 
possible to conserve genetic diversity.  Try to 
match donor site and revegetation site in terms of 
soils, elevation, hydro-dynamics, permanent 
groundwater table, and soil salinity (which 
should be low).  
•  Select willow cuttings from a local, native stand 
in healthy condition.  Prune no more than 2/3 of 
plants in an area.  Willow cuttings for pole 
plantings should generally be at least 1/2 inch in 
diameter or larger.  Select  the longest, straightest 
poles available.  Use only two to four-year old 
wood.  The total length of the poles needed 
depends upon the water table depth. 
•   Measure water table fluctuations in the planting 
area for at least 1 year, preferably longer, to 
determine the lowest water table depth.  Take a 
reading at least once a month, preferably more 
often during the driest months of the year.  
•  Cut poles while dormant.  Remove all side 
branches except the top two or three. 
•  Prepare cuttings by trimming off the top to 
remove the terminal bud, allowing a majority of 
the energy in the stem to be sent to the lateral 
buds for root and shot development. 
•  Soak poles in water for at least 5 to 7 days before 
planting.

•  Dig holes to the depth of the lowest anticipated 
water table.  Sites where the water table will be 
within one foot of the  ground surface during the 
growing season are better suited for willows than 
cottonwoods. 
•   The cuttings should extend several inches into 
the permanent water table to ensure adequate 
moisture for sprouting.  At least 1/2 to 2/3's of 
the cutting should be below ground to prevent 
the cutting from being ripped out during high 
flows.  Usually, at least 2 to 3 feet should be 
below ground.  It should also be long enough to 
emerge above adjacent vegetation such that it 
will not be shaded out. 
•  Place the cuttings in the holes the same day they 
were removed from the soak treatment.  Set the 
butt as close to the lowest annual water table 
elevation as possible. 
•  Electric hammer drills (Dewalt model DW530) 
fitted with one-inch diam eter, 3-foot bits were 
used to plant thousands of willows in New 
Mexico.  With one drill, two people installed 500 
willow cuttings per day to a 3-foot depth.  A 
power auger or a punch bar can also be used. 
•   Willow pole cuttings were generally planted on 
10 to 20 foot centers in New Mexico.  Areas 
with a shallow water table (4-6 feet) were 
generally planted with a higher number of pole 
cuttings to enhance overall survival.  Often 
understory species were planted under the 
canopy of pre-existing overstory (cottonwoods, 
tree willows), since they  are often observed 
occupying this niche. 
•   It is critical to ensure that the soil is packed 
around the cutting to prevent air pockets.  
"Mudding" (filling the hole with water and then 
adding soil to make mud slurry) can remove air 
pockets. 
•  When necessary, install  tree guards around the 
poles to protect from beavers, other rodents, or 
rabbits.  Willows tend to be fairly resistant to 
pruning from beavers, so tree guards may not be 
necessary. 
•   As buds begin to swell (usually in April or May), 
remove them from the lower two-thirds of the 
pole.  This will reduce evapotranspiration water 
loss and stimulate root growth. 
•  Exclude the planting area  from livestock grazing 
for at least two to three growing seasons. 
 
Seed Collections 
•   Willow seeds must be collected as soon as the 
capsules mature (when they turn from green to 
yellow or tan). 
•  Plant seeds immediately, since they retain their 
viability for only a few days at room 
temperature.  Even under the most favorable 
conditions, maximum storage is four to six 
weeks.  
•  Germination takes place 12 to 14 hours after 
planting.  Keep soil moist while seedlings 
germinate and grow.  
•  When seeding outdoors, willows require moist 
soil from spring over-bank flows, capillary 
wetting of the soil surface, or irrigation for 
establishment.  
 
Management 
Traditional resource management  of willow includes 
the following: 
•   Willows were traditionally tended by pruning or 
burning to produce long straight stems.  
•  Willow is gathered only at certain times of the 
year, beginning in the autumn after the leaves 
fall.  For many weavers, gathering will continue 
until the following spring when the sap begins to 
rise again.  
•   Often, basketweavers will prune many willows, 
sometimes replanting the stems, so there will be 
nice straight basketry  materials the following 
year. 
•   Before gathering, the weavers make offerings of 
thanks and pray for permission to gather.  Often 
tobacco or other offerings are given before 
beginning to gather. 
•  Basket weavers process materials with their 
hands and mouths.  Herbicides sprayed on 
willows and along streams have a much higher 
health risk for humans, when willows are 
processed and used for traditional materials.  
 
Howe and Knopf (1991) conclude that to ensure the 
survival of willows and cottonwoods in riparian 
communities, resource managers need to implement 
strategies to control the spread of exotic species. 
 
Livestock grazing has widely been identified as a 
leading factor causing or  contributing to degradation 
of riparian habitats in the western United States 
(Chaney et al. 1990, Fleischner 1994, Ohmart 1996).  
Livestock grazing can alter vegetative structure and 
composition of riparian habitat.  Overgrazing, 
especially by livestock and big game, frequently 
changes plant species composition and growth form, 
density of stands, vigor, seed production of plants, 
and insect production.  Li vestock grazing can cause 
the replacement of bird and mammal species 
requiring the vertical vegetation structure of riparian 
habitat to species, which are ubiquitous in their

habitat preferences.  Previous heavy cattle grazing 
changed the bird and small mammal community 
composition in riparian areas through reduction of 
shrub and herbaceous cover. 
 
Slovlin (1984) recommended a 5-year rest from cattle 
grazing to re-establish healthy stands of riparian 
vegetation such as cottonwood and willows.  Siekert 
et al. (1985) reported that  spring grazing showed no 
significant changes in channel morphology, whereas 
summer and fall grazing did.  However, even with 
limited seasonal grazing, all tree seedlings would be 
eliminated.  Marlow and Pogacnik (1985) 
recommended fencing riparian habitat, rest-rotation, 
light grazing (<20% forage removal), and grazing 
after streambanks have dried to 10% moisture.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Containerized shining willow saplings are available 
from most nurseries in the areas where they grow.  
We recommend using plants from the same region, 
elevation, climate, soil type, moisture, or hydrologic 
regime as you are replanting. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Andros, F. 1883.  The medicine and surgery of the 
Winnebago and Dakota Indians .  American Medical 
Association Journal 1: 116-118. 
 
Baird, K. 1989.   High quality restoration of riparian 
ecosystems.  Restoration and Management Notes 
7(2):60-64. 
 
Bentrup, G. & J. C. Hoag 1998.   The practical 
streambank bioengineering guide. User's guide for 
natural streambank stabilization techniques in the 
arid and semi-arid Great Basin and Intermountain 
West .  USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Carlson, G.G. & V.H. Jones 1939.   Some notes on 
use of plants by the Comanche Indians .  Michigan 
Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25: 517-543. 
 
Ellis, L.M. 1994.   Bird use of salt cedar and 
cottonwoods on a grazed and ungrazed plains 
bottomland in Northeastern Colorado.   USDA, FS, 
Research Note RM-370:1-4. 
 
Elvin-Lewis, M. 1979.   Empirical rationale for teeth 
cleaning plant selection.   Medical Anthropology 
(Fall) 1979:431-456. 
 
Farley, G.H., L.M. Ellis, J.N. Stuart, & N.J. Scott, Jr. 
1994.   Avian species richness in different-aged stands 
of riparian forest along the middle Rio Grande, New 
Mexico.   Conservation Biology 8:1098-1108. 
 
Fleishner, T.L. 1994.   Ecological costs of livestock 
grazing in western North America.   Conservation 
Biology 8:629-644. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices.   
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1992.  Use of willow and cottonwood 
cuttings for vegetation shorelines and riparian areas . 
USDA NRCS Riparian/Wetla nd Project Information 
Series #3, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1993a.   Selection and acquisition of 
woody plant species and materials for riparian 
corridors and  shorelines.  Riparian/Wetland Project 
Information Series #2, USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1993b.   How to plant willows and 
cottonwood for riparian rehabilitation.   Technical 
Note #23, USDA, NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials, 
Boise, Idaho. 
 
James, G.W. 1909 (rev. 1972 ).  Indian basketry.  
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  271 
pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992.   Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie. An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press of 
Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987.   Edible wild plants of the 
prairie. An ethnobotanical guide.   University Press of 
Kansas.  276 pp. 
 
Knopf, F.I. & F.B. Samson 1994.   Scale perspectives 
on avian diversity in western riparian ecosystems . 
Conservation Biology 8(3):669-676. 
 
Marlow, C.B. & T.M. Pogacnik 1985.   Time of 
grazing and cattle-induced damage to streambanks .  
Pages 279-284.  IN Johnson, R.R., C.D. Ziebell, D.R. 
Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, and R.H. Hamre. (Tech. 
Coords.)   Riparian ecosystems and their

management: Reconciling conflicting uses.  Proc. 
First North Am. Riparian Conf., USDA, FS, Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-120.  523 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts. A guide to wildlife food 
habits.   Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Mason, O.T. 1988.   American Indian basketry .  
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
McGregor, R.L., T.M. Barkley, R.E. Brooks, &E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1976.   Flora of the Great Plains .  
Great Plains Flora Association.  University Press of 
Kansas.  1402 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west.   Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki 
Indians .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(2):175-326. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the north 
central plains .  The University Press of Kansas.  530 
pp. 
 
Stevens, L.E., B.T. Brown,  J.M. Simpson, & R.R. 
Johnson 1977 .  The importance of riparian habitat to 
migrating birds , pp. 156-164. IN Johnson, R.R. & 
D.A. Jones (Tech. Coords.).   Importance, 
preservation and management of riparian habitat: a 
symposium .  USDA, Forest Service, Gen. Tech. 
Report RM-43, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado.  217 pp. 
 
Tilford, G.L. 1997.   Edible and medicinal plants of 
the west .  Mountain Press Publishing Company, 
Missoula, Montana.  
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000321.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Vestal, P.A. & R.E. Schultes 1939.   The economic 
botany of the Kiowa Indians .  Botanical Museum, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Ivan Dozier 
USDA, NRCS, Carlinville, Illinois 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Environmental Horticulture, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Revised 04dec00 jsp; 03j un03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.