Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COYOTE WILLOW 
Salix exigua Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = SAEX  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, New Mexico Plant Materials Center, & Idaho 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Sandbar willow, gray willo w, narrow-leaved willow, 
dusky willow, pussywillow 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The value of willow as the raw 
material necessary for the manufacture of a family's 
household goods cannot be over-estimated.  Among 
the Paiute, every woman carried bundles of long, 
slender willow which had been scraped white, and 
coils of willow sapwood that she had gathered and 
prepared during the winter months when the leaves 
were gone (Wheat 1967).  Willow branches are used 
as the warp for twined ba skets and the foundation in 
coiled baskets.  Willows are used to weave water 
jugs, cradles for newborn infants, hats, cooking 
vessels, serving bowls, trays, seed beaters, and 
storage baskets.  Some tribes use willow roots as a 
sewing strand.  Virtually all California tribes use 
willow in their baskets. 
 
Tribes which use willow, such as Salix exigua , 
include the Chemehuevi, Paiute, Mono, Panamint, 
Pviotso (Northern Paiute), Shoshoni, Bannock, Ute, 
Washo, Chiricahua, Jicarilla Apache, Mescalero 
Apache, Navajo, San Carlos Apache, Western 
Apache, White Mountain Apache, Havasupai, 
Maricopa, Yavapai, Hopi, San Juan Pueblo (Tewa), 
Zuni, Papago, and Pima Indians extending through 
the American Southwest an d Mexico.  In Ancestral 
Puebloan times, willow, along with threeleaf sumac,  was the material of choice for manufacturing Native 
American baskets. 
 
Willow is gathered from the time the leaves fall in 
autumn until the buds begin to swell in spring.  The 
year-old wands without branches are chosen, and 
sorted by size and length.  The bark can easily be 
stripped off in the spring when the sap rises.  Willow 
wands with the smallest leaf scars are split and peeled 
to obtain the tough, flexible sapwood used for the 
weft in basket weaving.  Color variation is achieved 
by alternating peeled and unpeeled willow sticks in 
the warp.  Ute Indians used
 to concoct a green dye 
for coloring buckskin by soaking willow leaves in hot 
water and then boiling the mixture to concentrate the 
pigment.  Willow roots also have been used by others 
to manufacture a rose-tan dye. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos  
The Paiute built willow-frame houses covered with 
mats of cattails or tules.  Slender willow withes were 
woven into tight circular fences as protection from 
the wind that blew sand  into eyes and food.  For 
shade, shed roofs thatched with willows, called 
"willow shadows", were constructed.  In the Pueblo 
province, coyote willow branches are employed with 
leaves attached for thatch ing roofs.  Other light 
construction uses included the tops of storage bins or 
racks for aerating co rn while it dried, such as one 
recently unearthed at pr ehistoric Arroyo Hondo 
Pueblo. 
 
A bed or sleeping bench of willow poles raised high 
off the ground indicated a  wealthy man in the Miwok 
culture in California's Sierra Nevada.  Willow brush 
was placed radically over the roof timbers of an earth 
lodge.  Boats had eight willow ribs and a gunwale of 
willow pole along each side.  Sweat lodges are made 
with willow.  A women’s shinney game was played 
on a field similar to a football field with five-foot 
long, sharp willow poles.  A ring of rope or string 
was thrown into an indent in the field and the women 
had to move it up the field and throw it against a goal 
post without touching or carrying it on the poles.  
Counting games are played with willow counting 
sticks. 
 
Ancestral Puebloans used willow wood for textile 
loom anchors, rods to control the weaving rhythm, 
and finishing needles.  Bows, arrow points, pot rests, 
scrapers and cradle parts all were crafted from 
willow.  In later times, Navajo made weaving sticks 
and arrow shafts from willow along with other

straight-grained woods, and Ute Indians made 
snowshoe frames from dried willow branches.  
Matting was another early product made from 
willows.   
 
Other implements made from willow include fire 
sticks twirled as a spindle to generate enough heat to 
ignite a flame and what appear to be prayer sticks 
recovered from various archaeological sites.  Willow 
is still used for making prayer sticks by the Zunis and 
doubtless by some of the Rio Grande pueblo.  Inner 
bark was used in spring for rope in California 
(Murphey 1959). 
 
Aspirin is the pharmaceuti cal equivalent of willow 
bark tea, which is an eff ective remedy for headache, 
fever or sore throat.  More than 2,400 years ago, the 
Greeks learned to use extracts of several native 
willow species to treat pain, gout, and other illnesses.  
In more recent times, in 1839, salicylic acid was 
isolated from wild pl ants and manufactured 
synthetically.  Early salicylic acid-based products had 
unpleasant side effects.  Sixty years later, the Bayer 
Company developed a derivative of salicylic acid, 
called it aspirin, and the rest is history. 
 
Tea made from willow leaves will cure laryngitis.  
Willow reduces inflammation of joints and 
membranes.  When used as an analgesic, willow 
treats urethra and bladder irritation, infected wounds, 
and eczema.  Willow is used as an over-all treatment 
of many diseases, including hay fever, diarrhea, 
prostatitis, satyriasis, and relief of ovarian pain.  A 
poultice is made for treating gangrene and skin 
ulcers.  For one remedy used by the Paiute, burned 
willow charcoal was added to water and taken as a 
tea to stop diarrhea.  A San Juan tribal elder said he 
used willow leaves to make his mouth water and 
relieve thirst. 
 
Young willow shoots can be stripped of their bark 
and eaten.  The inner bark can be eaten raw, prepared 
like spaghetti, or made into a flour.  The young 
leaves may be eaten in case of emergency 
 
Other Uses : Ecological diversity, bank and sediment 
stabilization, maintenance of channel morphology, 
water quality improvement, ground-water recharge, 
flood abatement, fish and wildlife habitat, ribs of 
boats, and games. 
 
Riparian Ecosystem Services and Functions : The 
riparian zone essentially  encompasses those alluvial 
sediment deposits where river and alluvial ground 
water supplement that available from local 
precipitation.  High-to-low elevations, north-south  and east-west gradients, and steep-to-shallow terrain 
all influence the relationship between geomorphic 
and fluvial processes and vegetation community 
structure.  Riparian ecosystem functions include the 
following: 
•
  Ecological diversity. 
•  Riparian vegetation traps sediments and nutrients 
from surface runoff and prevents them from 
entering the aquatic system. 
•  Dense matrix of roots in the riparian zone can 
serve as an effective filter of shallow 
groundwater. 
•  Water quality is improved through filtration and 
trapping of sediment, nutrients (particularly 
nitrogen dissolved in groundwater), and 
pollutants. 
•  Riparian vegetation tends to prevent the river 
from down-cutting or cutting a straight path 
(channeling), thus promoting a sinuous course, 
ground-water recharge, and maintenance of an 
elevated water table. 
•  Riparian areas act as a sponge by absorbing 
floodwaters which is then  slowly released over a 
period of time, which minimizes flood damage 
and sustains higher base flows during late 
summer. 
•   Structurally complex riparian vegetation 
communities provide many different habitats and 
support a diverse array of animal species.  
Different groups of animals occupy or use the 
different layers of vegetation, and this multi-
story arrangement is often present nowhere else 
in the arid landscapes. 
•  Canopies of plants growing on streambanks 
provide shade, cooling stream water, while roots 
stabilize and create overhanging banks, 
providing habitat for fish and other aquatic 
organisms. 
 
Wildlife : Rabbits and many ungulates, including deer, 
moose, and elk, browse on willow twigs, foliage and 
bark (Martin 1951).  Beavers consume willow 
branches, while several species of birds eat willow 
buds and young twigs.  
 
California's riparian forests support a high diversity 
of breeding birds (Miller 1951).  In one study 
conducted on the Sacramento  River, 147 bird species 
were recorded as nesters or winter visitants’ (Laymon 
1985).  The percentage of breeding individuals that 
are migratory is very high in the cottonwood-willow 
habitat.  Moister conditions in the cottonwood-willow 
forest may promote lusher plant growth, higher 
invertebrate populations and, therefore, more 
available food for flycatch ers, warblers and other

migratory, insectivorous birds.  Riparian areas 
support up to 10.6 times the density of migrant birds 
per hectare as adjacent non-riparian areas (Stevens et 
al. 1977).  Most of these migratory birds belong to 
the foliage insect (47%) or air insect (34%) foraging 
guilds. 
 
Coyote willow is browsed avidly by deer and to some 
extent by sheep, goats, and cattle, in summer and 
early fall.  Cattle will leave the willow patches when 
the foliage matures and drie s, whereas deer devour 
the current leafless stem th roughout the winter.  The 
browse rating for willow is good to fair for sheep and 
goats; good to poor for cattle; fair for deer; and fair to 
useless for horses (Sampson et al. 1981). 
 
Livestock : Riparian ecosystems offer water, shade, 
and food for domestic livestock.  Cattle and sheep 
congregate in riparian areas , particularly during hot 
or dry periods.  Overgrazing of domestic livestock in 
riparian areas destroys riparian ground cover, disrupts 
the reproductive cycle of cottonwood trees, 
destabilizes streambanks, and thus increases sediment 
loads to streams. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Willow Family (Salicaceae).   Salix exigua, 
with its long, thin leaves, is the most distinctive of 
the willow species.  The leaves have a very short 
petiole, and mature blades are 50 - 124 mm long, 
linear, with an acuminate leaf  tip and either a serrate 
or entire leaf edge.  Coyote willow is a shrub < 7 m 
tall, and spreads clonally by root-sprouting.  The 
catkin inflorescence appears w ith or after the leaves 
in the spring, and are 22-70 mm long on leafy shoots 
5-110 mm long.  The flower bracts are a tawny 
yellow color. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   Salix exigua  is distributed in wetlands, along 
alluvial bottomlands and streamsides at elevations 
lower than 2700 m.  Coyote willow is distributed 
throughout California north to Alaska, east across 
North America, and south to Arizona and Mexico 
(Hickman (1993).  Mason (1957) says  Salix exigua is 
often found at sites of former Indian habitation, and 
notes this was one of the common basket willows of 
the Indians   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Coyote willow dominates the riparian 
forests of lower terrace depo sits and stabilized gravel 
bars.  Willows are found near water; they require a 
bare gravel or sand substr ate with adequate moisture 
for germination and development.  Willows grow 
very rapidly when their root s are in contact with the 
permanent water table. 
 
Typically, in California, cottonwoods and willows 
predominate on the immediate stream banks, whereas 
valley oaks are spread irregularly over the natural 
levees farther away from stream banks.  In other parts 
of the American west, temporal gradients occur 
within a location in the riparian zone.  Early pioneer 
communities such as cottonwood/willow give way to 
late successional communities such as mesquite or 
sagebrush, often a consequence of sediment 
accumulation (Patten 1998).  Many similarities 
among western riparian ecosystems exist because 
several dominant genera (e.g.  Populus and Salix  spp.) 
are common throughout the West, and many 
geomorphic and hydrologic processes that influence 
riparian establishment are similar.  
 
Western riparian ecosystems have been greatly 
altered by human activity.  Riparian forests have been 
reduced to fragmented, discontinuous patches 
because of human interv ention.  For example, 
estimates are that 70 - 90  percent of the natural 
riparian ecosystems in the U.S. have been lost to 
human activities (Warner 1979).  Regional losses in 
these ecosystems have been estimated to exceed 98% 
in the Sacramento Valley in California (Smith 1977) 
and 95% in Arizona (Warner 1979).  Many factors 
have contributed to these resource losses, including 
the following: natural resource use; urbanization; 
alteration of stream flows through dam construction 
and ground-water withdrawal; modification of biotic 
conditions through grazing, agriculture, and 
introduction of non-native species; and alteration 
within watersheds (Patten 1998). 
 
Coyote willow roots freely from cuttings, and is an 
easy species to propagate.  Coyote willow is a shrub 
3 to 15 feet in height with multiple branches and 
deciduous leaves.  Its architecture is resilient to 
disturbance such as high velocity floodwaters, 
sediment deposition, medium to high flooding 
(anoxic conditions), high winds, heavy precipitation, 
or pruning from beaver, de er or wildlife.  Beaver 
browsed more than 5,000 willow cuttings to ground 
level in New Mexico, and all the willow resprouted 
(Los Lunas Plant Materials Center 1998).  These

cutting also survived over two months of continuous 
inundation.  
 
The NRCS Plant Materials Center at Los Lunas in 
cooperation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
developed a pole planting technique for establishing 
willow and cottonwood (USDA, NRCS).  We reprint 
this procedure below. 
•   "Trial planting on well adapted sites indicate 
more that 80% survival of cottonwood and willow 
poles when dormant poles are cut and planted 
between November and February. 
•   It is essential to monitor the water tables at 
proposed planting sites for at least one year before 
planting.  Poles planted where the water table 
fluctuates widely will have lower survival rates than 
those planted where water table is relatively stable.  
If groundwater monitoring shows the water level will 
drop more than 3 feet during the growing season 
(May-October), another site  should be selected.  
Monitoring of observation wells for at least one 
calendar year before planting will allow better 
planting depth to ensure establishment.  
•   Salt cedar ( Tamarix chinensis ), Russian olive 
( Eleagnus angustifolia ), and giant reed (Arundo 
donax ) will need to be controlled before poles are 
planted.  However, young cottonwoods and willows 
can grow successfully in quite small openings in 
stands of salt cedar.  Study of natural stands suggest 
they will eventually shade out the salt cedar." 
 
Steps for Successful Pole Plantings : 
•  Select sites as close to the area as possible to 
conserve genetic diversity.  Try to match donor site 
and revegetation site in terms of soils, elevation, 
hydro-dynamics, permanent groundwater table, and 
soil salinity (which should be low).  
•   Select willow cuttings from a local, native stand 
in healthy condition.  Prune no more than 2/3 of 
plants in an area.  Willow cuttings for pole plantings 
should generally be at least 1/2 inch in diameter or 
larger.  Select the longest, straightest poles available.  
Use only two to four-year old wood.  The total length 
of the poles needed depends upon the water table 
depth (see #7 below). 
•   Measure water table fluctuations for at least 1 
year, preferably longer, to determine the lowest water 
table depth.  Take a reading at least once a month, 
preferably more often during the driest months of the 
year.  
•   Cut poles while dormant during January and 
February.  Remove all side branches except the top 
two or three. 
•   Prepare cuttings by trimming off the top to 
remove the terminal bud, allowing a majority of the  energy in the stem to be sent to the lateral buds for 
root and shot development. 
•
  Soak poles in water for at least 5 to 7 days before 
planting.  
•   Dig holes to the depth of the lowest anticipated 
water table.  Sites where the water table will be 
within one foot of the  ground surface during the 
growing season are better suited for willows than 
cottonwoods. 
•   The cuttings should extend several inches into 
the permanent water table to ensure adequate 
moisture for sprouting.  At least 1/2 to 2/3 of the 
cutting should be below ground to prevent the cutting 
from being ripped out during high water flows.  
Usually, at least 2 to 3 feet should be below ground.  
It should also be long enough to emerge above 
adjacent vegetation such that it will not be shaded 
out. 
•   Place cuttings in the hole the same day they are 
removed from the soak treatment.  Set the butt as 
close to the lowest annual water table elevation as 
possible. 
•   Electric hammer drills (Dewalt model DW530) 
fitted with one-inch diameter,  3-foot bits were used to 
plant thousands of coyote willows in New Mexico.  
With one drill, two people installed 500 willow per 
day to a 3-foot depth.  A power auger or a punch bar 
can also be used. 
•   Coyote willow pole cuttings were generally 
planted on 10 to 20 foot centers in New Mexico.  
Areas with a shallow water table (4-6 feet) were 
generally planted with a higher number of pole 
cuttings to enhance overall survival of the project; in 
this case, coyote willow was planted on 1-foot 
centers or even closer.  Of ten understory species were 
planted under the canopy of pre-existing overstory 
(cottonwoods, tree willows ) since they are often 
observed occupying this niche. 
•   It is critical to ensure the soil is packed around 
the cutting to prevent air pockets.  "Mudding" (filling 
the hole with water and then adding soil to make a 
mud slurry) can remove air pockets. 
•   When necessary, install  tree guards around the 
poles to protect from beavers, other rodents, or 
rabbits.  Coyote willows tend to be fairly resistant to 
pruning from beavers, so tree guards may not be 
necessary. 
•   As buds begin to swell (usually in April or May), 
wipe them off the lower two-thirds of the pole.  This 
will reduce evapotranspiration water loss and 
stimulate root growth. 
•   Exclude the planting area  from livestock grazing 
for at least two to three growing seasons.

There are other techniques for stabilization of banks 
and erosion control, called bioengineering, which 
utilize coyote willows.  These include brush layers, 
brush mattresses, brush or tree revetments, brush 
trenches, vertical bundles, and willow wattles.  Often 
fiberschine, erosion control fabric and hay bales are 
utilized to stabilize an eroding site.  For further 
information on these techniques, refer to  The 
Practical Streambank Bioengineering Guide  by 
USDA, Natural Resources  Conservation Service 
(Bentrup and Hoag 1998).   
 
Establishment From Seed: Willow seeds must be 
collected as soon as the capsules mature (when they 
turn from green to yellow) and planted immediately 
since they retain their viability for only a few days at 
room temperature.  Even under the most favorable 
conditions, maximum storage is four to six weeks.  
No dormancy occurs, so germination takes place 12 
to 14 hours after planting if the seeds are kept 
constantly moist willows are difficult to propagate in 
quantity by seed. 
 
Willows root so readily by either stem or root 
cuttings that there is little need to use other methods.  
Hardwood cuttings planted in early spring root 
promptly. 
 
For natural seed revegetation, coyote willow requires 
moist soil from spring over-bank flows or capillary 
wetting of the soil surface for establishment.  A 
number of studies have related components of the 
reproductive cycle of  Salix species to floodplain site 
conditions produced by streamflow and associated 
fluvial processes.  In particular, components of the 
annual pattern of streamflow, or annual hydrograph, 
are associated with specific stages of  Salix seedling 
emergence and growth.  Th ese include the following: 
1) flood flows that precede  Salix seed dispersal 
produce suitable germination sites; 2) flow recessions 
following a peak expose germination sites and 
promote seedling root elongation; and 3) base flows 
supply soil moisture to meet summer and winter 
seedling water demand (Shafroth et al. 1998; 
Mahoney et al. 1998).  The combination of root 
growth and capillary fringe defines the successful 
recruitment band for seedling establishment, which is 
usually from about 0.6 to 2 m in elevation above the 
late summer stream stage (M ahoney et al. 1998).  The 
rate of stream stage decl ine is also critical for 
seedling survival and should not exceed 2.5 cm per 
day.  
 
Management 
Traditional Resource Management: Willow is 
nature’s healer.  Poles of willow readily sprout, and  help to stabilize stream banks and provide habitat.  
Sweat lodges constructed of willow have been known 
to sprout and grow, even though the willows were 
subjected to very high heat.  
 
Willows were traditionally tended by pruning, to 
produce long straight stems.  Willow is gathered only 
at certain times of the year, beginning in the autumn 
after the leaves fall.  For many weavers, gathering 
will continue until the following spring when the sap 
begins to rise again.  Some
 gatherers, once they find 
a good stand, will cut as much as they can.  The 
willows in many areas have not been tended in a long 
time, and the stems are old, woody, and twisted.  
Often basket weavers will prune many willows, 
sometimes replanting the stems, so there will be nice 
straight basketry materi als the following year. 
 
The Chemehuevi gather shoots, which they have 
burned several times, until only the living stumps of 
the willow, remain (Collings 1979).  Straight young 
shoots grow from these stumps in profusion.  Each 
twig is carefully selected.   Those finally selected are 
at least fifteen inches long  and between 1/8 and 3/16 
of an inch in diameter with as little taper from end to 
end as possible.  
 
Before gathering, the weavers I have interviewed 
make offerings of thanks and pray for permission to 
gather (Stevens, unpublished field notes, 1998).  
Often tobacco or other offerings are given before 
beginning to gather. 
 
Basket weavers process materials with their hands 
and mouths.  Herbicides sprayed on willows and 
along streams have a much higher health risk for 
humans when they are used for traditional materials.  
A Washoe basket weaver  says, “Sometimes when 
you take the willows' skins off, they have spots from 
pesticides.”  Another weaver says the plants then 
grow deformed; the shoots don't grow straight and 
the willows are bumpy and wormy inside (Fulkerson 
1995). 
 
Howe and Knopf (1991) conclude that to ensure the 
survival of willows and cottonwoods in riparian 
communities, resource managers need to implement 
strategies to control the spread of exotic species. 
 
Livestock grazing has widely been identified as a 
leading factor causing or  contributing to degradation 
of riparian habitats in the western United States (U.S. 
General Accounting Office 1988; Chaney et al. 1990, 
Fleischner 1994, Ohmart 1996).  Livestock grazing 
can alter vegetative structure and composition of 
riparian habitat.  Overgrazing, especially by livestock

and big game, frequently changes plant species 
composition and growth form, density of stands, 
vigor, seed production of plants, and insect 
production.  Livestock grazing can cause the 
replacement of bird and mammal species requiring 
the vertical vegetation structure of riparian habitat to 
species, which are ubiquitous in their habitat 
preferences. 
 
Slovlin (1984) recommended a 5-year rest from cattle 
grazing to re-establish healthy stands of riparian 
vegetation, such as cottonwood and willows.  Siekert 
et al. (1985) reported that spring grazing showed no 
significant changes in channel morphology, whereas 
summer and fall grazing did.  However, even with 
limited seasonal grazing, all tree seedlings would be 
eliminated.  Marlow and Pogacnik (1985) 
recommended fencing riparian habitat, rest-rotation, 
light grazing (<20% forage removal), and grazing 
after streambanks have dried to 10% moisture.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Containerized coyote willow saplings are available 
from most nurseries in the areas where adapted.  We 
recommend using plants from the same region, 
elevation, climate, soil type, moisture or hydrologic 
regime as you are replanting.  
 
Coyote willow poles, suitabl e for transplanting, are 
available from the NRCS Plant Materials Center at 
Los Lunas, New Mexico and Tucson, Arizona.  The 
Plant Materials Centers vegetatively propagate these 
poles from parent stock.  Each center maintains 
parent stock of several ecotypes collected from the 
center's NRCS service area.  These ecotype 
collections vary in the amount of genetic diversity 
within ecotypes.  These centers can supply poles to 
NRCS Field and State Of fices, and other public 
agencies. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Auble, G.T. & M.L. Scott 1998.   Fluvial disturbance 
patches and cottonwood recruitment along the upper 
Missouri River, Montana .  Wetland 18(4): 546-556. 
 
Baird, K. 1989.  High quality restoration of riparian 
ecosystems.  Restoration and Management Notes 
7(2):60-64. 
 
Beier, P. & R.H. Barret 1987.   Beaver habitat use 
and impact in the Truckee River basin, California 
USA .  J. Wildlife Management 51:  794-799. 
 
Bentrup, G. & J.C. Hoag 1998.   The practical 
streambank bioengineering guide.  User's guide for 
natural streambank stabilization techniques in the 
arid and semi-arid Great Basin and Intermountain 
West.   USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Brode, J. & R.B. Bury 1984.   The importance of 
riparian systems to amphibians and reptiles.  Pages 
30 - 35 IN:  R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, eds.  
California riparian systems; ecology, conservation, 
and productive management.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Brotherson, J.D., S.R. Rushford, W.E. Evenson, & C. 
Morden 1983.   Population dynamics and age 
relationships of eight trees in Navajo National 
Monument, Arizona.  J. Range Management 36:  250-
256. 
 
Brunsfeld, S.J. & F.D. Johnson 1985.   Field guide to 
the willows of east-central Idaho .  Forest, Wildlife 
and Range Experiment Station.  University of Idaho 
Bull.  #39. 
 
Bull, E.L. & J.N. Slovlen 1982.  Relationships 
between avifauna and streamside vegetation.  Trans. 
North. Am. Wildl. Nat. Resour. Conf. 47: 496-506. 
 
Cemments, C. 1991 .  Beavers and riparian systems .  
Rangelands 13:277-279. 
 
Chaney, E., W. Elmore, & W.S. Platts 1990.  
Livestock grazing on western riparian areas.   U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8, Denver, 
Colorado. 
 
Collings, J.L. 1979.   Profile of a Chemehuevi basket 
weaver .  American Indian Art Magazine (Autumn). 
pp 3-11. 
 
Conard, S.G., R.L. MacDonald & R.F. Holland 1977.  
Riparian vegetation and flora of the Sacramento 
Valley .  Pages 47-56, IN: Anne Sand (ed.), Riparian 
Forests in California.  Their Ecology and 
Conservation. 
 
Crouch, G.L. 1979.   Long-term changes in 
cottonwoods on a grazed and ungrazed Plains 
bottomland in Northeastern Colorado .  USDA, 
Forest Service Research Note RM 370: 1-4.

Ditterberner, P.L. & M.R. Olson 1983.  The plant 
information network (PIN) data base Colorado, 
Montana, North Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming .  U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service FWS/OBS-83/36. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.   Wild plants 
and native peoples of the Four Corners.  Museum of 
New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico.  312 pp. 
 
Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.   Wild plants 
of the Pueblo province.  Exploring ancient and 
enduring use .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa 
Fe, New Mexico.  290 pp. 
 
Ellis, L.M. 1994.   Bird use of salt cedar and 
cottonwoods on a grazed and ungrazed plains 
bottomland in Northeastern Colorado .  USDA, 
Forest Service Research Note RM-370:1-4. 
 
Farley, G.H., L.M. Ellis, J.N. Stuart, & N.J. Scott, Jr. 
1994.   Avian species richness in different-aged stands 
of riparian forest along the middle Rio Grande, New 
Mexico .  Conservation Biology 8:1098-1108. 
 
Fenner, P.W., W.W. Brady, & D.R. Patton 1984.  
Observations on seed and seedlings of Fremont's 
cottonwood .  Desert Plants 6:55-58. 
 
Fleishner, T.L. 1994.   Ecological costs of livestock 
grazing in western North America. Conservation 
Biology 8:629-644. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1992.   In the shadow of Fox Peak.  An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
people of Stillwater Marsh .  Cultural Resource Series 
Number 5.  U.S. Department of the Interior. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Region 1.  Stillwater National 
Wildlife Refuge. 264 pp. 
 
Fulkerson, M.L. 1995.   Weavers of tradition and 
beauty.  Basketmakers of the Great Basin.   University 
of Nevada Press. 138 pp. 
 
Gaines, D. 1977.   The valley riparian forests of 
California: Their importance to bird populations.   
Pages 57-86, IN: Anne Sand (ed.), Riparian Forests 
in California.  Their Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Glinski, R.L. 1977.   Regeneration and distribution of 
sycamore and cottonwood trees along Sonoita Creek, 
Santa Cruz County, Arizona.  USDA, Forest Service 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-43:116-123. 
 
Grenfell, W.E., Jr. 1988.   Valley foothill riparian.  
Pages 86-87, IN: Kenneth A. Mayer and William F.  Laudenslayer, Jr.  A guide to wildlife habitats of 
California. USDA - Pacifi
c SW Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, California Dept. of Fish and 
Game, PG and E, and USDA Forest Service Region 
5. 
 
Grime, J.P. 1978.   Interpretation of small-scale 
patterns in the distribution of plant species in space 
and time.   Pages 101-104, IN: A.J.H. Freysen and 
J.W. Woldendorp (eds.)  Structure and Functioning 
of Plant Populations.  Elsevier. North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, New York. 
 
Grime, J.P. and R. Hunt 1975.   Relative growth rate: 
its range and adaptive significance in a local flora .  
J.  Ecology 63: 393-422. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kesler, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.   Plant propagation principles and practices . 
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 
pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of Calif ornia.  University of California 
Press.  1400 pp. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1992.   Use of willow and cottonwood 
cuttings for vegetation shorelines and riparian areas.   
USDA, NRCS, Riparian/Wetla nd Project Information 
Series #3, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1993a.   Selection and acquisition of 
woody plant species and materials for riparian 
corridors and shorelines . Riparian/Wetland Project 
Information Series #2.  USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1993b.   How to plant willows and 
cottonwood for riparian rehabilitation . Idaho Plant 
Materials Technical Note  #23.  USDA NRCS, Boise, 
Idaho. 
 
Howe, W.H. & R.L. Knopf 1991.   On the imminent 
decline of Rio Grande cottonwoods in central New 
Mexico .  The Southwestern Naturalist 36:28-224. 
 
Johnson, R.R. & C.W. Lowe 1985 .  On the 
development of riparian ecology .  Pages 112-116 IN: 
R.R. Johnson, C.D.  Ziebell, D.R. Patten, P.F. Ffolliot, 
and R.H. Hamre (tech. coord.)  Riparian ecosystems 
and their management: Reconciling conflicting uses.  
General Technical Report RM-120.  USDA, Forest 
Service, Fort Collins, Colorado.

Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the 
prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide .  University Press 
of Kansas.  340 pp. 
 
Knopf, F.I. and F.B. Samson 1994.   Scale 
perspectives on avian diversity in western riparian 
ecosystems.  Conservation Biology 8(3):669-676. 
 
Laymon, S.A. 1984.   Riparian bird community 
structure and dynamics: Dog Island, Red Bluff, 
California.   Pages 587-597  IN:  R.E. Warner and K. 
Hendrix, eds.  California ri parian systems; ecology, 
conservation, and productive management.  Univ. of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Mahoney, J.M. & S.B. Rood 1998.   Streamflow 
requirements for cottonwood seedling recruitment - 
an integrative model.   Wetlands 18(4): 634-645. 
 
Marlow, C.B. & T.M. Pogacnik 1985.  Time of 
grazing and cattle-induced damage to streambanks.   
Pages 279-284 IN: Johnson, R.R., C.D. Ziebell, D.R. 
Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, and R.H. Hamre (Tech. 
Coords).  Riparian Ecosystems and Their 
Management: Reconciling Conflicting Uses.  Proc. 
First North Am. Riparian Conf.  USDA, For. Serv. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. 523 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
McGinley, M.A. & T.G. Whitham 1985.   Central 
place foraging by beavers (Castor canadensis):  A 
test of foraging predictions and the impact of 
selective feeding on the growth form of cottonwoods 
(Populus fremontii).  Oecologia 66: 558-562. 
 
Michny, F.J., D. Boos & F. Wernette 1974 .  Riparian 
habitats and avian densities along the Sacramento 
River, California .  State of California Dept. of Fish 
and Game.  23 pages. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the Mountain 
West .  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Ohmart, R.D. 1996.   Historical and present impacts 
of livestock grazing on fish and wildlife resources in 
western riparian habitats .  Pages 245-279 IN: P.R. 
Karausman (ed.) Rangeland Wildlife.  Society for 
Range Management, Denver, Colorado, USA. 
 
Ohmart, R.D. & B.W. Anderson 1986.  Riparian 
habitat.  In inventory and monitoring of wildlife 
habitat .  Bureau of Land Management.  pp 169-199. 
 
Patten, D.T. 1998.   Riparian ecosystems of semi-arid 
North America: diversity and human impacts.   
Wetland 18(4): 498-512. 
 
Platts, W. et al. 1987.   Methods for evaluating 
riparian habitat with applications to management.  
USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station, General Technical Report INT-221. 
 
Pope, D.P., J.H. Brock, & R.A. Backhaus 1990.  
Vegetative propagation of key Southwestern woody 
riparian species.   Desert Plants 10: 91-95. 
 
Reichenbacher, F.W. 1984.   Ecology and evolution of 
Southwestern riparian plant communities . Desert 
Plants 6:15-22. 
 
Roberts, W.G, J.G. Howe & J. Major 1977.   A survey 
of riparian forest flora and fauna in California .  
Pages 3-20 IN: Anne Sand (ed.).  Riparian Forests in 
California. Their Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Robichaux, R. 1977.   Geologic history of the riparian 
forests of California . Pages 21-34 IN: Anne Sand 
(ed.).  Riparian Forests in  California.  Their Ecology 
and Conservation. 
 
Rucks, M.G. 1984.   Composition and trend of 
riparian vegetation on five perennial streams in 
southeastern Arizona.  pp 97-107 IN: R.E. Warner 
and K.M. Hendrix (eds.).  California Riparian 
Systems:  Ecology, Conservation, and Productive 
Management. University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
St. John, T.V. 1987.   Mineral acquisition in native 
plants .  Pages 529-536 IN: Elias, Thomas S. (ed.) 
Conservation and Management of Rare and 
Endangered Plants.  California Native Plant Society, 
Sacramento, California. 
 
St. John, T.V. 1988.   Soil disturbance and the 
mineral nutrient of native plants . Pages 34-39 IN: 
Rieger J.P. and B.K.  Willia ms (eds.) Proceedings of 
the Second Native Plant Revegetation Symposium.  
San Diego, California. 
 
Sampson, A.W. & B.S. Jespersen 1981.   California 
range brushlands and browse plants.   Division of 
Agricultural Sciences. University of California. 
 
Schulz, T.T. & W.C. Leininger 1991.   Nongame 
wildlife communities in grazed and ungrazed 
montane riparian sites .  Great Basin Naturalist 
51(3):286-292.

Schulz, T.T. & W.C. Leininger 1990.  Differences in 
riparian vegetation structure between grazed areas 
and exclosures .  Journal of Range Management 
43(4):295-299. 
 
Shafroth, P.B., G.T. Auble, J.C. Stromberg, & D.T. 
Patten 1998.   Establishment of woody riparian 
vegetation in relation to annual patterns of 
streamflow, Bill Williams River, Arizona.  Wetlands 
(18)4:577-590. 
 
Shanefield, A.N. 1984.   Alder, cottonwood, and 
sycamore distribution and regeneration along the 
Nacimiento River, California .  pp 196-201 IN: R.E. 
Warner and K.M. Hendrix (eds.). California Riparian 
Systems: Ecology, Conservation, and Productive 
Management.  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Siekert, R.E., Q.D. Skinner, M.A. Smith, J.L. Dodd, 
& J.D. Rodgers 1985.   Channel response of an 
ephemeral stream in Wyoming to selected grazing 
treatments .  Pages 276-278 IN: Johnson, R.R., C.D. 
Ziebell, D.R. Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, and R.H. Hamre 
(Tech. coords).  Riparian Ecosystems and Their 
Management: Reconciling Conflicting Uses.  Proc. 
First North Am. Riparian Conf.  USDA, For. Serv. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. 523 pp. 
 
Slovlin, J.M. 1984.   Impact of grazing on wetlands 
and riparian habitat: a review of our knowledge.   
Pages 1001-1104 IN:  Developing strategies for 
rangeland management . Nat. Res. Counc. Natl.  
Acad. Sci. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
 
Smith, F.  1977.   A short review of the status of 
riparian forests in California .  Pages 1-2 IN: Anne 
Sand (ed.).   Riparian Forests in California .  Their 
Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Stevens, L.E., B.T. Brown,  J.M. Simpson, & R.R. 
Johnson 1977.   The importance of riparian habitat to 
migrating birds .  Pages 156-164 IN: Johnson, R.R. 
and D.A. Jones (tech. coords .).  Importance, 
preservation and management of riparian habitat:  a 
symposium .  USDA, Forest Service Gen. Tech. 
Report RM-43.  Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 217 pp. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.   Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians .  Volume 2.  Aboriginal Uses of California's 
Indigenous Plants .  Koelz Scientific Books 
USA/Germany.  210 pp. 
 
Stromberg, J.C. 1993.   Fremont cottonwood-
goodding willow riparian forest: a review of their 
ecology, threats, and recovery potential . J.  Arizona-
Nevada Acad. Sci. 27:97-110. 
 
Stromberg, J.C. 1998.   Functional equivalency of 
saltcedar (Tamarix chinensis) and Fremont 
cottonwood (Populus fremontii) along a free-flowing 
river .  Wetlands 18(4):675-686. 
 
Thompson, K. 1977.   Riparian forests of the 
Sacramento Valley, California .  Pages 35-38 IN: 
Anne Sand (ed.).  Riparian Forests in California.  
Their Ecology and Conservation. 
 
Tilford, G.L. 1997.   Edible and medicinal plants of 
the West .  Mountain Press Publishing Company, 
Missoula, Montana.  
 
Trapp, G.R., G.L. Linc k & E.D. Whisler 1984.   The 
status of ecological research on the mammal fauna of 
California's central valley riparian communities .  
Pages 942-949 IN: R.E. Warner and K. Hendrix, eds.  
California riparian systems; ecology, conservation, 
and productive management.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
USDA, Natural Resources  Conservation Service 
1992.   Soil bioengineering for upland slope 
protection and erosion protection .  USDA, NRCS, 
Engineering Field Handbook.  Chapter 18. 
 
USDA, Natural Resources  Conservation Service 
1998.   1998 annual interagency riparian report .  
Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, New Mexico. 
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database . 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>  Version: 990405. 
 
U. S. General Accounting Office 1988.   Public 
rangelands: some riparian areas restored but 
widespread improvement will be slow .  Washington, 
DC, USA. GAO/RCED-88-01. 
 
Warner, R.E. and K.M. Hendrix 1979 .  California 
riparian systems: Ecology, conservation, and 
productive management . University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Wheat, M.M. 1967.   Survival arts of the primitive 
Paiutes .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, Nevada.  
117 pp. 
 
Williams, D.F. & K.S. Kilburn 1984.   Sensitive, 
threatened, and endangered mammals of riparian

and other wetland communities in California.  Pages 
950-956 IN: Warner, R.E., and K.E. Hendrix (eds.), 
California riparian systems:  ecology, conservation, 
and productive management .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley , California.  1035 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Greg Fenchel 
USDA, NRCS Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, 
New Mexico 
 
Chris Hoag 
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant Development 
Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.