Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH BLUE ASTER  
Symphyotrichum laeve  (L.) A. 
Love & D. Love var.  laeve 
Plant Symbol = SYLAL3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Aster falcidens var. falcatus, Aster laevis, Aster laevis 
forma amplifolius, Aster laevis  forma latifolius, Aster 
laevis forma purpurascens, Aster laevis var. 
amplifolius, Aster laevis  var. falcatus, Aster laevis 
var. latifolius, Aster laevis  var. thyrsoideus, Aster 
steeleorum , Smooth aster,  Symphyotrichum laeve  
 
Uses 
Conservation: Smooth blue aster is used for mixed-
grass and tallgrass prairie restoration as well as 
roadside revegetation. 
 
Gardening:  The showy flowers of smooth blue aster 
makes it a popular plant for use in wildflower, native 
plant, and butterfly gardens. 
 
Wildlife:  Smooth blue aster is palatable to white-
tailed deer, which prefer to graze this species before 
other forbs.  It has high nutritional value, decreasing 
with maturation.  It also attracts butterflies, 
pollinators of the flowers,  and can provide shelter for 
them. 
 
Legal Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants. 
usda.gov) and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’ s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Aster Family (Asteraceae).  Smooth blue 
aster is a perennial forb with a stout rhizome and 
underground stem (caudex).  Six to seven aerial 
stems sprout from the caude x.  Plants are generally 
30 to 100 cm tall.  Leaves are thick and stout, 1 to 2.4 
cm wide and less than 5 times as long as wide, 
sometimes toothed along the margins and clasped to 
the stem by a lobed appendage (auricle).  Leaves near 
the inflorescence are reduced to 2 mm bracts and 
have diamond-shaped tips.  Each plant produces 
several inflorescences.  Ray flowers are pale blue to 
purple, 7 to 15 mm long.  Disc flowers are yellowish.  
Fruit are achenes.  Flowering occurs from August to 
October.  Lower leaves drop early in the autumn 
while upper leaves remain until frost top-kills the 
plant. 
 Theodore S. Cochrane.  Robert W. Freckmann Herbarium. 
 
Distribution : Smooth blue aster is native to the 
United States.  It occurs from Maine to British 
Columbia, south to Georgia and Arkansas, and west 
to New Mexico.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Smooth blue aster occurs in various habitats, 
ranging from moist woods to dry, open prairies.  It is 
most notably associated  with mixed prairie plant 
types, and is also a dominant understory species in 
quaking-aspen communities. 
 
Adaptation 
USDA hardiness zones for smooth blue aster are 4 to 
8.  Smooth blue aster occurs on various soil types.  It 
was found to sustain more populations on wet, poorly 
drained glacial till in eastern Illinois and western 
Indiana.  In Michigan it occurs on xeric sites more 
readily than on mesic and transitional sites.  It is not 
tolerant of deep shade, but does well in high light to 
intermittent shade conditions. 
 
Establishment 
Smooth blue aster seeds are ready for collection in 
September when achenes separate easily from the 
receptacle.  Dry seeds prio r to cleaning and store in

sealed containers at 3 to 5oC.  Damp stratification at 1 
to 2oC for 2.5 to 4 months may increase seed 
germination of higher elevation sources.  Seed 
storage longevity is up to 7 years.  
 
Seeds can be started in the greenhouse from 
December to March.  Cover seeds to one times their 
depth with soil and lightly press down.  Seeds 
germinate in 10 to 15 days at 22
oC, reaching the true 
leaf stage in 7 to 15 days.  Seedlings should be 
thinned and fertilizer can be applied biweekly once 
the true leaf stage has been reached.  Foliage must be 
thoroughly rinsed off after fertilizer application.  
When foliage is 8 to 10 inches tall, prune plants back 
to 3 to 4 inches.   
 
For the first 12 weeks, 20-10-20 liquid NPK fertilizer 
at 100 ppm is applied.  Plants are then fertilized once 
with 10-20-20 liquid NPK at 200 ppm.  After 4 
weeks, seedlings can be stored in outdoor 
temperatures under insulating foam (if necessary) for 
up to 5 months before outplanting.  Outplanting can 
take place from September to November or April to 
May. 
 
Management  
Deer grazing does  not affect survival of established 
smooth blue aster plants, as long as only stem tips are 
removed.  Most plants respond to grazing with 
vigorous growth the next growing season. 
 
Herbicides used to control quack grass can suppress 
establishment or growth.  These herbicides contain 
glyphosate, dichlobenil, picloram, tebuthiuron, and 
hexazinone, alone or in combination with each other. 
 
Smooth blue aster resprouts from the rhizome after 
being top-killed by fire.  In  general, late spring fires 
have more adverse effects on percent plant coverage, 
and perhaps on leaf and flower regeneration, than 
early spring fires. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
any cultivars of smooth blue aster for conservation 
use.  Regional seed sources of native smooth blue 
aster are recommended for use in your area. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Cons ervation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”   The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
References 
Cochrane, T.S. 2004. Vascular Plant Species 
Database  (http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora / 
scripts/detail.asp?SpCode=ASTLAEvLAE, 26 
February 2004). Wisconsin State Herbarium, 
Madison. 
 
Native Plants Network. 2003.  Protocol information: 
Aster laevis (http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org/ 
network, 2 February 2004). University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery, Moscow. 
 
Sullivan, J. 1992.  Aster laevis. (http://www.fs.fed.us/ 
database/feis
, 2 February 2004). USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain  Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Ft. Collins. 
 
Vascular Plant Species Database. 2004.  Aster laevis 
L. var. laevis  (http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora / 
scripts/detail.asp?SpCode=ASTLAEvLAE, 18 
February 2004). Wisconsin State Herbarium, 
Madison. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 26Feb2004sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.