Plant Guide       
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVER 
BUFFALOBERRY  
Shepherdia argentea (Pursh) 
Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = SHAR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 
Alternate Names  
Buffaloberry, Bull berry.  
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Provides ideal cover and nesting sites for 
many birds.  It is a preferred food source of many 
songbirds and sharp-tailed grouse.  Seeds of this 
shrub are dispersed in the droppings of birds and 
ungulates, but sprouting of  the seeds seems to occur 
very rarely in nature.  It is also a browse source for 
big game animals, as well as rodents. 
 
Windbreaks: This species is suitable for the outside 
rows of multi-row belts.  In a single-row planting, it 
forms a low, dense barrier. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: The grayish green 
foliage and bright red fruit in the fall are colorful.  
The thorns and moderate suckering may make it less 
desirable for urban plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Elaeagnaceae (Oleaster Family).  Silver 
buffaloberry is a deciduous thorny, thicket-forming 
native shrub to small tree that is drought-hardy and 
winter-hardy.  It has opposite branching.  As the 
shrub matures, the thin bark becomes grayish-brown, 
and starts to peel.  Its height varies from 3 to 20 feet.  
The leaves are silvery gray  in color on both top and 
bottom.  They are about 1 to 2 inches long and about 
3/8 inches wide.  The male and female flowers are 
found on separate plants.  In early spring (late April), 
the yellow-colored male fl owers are quite noticeable, 
while the female flowers remain inconspicuous.  This 
species is insect pollinated, most commonly by honey 
bees and bumble bees. 
 USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials Center 
 
The fruit is drupe-like, ovoid, about ¼ inch long and 
one-seeded.  The seed is a small, shiny-brown achene 
that is very hard.  The berries start to form in late 
may and ripen by late summer.  Most of the fruit are 
reddish-orange in color.  Rarely, yellow fruit are 
seen.  The ripe berries remain on the shrubs and, if 
not eaten, dry berries may still be present the 
following spring.  
 
Distribution : It is found primarily in the prairies and 
southern parklands of the Prairie Provinces of Canada 
and south to California, Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Oklahoma with small populations in western 
Minnesota and northwestern Iowa.  It is most 
commonly found in the northern Great Plains.  
Precipitation in this region varies from 13 to 23 
inches.  It is hardy to Zone 3.  In its area of 
distribution, it appears to be indifferent to variations 
in climate.  No evidence of ecotypic variation has 
been noted. 
 
Habitat: It is found growing along streams, in coulees 
and on exposed, moist hillsides where it forms 
thickets in which several woody species are 
represented.  Silver buffaloberry is capable of fixing 
nitrogen in root nodules that contain bacteria.  This 
nitrogen may be important to other species and in the 
establishment and maintenance of shrub 
communities. 
 
Adaptation 
Silver buffaloberry grows on most well-drained soils.  
It is tolerant of non-saline to slightly saline, 
calcareous soils.  It prefers full sunlight, often on

northwest to east facing slopes.  The shrubs are 
excellent bank stabilizers, once established. 
 
Establishment 
Nursery grown seedlings generally establish readily 
if planted free of competing vegetation, in locations 
having 13 inches or more of annual precipitation.  
Occasionally, establishment problems are reported 
for no obvious reason.  Bare root seedlings should be 
planted in the spring, once the threat of frost is over.  
The optimum spacing is 4 to 6 feet between plants.  
Successful establishment has been documented from 
direct seeding into native grassland.  Seed should be 
sown about ½ inch deep in mid-September (Knudson 
et al. 2002). 
 
Management  
Control of invading weeds and grasses is important.  
Shallow cultivation works best.  Silver buffaloberry 
is reported to be a suckering plant.  However, the 
suckers do not seem to be strongly competitive.   
Browsing often sharply reduces the amount of 
suckers.  Cultivation can also be used to stop the 
spread of shoots or suckers, if that is a concern.  
Shelterbelts which are regularly cultivated show little 
sign of suckering.  Suckering may be encouraged for 
wildlife plantings.  Control of competing vegetation 
is still needed to allow for adequate growth of the 
buffaloberry plants.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insect problems are not severe.  White heart rot 
disease is a common problem on older plants.  If 
diseased plants are pruned,  the life of the planting can 
be prolonged. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
This plant is quite thorny and produces suckers.  Care 
should be taken to prevent suckers from taking root 
in unwanted areas around homes and agricultural 
systems.  The berries c ontain saponin which can 
cause irritation of the digestive system.  However, 
small amounts can be consumed with little risk. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Silver buffaloberry is a seed  propagated species.  The 
fruit ripens in late summer and should be picked 
slightly under ripe when making jellies because of 
the higher pectin levels.  The fruit is best harvested 
by shaking branches and catch ing the fruits in a sheet 
or flat pan spread on the  ground.  When eating fresh, 
fruit that is harvested after a light frost has a sweeter 
taste.  Looman (1984) esti mates that a mature plant 
may have in excess of 10,000 seeds.   
 
The harvested fruit should be macerated to remove 
the pulp from the seeds.  The pulp is removed by 
floating, changing the water several times.  Non-
stratified seed should be sown about ½ inch deep in 
mid-September.  Cover the seedbed with sand to 
prevent soil crusting.  When growing seedlings 
indoors, stratify the seed for 90 days at 41
o F in order 
to break dormancy.  Seedlings can be transplanted 
after two growing seasons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings of silver buffal oberry are available from 
many commercial conservation nurseries.  
‘Sakakawea’ was developed by the North Dakota 
Plant Materials Center, Bismarck.  This cultivar 
originated from open-pollinated seed collected in 
1954 in Canada.  Within this selection, 12 to 20 
percent of the plants produce yellow fruit. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government”.  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Hladek, K.L. 1971. Growth characteristics and 
utilization of buffaloberry  (Shepherdia argentea 
Nutt.)  in the Little Missouri River badlands of 
southwestern North Dakota.  Fargo, ND: North 
Dakota State University. 106 p. Thesis. 
 
Knudson, M., W. Duckwitz,  R. Bergsagel, N. Jensen, 
D. Tober. 2002.  Native shrubs for conservation-II.  
12
th Wildland Shrub Symposium, Laramie, WY. 
Aug., 2002. 
 
Looman, J. 1984.  The biological flora of Canada. 4. 
Shepherdia argentea (Pursh) Nutt.,  buffaloberry. The 
Canadian Field Naturalist. 98:231-244. 
 
PFRA. [n.d.]  Fruit-bearing shrubs for multi-use 
shelterbelts and orchards.  Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration. Indian Head, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Michael Knudson 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Bismarck, ND 
 Edited: 13feb2006 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.