Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
  
PITCHER SAGE 
Salvia azurea Michx. ex Lam. 
var.  grandiflora  Benth. 
Plant Symbol = SAAZG  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
  Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX 
 
Alternate Names azure blue sage, blue salvia, blue 
sage, pitcher salvia, and wild blue sage.  
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Pitcher sage is readily eaten by livestock 
and wildlife (Bare, 1979).  This palatable forb is 
especially sought out by liv estock in the early spring 
due to its high level of protein. Pitcher sage decreases 
in native pastures that are over grazed or over stocked 
with livestock. The flowers are pollinated by bumble 
bees and may be visited by hummingbirds. The plant 
is attractive to migrating monarch butterflies 
(Lepidoptera: Danaidae,  Danaus plexippus) and other 
insects (Thomas and Schrock, 2004).  
 
Landscape potential: Thomas and Schrock (2004) 
described  Salvia azurea  as a sometimes disorderly 
plant that is spectacular for its profuse, deep blue 
flowers. The bloom period persists over a long period 
of time in the fall when little else is blooming.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
Description 
General
: The Mint family (Lamiaceae). Pitcher Sage 
is a warm-season, long-lived, herbaceous, native 
perennial species. The common name Pitcher Sage is 
derived from the name of Doctor Zina Pitcher, a 19
th 
century U.S. Army surgeon and botanist. “ Salvia” 
Latin for safe and well since some of the plants of 
this genus have medicinal properties;  “azurea” and 
“ grandiflora ” Latin for blue and large flowers, 
respectively. Stem number single to several, 
sparingly branched, arising  from a thick caudex with 
deep branched roots to 2.5 meters (m). Weaver 
(1968) indicated that this species and others doubled 
their rooting depth in response to extreme drought. 
The stems are .6 to 1.5 m in height, square in cross 
section and have leaves attached opposite. The 
narrow, linear to lanceolate, gray greens leaves 
extend out from all four sides of the stem, and are 
produced from the bottom to the terminal spike 
inflorescence. Although it has a fragrance, the odor 
of the foliage is not nearly as strong as some 
members of the mint family. Lower leaves are 
sometimes shed early in the growing season. Pitcher 
sage usually begins blooming in July and can bloom 
until early October. The light blue flowers are 
attached by short pedicels on  terminal spikes or in the 
axils of the upper leaves . The greatly enlarged, 
drooping lower lip of the flower is covered at the 
base by a short, stiff, upper lip or hood. A bee will 
land on the lower lip and force its way under the 
hood to reach the nectar gland at the base of the 
flower tube. As in some other species the anthers of 
the flower mature before the stigma is ready to accept 
pollen, thus ensuring cross pollination. The pollen 
bearing anther is on one end of a slender filament and 
a sterile anther on the other end. When the bee enters 
the flower tube, its head pu shes on the sterile anther, 
and the filament, like a seesaw, pivots to dust the 
bee’s back with pollen from  the fertile anther (Farrar, 
1990). The fruits consist of one or two light brown 
resin-dotted nutlets borne at the bottom of the 
persistent calyx tube (Platt and Harder, 1991). The 
nutlets are elliptical, flattened and approximately 3 
millimeters (mm) long. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. Pitcher sage grows in the eastern 
¾ of Kansas. This species is also found in parts of 
Oklahoma, Nebraska, Missouri, and the panhandle of 
Texas. The species ranges east to South Carolina and 
Florida.

Habitat: Salvia azurea  grows on open sunny sites in 
well drained upland prairies. It can be found along 
roadsides and in moderately disturbed sites (Platt and 
Harder, 1991). Barkley et  al. (1986) reported that it 
grows on rocky and sandy sites.  
 
Adaptation 
This perennial forb is adapted to dry, sunny sites and 
is quite drought resistant. Thomas and Schrock 
(2004) indicated that  Salvia azurea was a drought 
tolerant plant that will occasionally wilt under 
extreme heat. They also indicated that it was an 
excellent long-term survivor. Lindgren and Schaaf 
(2005) conducted a ten year study and found that 
Ratibida pinnata  and Salvia azurea  had the highest 
survival rate of 16 wildflowers planted in buffalo 
grass or blue grama grass plots in central Nebraska.  
  
Establishment 
Unstratified seed can be planted in the fall or 
stratified seed can be planted in the spring (Platt and 
Harder, 1991). Without pr etreatment approximately 
40 percent of the seed will germinate. Moist 
stratification for 4 to 8 weeks will increase 
germination to around 80 percent (Platt and Harder, 
1991). 
 
Management  
When  Salvia azurea  is grown without competition it 
tends to become too tall and sprawl or lodge. This 
will lead to what Thomas and Schrock (2004) 
considered a disorderly plant as they mentioned in 
their article. However, moderate clipping early in the 
growing season will allow the plant to maintain a 
better more upright form. The plant flowers over an 
extended period of time and this makes time of 
harvest hard to judge since you have flowers and fruit 
in all stages of maturation.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious insect  or disease problems of 
any consequence with this member of the Lamiaceae 
family (Kahtz, 2006).  
 
Environmental Concerns 
No real environmental concerns regarding this plant 
species. It is used in prairie revegetation plantings 
where it is not considered weedy. Pitcher sage may 
volunteer from seed, but will not spread aggressively 
(Platt and Harder, 1991). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed can be planted in the field for plant 
establishment or in flats in a greenhouse situation as 
potted stock with proper stratification. The two  cotyledons are heart-shaped
, rounded at the tip, wide 
at the base and attached to a moderately long stalk. 
True seedling leaves arise in pairs on the upright 
stem. The true leaves are elongated and have a 
toothed margin (Platt and Harder, 1991). 
Salac et al. (1978) indicated that  Salvia azurea could 
be propagated vegetatively by stem cuttings.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
“United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
‘Nekan’, Pitcher Sage is a cooperative release by the 
USDA-NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center in 
Manhattan, KS and the Nebraska Agriculture 
Experiment Station in Lincoln, NE. The release was 
made in 1977 after evaluation of accessions from 
Nebraska, Kansas and South Dakota. The Kansas 
accession from Marion County, Kansas designated as 
PMK-1408 was selected for additional testing in 
1972, because of overall better performance and was 
rated excellent for vigor and stand. Growth of PMK- 
1408 was uniform with respect to plant height and 
spread. 
 
References 
Bare, J.E. 1979. Wildflowers and Weeds of Kansas. 
The Regents Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS. 
 
Barkley, T.M., R.L. McGre gor, R.E. Brooks and E.K. 
Schofield (eds.) 1986. Flora of the Great Plains. 
University of Kansas Press. Lawrence, KS. 
 
Farrar, J. 1990. A Wildflower Year. 
NEBRASKAland Magazine. Published by the 
Nebraska Game and Park Commission. Lincoln, NE. 
 
Kahtz, A.M. 2006. Field Notes:  Salvia azurea. 
American Nurseryman. August 1, 2006:  Vol. 66. 
 
Li

ndgren, D.T. and D. Schaaf. 2005. Survival and 
growth of wildflowers with bufflo grass or blue 
grama grass. HortScien ce. 40(6): 1787-1789. 
 
Platt, D.R. and L.H. Harder. 1991. Growing Native 
Wildflowers. The Kauffman Museum, Bethel 
College. N. Newton, KS. 
 
Salac, S.S., P.M. Jensen, J.A. Dickerson, and R.W. 
Gray Jr. 1978. Wildflowers for Nebraska Landscapes.

The Agriculture Experiment Station Bulletin (PM 35) 
University of Nebraska. Lincoln, NE. 
 
Thomas, A.L. and D. Schrock. 2004. Performance of 
67 Native Midwestern U.S. Perennials in Low-
maintenance Landscape. HortTechnology. 14(3); 
381-388. 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1968. Prairie Plants and their 
Environment. University of Nebraska Press. Lincoln, 
NE.    
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia , USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS                                 
 
Edited: 090226 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a  complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office  
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.