Plant Guide
AWNLESS 
BUSHSUNFL OWER 
Simsia calva  (Engelm. & A. Gray) 
A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = SICA7  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PMC  
Uses 
Awnless bushsunflower is a highly palatable plant that is 
utilized by several classes of livestock and wildlife  
(USDA -SCS, 1970) . Sheep and goats benefit from its 
high protein and digestibility. It also provides a browse 
for deer and seed for songbirds. It has a  “fair ” wildlife 
index of 3.08 (TPWD , 2010).  A study at the James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center  showed  an average 
crude p rotein of 10% between the months of May through 
October.  The dense foliage provides cover for small 
mammals, reptiles, and birds. Awnless bushsunflower 
foliage is also eaten by Border Patch butterfly caterpillars. 
The  flowers attract many other  species of pollinators  
(Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center , 2010) . Awnless 
bushsunflower can also be added to erosion control mixes 
for highly erodible areas. It has a “ fair” erosion index 
value of 3.33 (TPWD , 2010).  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displ ace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
D

escription  
Awnless bushsunflower is a 
native, semi -woody 
perennial forb.  Plants stand 
1 ½ to 3 feet tall with 
multiple branches and a 
large woody or fleshy 
taproot.  The leaves have 
an arrowhead appearance 
with jagged edges.  Older 
leaves at the bot tom of the 
plant measure about 2 
inches in length; while the 
newer leaves at the top of the plant are much shorter.  The 
stem splits into three separate stalks, each with its own 
flower  (USDA -SCS , 1979) .  The flower is 1 to 1½ inches 
wide with yellow petal s and a yellowish center.  
Flowering oc curs from April through the October 
( Agrilife , 2010) .  There are approximately 330,966 seeds 
per pound.   
Distribution :  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Adaptation  
Awnless bushsunflower is primarily adapted to the 
Edwards Plateau  and Rio Grande Plains , but it also 
performs well in the western Gulf Coast Prairies , and 
Central Rolling Red and Gran d Prairies. It desires full sun 
and  well -drained soils  like sandy or clay loams. It can 
also be found in the understory of brush.  It does not 
tolerate salinity, deep sands, heavy clays, or wet 
bottomlands.  
Establishment  
The full seeding rate for awnl ess bushsunflower is 2.6 lbs 
pure live seed /acre (USDA -NRCS , 2012) .  When planting 
as a component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should 
USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PMC

be adjusted to the desired percent of the mix.  Seed should 
be placed ¼ to ½ inch deep (USDA -SCS,  1979) .   
Seedbed preparation should begin the year prior to spring 
planting  to reduce weed problems during the first year of 
establishment.  Work the site as necessary during the 
summer or early fall prior to establishment to create a 
firm, weed -free seedbed.  Work should be completed in 
the fall to allow time for the soil to settle and accumulate 
moisture.  Minimum and no -till operations should use 
herbicide applications to control weeds.   
Management  
Plantings should be well established before livestock 
grazing is permitted. Twelve months of grazing deferment 
should give plants enough time to become established .  
Established stands of awnless bushsunflower  cannot 
tolerate continuous or heavy grazing. Contact your local 
U.S. Department of Agriculture -NRCS field office for 
assistance in planning and applying prescribed grazing 
plans.    
A soil test should be conducted to determine the amount 
of fertilizer to apply to maintain a medium soil test level.  
Nitrogen should not be used during the establishment year 
because  it will encourage weed growth.  Weeds may be 
controlled by mowing or  with herbicides. Consult your 
local extension weed specialist  for recommendations on 
herbicides for awnless bushsunflower.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Awnless bushsunflower is a  host plant for the bordered 
patch butterfly ( Chlosyne lacinia).  The caterpillars have 
occasionally become a pest  in test plots and seed increase 
fields.  White flies have also defoliated plants in the field.    
 
 
USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PMC  
Environmental Concerns 
None Known  
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.   
Seeds and Plant Production  
Awnless b ushsunflower  seed can be harvested using a 
conventional combine , seed stripper, or by swathing the 
plant and using a special header attachment for combining 
the seed. Average seed yield at Knox City is 119 lb/acre.
 
Average seed yi eld at Kingsville is  159 lbs pls/acre  (370 
bulk lbs/acre at 43% pls).   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
‘Plateau’ awnless bushsunflower was released from the 
James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center in Knox 
City, Texas in 1987 to provide an adapted forb for 
inclusion in range mixes.  Original seed collection came 
from a composite collection from Kerr County, Texas.  
 
Venado Germplasm awnless bushsunflower was released 
by the E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center and 
South Texas Natives in Kingsville, Texas in 2013.  This 
release was made to provide a native forb for rangeland 
plantings, wildlife habitat improvement plantings, 
conservation reserve plantings, roadside plantings, 
pollinator plantings, critical site revegetation including oil 
and  gas field reclamation, native landscaping, and food 
plot plantings for white -tailed deer.  Venado Germplasm 
is comprised of four collections made from native stands 
in Medina, Bee, Webb, and La Salle County, Texas.    
References  
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflo wer Center.  The University of   
Texas at Austin.  2 012.  Native Plant In formation 
Network. Available at  http://www.wildflower.org/  
plants/result.php?id_plant=SICA7   Aus tin, TX, 
78739, USA.  Accessed 24 Aug . 2012. 
Release Brochure for Plateau ( Simsia calva). USDA- 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, TX 
79529. Published March 2012.  
Texas  AgriLife Research an d Extension at Uvalde.  2012.   
Texas  A&M University.  Available at  http://uvalde.  
tamu.edu/  he rbarium/sica.htm  24  College Station, 
TX.  Accessed 24 August 2012. 
Texas  Parks and Wildlife:  Texas Pl ant Information 
Database. 2010. Texas Parks and Wildlife. Available 
at  http://tpid.tpwd.state.tx.us/species_  
report.asp?species =228. Austin, TX, 787 44, USA. 
Accessed 24 August 2012. 
USDA NRCS. 2009.  The PLANTS Database  
(http://plants.usda.gov 20 June 2009.)  National  Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA, 70874- 4490, USA.

USDA NRCS. 2012. Release Brochure for ‘Plateau’  
Awnless Bushsunflower (Simsia calva). Available at 
http://www.plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
pubs/txpmcrb10958.pdf. 2012.  
USDA  SCS. 1979.  Planting Guide for  Awnless  
Bushsunflower ( Simsia calva).  USDA-Soil 
Conservation Service.  February 1979.    
USDA  SCS. 1970.  Technical Notes:  Awnless  
Bushsunflower ( Simsia calva).  USDA-Soil 
Conservation Service.  May 1970.  Fort Worth,  Texas. 
Prepared By  
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials C enter, Knox City, Texas . 
 
Citation 
Carr, B., 2013 . Plant  Guide for Awnless Bushsunflower  
( Simsia calva ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation 
Service,  James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center. 
Knox City, TX 79529 . 
Published: April 2013  
Edited:  19July2013 sdm   For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials  Program Web site  
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PM C  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER