Plant Guide

BROADLEAF 

ARROWHEAD 
Sagittaria latifolia Willd. 
Plant Symbol = SALA2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS 1972 @ PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
Arrowhead, Indian potato, tule potato, wapato 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Sagittaria is an aquatic plant with 
tuberous roots that can be eaten like potatoes.  Lewis 
and Clark found it at the mouth of the Willamette and 
considered it equal to the potato, and valuable for 
trade. Indian women collected it in shallow water 
from a canoe, or waded into ponds or marshes in the 
late summer and loosened the roots with their toes. 
The roots would rise to the top of the water where 
they were gathered and tossed into floating baskets.  
Today, the tubers are harvested with a hoe, pitchfork, 
or rake.  Tubers are baked in fire embers, boiled, or 
roasted in the ashes.  Tubers are skinned and eaten 
whole or mashed.  
After roasting, some tubers were dried and stored for 
winter use. The Chippewa gathered the &#34;Indian 
potatoes&#34; in the fall, strung them, and hung them 
overhead in the wigwam to dry.  Later they were 
boiled for use. 
The tubers of Sagittaria species were eaten by many 
different indigenous groups in Canada, as well as 
many groups of Washington and Oregon (Kuhnlein 
and Turner 1991). The tubers were also widely traded 
from harvesting centers to neighboring areas.  The 
tubers were also a major item of commerce on the 
Lower Columbia in Chinook Territory.  Katzie 
families owned large patches of the plant and 
clearing the patches claimed ownership.  Family 
groups would camp beside their claimed harvesting 
sites for a month or more. 
A species of Sagittaria grows in China, and is sold in 
the markets of China and Japan as food, the corms 
being full of starch. Sagittaria latifolia is extensively 
cultivated in the San Francisco Bay area in California 
to supply the Chinese markets, and the tubers are 
commonly to be found on sale.  The Chinese, on 
coming to California, used it for food and may have 
cultivated it somewhat.  In so doing, they are 
believed to have extended its range into the southern 
part of the state (Mason 1957). 
Medicinally, the Maidu of California used an 
infusion of arrowhead roots to clean and treat 
wounds.  The Navajo use these plants for headaches. 
The Ojibwa and the Chippewa used Sagittaria 
species as a remedy for indigestion.  The Cherokee 
used an infusion of leaves to bathe feverish babies, 
with one sip given orally.  The Iroquois used it for 
rheumatism, a dermatological aid, and a laxative.  
The Iroquois used it as a ceremonial blessing when 
they began planting corn. 
Wildlife: Tubers are planted as an wildlife food.  
Ducks eat the small, flat seeds of arrowheads, but the 
tubers are the most valuable to wildlife.  Muskrat and 
porcupine are known to eat the tubers.  Swans, geese, 
wood ducks, blue-winged teal, lesser and greater 
scaup, ruddy duck, ring necked duck, pintail, mallard, 
mottled duck, gadwall, canvasback, black duck and 
king rail are known to eat arrowhead seeds and 
tubers.  For wildlife use, the tubers of Sagittaria 
latifolia are often too large and too deeply buried to 
be useful to ducks (Martin 1951). 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

Muskrats have evolved with wetland ecosystems and 
form a valuable component of healthy functioning 
wetland communities.  Muskrats use emergent 
wetland vegetation such as Sagittaria species for 
food.  Muskrat grazed areas increase wetland 
diversity by opening up the dense stands of Typha 
and Schoenoplectus (Scirpus) species, and providing 
opportunities for aquatic vegetation such as 
Sagittaria to become established in the open water. 
Muskrat huts provide a substrate for shrubs and other 
plant species.  Indian people often sought caches of 
Sagittaria tubers stored by muskrat and beaver. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Description 
General: Arrowhead Family (Alismataceae). Both 
Sagittaria latifolia and Sagittaria cuneata are aquatic 
plants growing in swampy ground or standing water 
in ponds, lakes, stream edges, and ditches (Hickman 
1993). Both species have white or bluish tubers, 
which are edible.  The leaves are sagittate, with leaf 
blades are either erect or floating on the surface of 
the water. S. cuneata leaf blades are smaller, from 5­
15 cm, and the lower lobes of emergent leaf blades 
are less than the terminal lobe.  In S. latifolia, leaf 
blades are from 6-30 cm, and the lower lobes of the 
emergent leaf blade are approximately equal to the 
terminal lobe. The inflorescence is simple or 
branching, often with the lower flowers pistillate and 
the upper ones staminate.  The flowers are white, 
with three white petals and 3 sepals.  Stamens are 
numerous and bright yellow.  The pistils are 
numerous, spirally arranged on the receptacle.  The 
fruit is an achene and is greenish colored.  A 
diagnostic feature distinguishing the two species is 
the beak on the fruit of S. cuneata is ascending to 
erect and <0.5 mm; the beak on the fruit of S. latifolia 
is spreading and 1-2 mm. 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. Sagittaria species are obligate wetland plants 
found in marshes and wetlands throughout temperate 
North America.  The ranges of S. cuneata and S. 
latifolia overlap. S. latifolia is found from central 
and southern British Columbia to Nova Scotia and 
Prince Edward Island, south to California and into 
South America.  In California, S. latifolia is confined 
to lower elevations <1500 m. Sagittaria species 
grow in ponds, slow streams, ditches and freshwater 
wetlands.  
Establishment 
Sagittaria species may be planted from bare root 
stock, by transplanting the tubers, and by seeding 
directly into wetland soil.  Live plant transplants or 
transplanting tubers are preferred revegetation 
methods where there is moving water.  It takes two 
years for seed to germinate; planting bare root stock 
or tubers gives faster revegetation results. 
Live Plant Collections: No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected. If no more than 
0.09 m² (1 ft²) are removed from a 0.4 m2 (4 ft2) 
area, the plants will grow back into the hole in one 
good growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep for digging plugs. This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes to grow back during the 
growing season.  
Wild plants should be collected after the leaves begin 
to emerge in the spring until the first frost.  The 
plants can be pulled up easily from wet soil.  When 
collecting wild plants, rinse roots gently.  Leaves and 
stems can be clipped from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches); this allows the plant to allocate more energy 
into root production.  The roots should always remain 
moist or in water until planted.  Plants should be 
transported and stored in a cool location prior to 
planting. Water depth should be 0 to 6&#34; and the soils 
should be wet. 
Sagittaria grows prolifically around ponds or 
wetlands in shallow water.  Plug spacing of 25-30 cm 
will fill in within one growing season.  Soil should be 
kept saturated, with approximately 1/2&#34; of water over 
the surface of the soil after planting.  If water is low 
in nutrients (oligotrophic), fertilization will speed 
biomass production and revegetation. Many surface 
waters are already rich in nutrients (eutrophic), and 
fertilization is not necessary. 
Indian potatoes transplant success may be greater 
with the tubers than with bare root stock.  The little 
underground potatoes can be separated from the 
parent plants with a rake, hoe, or shovel. In 
unconsolidated soils, the tubers can be pulled up by 
hand by searching around the roots of the plant. 
After collecting, the Sagittaria potatoes should be 
kept moist and cool, and stored in peat moss. 
Potatoes are then planted in shallow water, in the 
same conditions as described above for the whole 
plants.  Potatoes should be collected and planted

when plants are dormant, in the fall, winter and early 
spring. 
Seed Germination: Seeds of Sagittaria species take 
two years to germinate, because they have a double 
dormancy requiring cold then warm then cold 
temperatures.  Temperature has a multiple role in the 
regulation of timing of germination.  Dormant seeds 
become non-dormant only at specific temperatures, 
non-dormant seeds have specific temperature 
requirements for germination, and non-dormant seeds 
of some species are induced into dormancy by certain 
temperatures.  Once Sagittaria seeds germinate, they 
have fairly high viability. Procedures for growing 
Sagittaria seeds in the greenhouse have not been 
developed at this time. 
Sagittaria seeds can be planted directly in wetlands 
or ponds.  Prepare the area by creating a washboard 
in shallow water, at mudflat consistency.  Seeds 
should then be scattered on the surface of the soil, as 
the seeds need sunlight to germinate well.  Light and 
temperature in natural conditions will promote seed 
germination, and in two years Sagittaria plants will 
emerge. 
Management 
Hydrology is the most important factor in 
determining wetland type, revegetation success, and 
wetland function and value.  Changes in water levels 
influence species composition, structure, and 
distribution of plant communities.  Water 
management is absolutely critical during plant 
establishment, and remains crucial through the life of 
the wetland for proper community management.  
Sagittaria species require moist soils to standing 
water for successful revegetation. 
We have no record of specific traditional resource 
management techniques other than anecdotal 
information of the use of fire to keep dense tule 
marshes open, which provided an opportunity for 
colonization and spread of Sagittaria species.  The 
harvest of arrowhead was usually made in late 
summer as the stems and leaves were dying (and 
usually when the water table was lower) (Balls 1962). 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available from native plant nurseries specializing in 
aquatic plants.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.” The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
References 
Angier, B. 1974.  Field guide to edible wild plants. 
Stackpole Books. 255 pp. 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933. Miwok caterial 
culture Indian life of the Yosemite region. Yosemite 
Association. Yosemite National Parks, California. 
388 pp. 
Clarke, C.B. 1977. Edible and useful plants of 
California. University of California Press.  280 pp. 
Densmore, F. 1974. How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine and crafts. Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York.  397 pp. 
Fowler, C.S. 1992. In the shadow of Fox Peak. An 
ethnography of the cattail-eater Northern Paiute 
people of Stillwater Marsh. Cultural Resource Series 
#5.  USDI, FWS, Stillwater National Wildlife 
Refuge.  264 pp. 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.  Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region. University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln and London.  125 pp. 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V.P. Lawson 1980. 
Kashaya Pomo plants. Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
Harrington, H.D. 1972. Western edible wild plants. 
The University of New Mexico Press. 156 pp. 
Hedrick, U.P. 1972.  Sturtevant&#39;s edible plants of the 
world. Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  686 pp. 
Hickman, James C. (ed.) 1993.  The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California. University of California 
Press. 1400 pp. 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1995.  Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands. 
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant Development 
Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
Hoag, J.C. & M.E. Sellers 1994. Seed and live 
transplant collection procedures for 7 wetland plant 
species.  Interagency Riparian/Wetland Plant 
Development Project, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.

Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous p eoples. 
Nutrition, botany and use. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  633 pp. 
Martin, A.C.,  H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants:  A guide to wildlife 
food habits. Dover Publications, Inc. New York. 
500 pp. 
Mason, H.L. 1957. A flora of the marshes of 
California. University of California Press.  878 pp. 
Mayer, K.E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr., eds. 1988.  A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California. USDA 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish and 
Game, PG&E. 
Moerman, D.E. 1986.  Medicinal plants of native 
America. University of Michigan Museum of 
Anthropology. Technical Reports, Number 19. 534 
pp. 
Peterson, L.A. 1977.  A field guide to edible wild 
plant.  Eastern and Central North America. Houghton 
Mifflin Company. 330 pp. 
Strike, S.S. 1994. Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians. Volume 2. Aboriginal Uses of California&#39;s 
Indigenous Plants.  Koeltz Scientific Books 
USA/Germany. 210 pp. 
USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database. 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
<http://plants.usda.gov>.  Version: 05apr1999. 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.