Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEBB WILLOW 
Salix bebbiana Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = SABE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
diamond willow, beak willo w, long-beaked willow, 
livid willow, smooth gray willow, smooth Bebb 
willow 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : A decoction of the branches was taken 
by women for several months after childbirth to 
increase the blood flow (Moerman 1998).  A poultice 
of bark and sap was applied as a wad to bleeding 
wounds (Ibid.).  A poultice of the damp inner bark 
was applied to the skin over a broken bone (Ibid.). 
 
Economic : The diamond shaped wood is carved into 
canes, lampposts, furniture, and candleholders 
(Viereck & Little 1972).  The wood has also been 
used to make furniture, baskets, baseball bats, 
charcoal, and gunpowder. 
 
Wildlife : snowshoe hares, deer, elk, and moose 
browse Bebb willow.  The buds, shoots, and catkins 
are eaten by birds, beaver and small mammals. 
 Wetland Plants and Plant Communities in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin 
Northern Plains Wildlife Research Center 
 
Agroforestry: Bebb willow is used in forested 
riparian buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, 
protect aquatic environments, enhance wildlife, and 
increase biodiversity. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Bebb willow (Salix bebbiana ) is a large 
native shrub ten feet tall or a small bushy tree fifteen 
to twenty-five feet (Viereck & Little 1972).  The 
leaves are elliptical to oblanceolate; one to three 
inches long, and are hairy when young smooth and 
strongly veined when old.  The fruit is capsules, six 
to eight millimeters long,  long beaked, and sparsely 
hairy (Farrar 1995).  The bark is thin, reddish, olive-
green, or gray tinged with red and slightly divided by 
shallow fissures (Sargent 1961).  The roots are 
shallow and dense. 
 
Distribution : Bebb willow range from Alaska south 
to British Columbia to east Newfoundland and in 
northeast United States and upper mid-western 
United States.  For current  distribution, please consult 
the Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Bebb willow is adapted to a wide variety of soil 
textures.  It prefers moist sites and is drought tolerant.  
This species tolerates moderate alkaline soils but not 
extremely alkaline conditions.  It is frequently found 
in swamps, lakes, borders of streams, open woods 
and forests (Sargent 1961).  Bebb willow is a fast 
growing but short-lived species that occurs most 
commonly under shade of tr ees where the sites are 
poor (Viereck & Little 1972).

Establishment 
Propagation from Seed: Seeds must be sown as soon 
as they are ripe in the sp ring.  Seeds are viable for 
only a few days and the maximum storage period is 
four to six weeks with germination rates dropping off 
fast after ten days at room temperature (Dirr & 
Heuser 1987).  Willow seeds have no dormancy and 
germinate within twelve to twenty-four hours after 
falling on moist ground (Ibid.).  Seedbeds must be 
kept moist until seedlings are well established. 
 
Propagation from Cuttings: Hardwood cuttings can 
be collected and prepared for insertion, normally 
from November through March.  Cuttings seven to 
ten inches long and a half to one inch thick are 
initially planted close in stool beds and dug after one 
year (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  Willows have a rooting 
percentage of ninety to one-hundred percent and the 
rooting number is not promoted by rooting hormones 
(Ibid.). 
 
Management 
The depressions on these willows are caused by one 
or more fungi, which attack willows at the junction of 
a branch with the main trun k (Viereck & Little 1972).  
The term “diamond willow” applies to species when 
the stems are carved resulting in a pattern of 
diamond-shaped cavities with a sharp contrast 
between the white or cream sapwood and the reddish-
brown heartwood. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Readily available through native plant nurseries 
within its area of distribution.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.   Trees and shrubs of New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Epple, A.O. 1995.   Plants of Arizona.  Falcon Press, 
Helena, Montana. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Graves, A.H. 1956.   Illustrated guide to trees and 
shrubs .  Harper & Brother Publishers, New York, 
New York. 
 
Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of the 
great plains .  University press of Kansas, Lawerence, 
Kansas. 
 
MacKinnon, A., J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of the northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine 
Publishing, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustrated manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, & London. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Nelson, R.A. 1977.   Handbook of Rocky Mountain 
plants .  2nd ed.  Skyland Publishers, Estes Park, 
Colorado. 
 
Peattie, D.C. 1950.  A natural history of trees of 
eastern and central North America .  Houghton 
Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.   Manual of cultivated trees and 
shrubs: hardy in North America .  2nd ed.  Dioscorides 
Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
USDI, GS 2002.  Wetland plants and plant 
communities in Minnesota and Wisconsin .  Northern 
Prairie Wildlife Research Center, Jamestown, North 
Dakota.  Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1998/mnplant/
sabe.htm> 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture.  Agriculture Handbook No. 410, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas.

Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.