Plant Guide
BLACK WILLOW 
Salix nigra Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = SANI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State University, Forestry  
Research  
   
Photo s Courtesy  of Philip Barbour , Wildlife Biologist, USDA NRCS, 
Madison, Mississippi  
Alternate Names 
American,  Brittle, Champlain, Dudley, Gooding, gulf 
black,  puzzle, rough American, scythe -lea f, scythe -
leaved, southwestern black, swamp, tall black, Texas 
black, and  western black  willow;  sauce, saule, saule noir, 
sauz  (Espanol),  swamp  walnut ,  weide, wilg, willow , and 
willow catkins  
   
The name willow derives from the Old English wilwe.   
The botanical name  Salix  was the name given by the 
ancient Romans.  
 
Uses  
Conservation:   One of the greatest services of the willows 
is as a soil -binder.  Growing along the banks of countless 
streams, their fibrous roots help to prevent the soil from 
being washed away.  Willow has been planted frequently 
to help stabilize the banks of eroding  streams, to hold the 
soil in road cuts and embankments, and to bind shifting 
sands. Black willows dense root system is excellent for 
stabilizing eroding lands (Pitcher and McKnight,  1990).  
 
Ethnobotanic:  The ancient Greeks knew the therapeutic 
values of  willow.   Tea made from willow bark was used 
for stiff joints and rheumatic pains.  
 
By  the 1840’s, chemists had isolated salicylic acid from 
willow and found it produced marked antipyretic (fever -
reducing) and analgesic (pain -killing) effects and 
“strikin g relief of acute articular rheumatism. ”  Modern  aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is a synthetic product.  
Salicylic acid got its name from Salix
 (Randall , 1969) . 
 
Aboriginal peoples of North America used various plant 
parts of black willow  for uses such as drugs to treat 
aliments , fiber for basketry and other u ses. 
 
Drug Uses  –  “The medicinal part of the plant is the inner 
bark and was used as a pain reliever for a variety of 
ailments (arnatural.org, 2010).”  
Antiperiodic:  a medicine 
preventing the recurre nce of periodic disturbances and 
irregularities.  
Anti -rheumatics: medicines correcting and 
relieving rheumatism.  
Antiseptics: agents preventing or 
countering decay, or the formation of pus.  
Astringents: 
agents producing contractions of  organic tissues, or the 
arrest of a discharge.  (Meridian Institute, 2010).  
Analgesic:  Infusion of roots taken by the Koasati  for 
headaches  (Taylor, 1940).   
Antidiarrheal: An infusion of 
bark used by the  Cherokee  to check the bowels  (Hamel 
and Chiltoskey, 1975) ; 
Blood Medicine:  a decoction of 
roots and bark taken by the Houma  for “feebleness” due 
to thin blood  (Speck, 1941). 
Carminative:   A compound 
decoction taken for stomach gas by the Iroquois  (Herrick, 
1977).   
Cough Medicine:  A compound decoction was 
taken by the Iroquois for coughs (Herrick, 1977).  
D ermatological  Aid:  The Cherokee used a  decoction or 
infusion of bark as a  wash to make the hair grow; and  the 
bark was also used as a poultice  (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975); Th e Micmac made a poultice of bruised leaves 
used on sprains and bruises; also a poultice o f scraped 
root and spirits  was applied to bruises  and  sprains ( Speck, 
1917) .  
Febrifuge:   An  infusion taken by the Cherokee  for 
fever  (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975) ; the Houma  made a 
decoction of roots and bark was taken for fever (Speck, 
1941) ; Cold infusion of roots was taken for fevers  by the 
Koasati (Taylor, 1940) .  
Gastrointestinal Aid:  d ecoction 
of roots taken by the Koasati  for dyspepsia (Taylor, 
1940).   
Orthopedic Aid:  t he Micmac applied a poultice of 
bruised leaves to  use on sprains and bruises; also a 
poultice of scraped root and spirits was applied to sprains 
and broken bones (Speck, 1917).  
Respiratory Aid:   t he 
root was chewed by Cherokee ball players “for wind”  
(Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975).  
Throat  Aid: i nfusion of 
inner bark taken for lost voice and root chewed for  
hoarseness by the Cherokee (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975) and  used by the Iroquois  for mouth and throat 
abscesses (Herrick, 1977).   
Tonic
  :  the bark was also used 
as a tonic by the Cherokee (Hamel and Chilto skey, 1975). 
Basketry  and Weaving  – The Papago split twigs in half 
lengthwise, sun dried and  used as a foundation in coiled 
basketry  and used for sewing coiled basketry; also used 
for  curved structures in wrapped weaving (Castetter and  
Underhill, 1935).