Plant Guide
OREGON SAXIFRAGE 
Saxifraga oregana Howell  
Plant Symbol = SAOR2 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  
 
Oregon saxifrage seed increase field at the Corvallis Plant Materials  
Center. Photo by  Amy Bartow 
Alternate Names  
Alternate Common names :  bog saxifrage, Oregon bog 
saxifrage,  swamp saxifrage , Oregon marsh saxifrage  
Alternate Scientific Names : Micranthes  arnoglossa  Small, 
Micranthes brachypus  Small, Micranthes  oregana 
(Howell) Small, Saxifraga  montanensis Small,  Saxifraga 
oregana  Howell var.  montanensis  (Small) C.L. Hitchc., 
Saxifraga  oregana Howell var.  sierrae  Coville   
Uses 
Restoration:  Oregon saxifrage can be planted on 
restoration sites that contain wet areas such as stream 
banks, seasonal wetlands, or vernal pools.   This species is  
used for  NRCS  Conservation Reserve Program ( CRP),  Wetland Reserve Program (
WRP) and  Wildlife Habitat 
Incentives  Program (WHIP ) pl antings.  
Pollinator habitat : Oregon saxifrage provides an 
important  early season nectar source  for many native 
pollinator species.   
Ornamental:  This species is a resilient, long -lived 
perennial that can add some early spring texture to a 
landscape that contain s other later blooming species.  It 
can also be used in places within a landscape where the 
soil is waterlogged throughout the winter and spring 
months.    
Status  
In the Intermountain region and California, Oregon 
saxifrage is considered an obligate  wetland species, 
meaning it almost always occurs in wetlands, and in the 
Northwest region it is considered a facultative wetland 
plant that usually occurs in wetland s, but may 
occasionally be found in non- wetlands (USDA-NRCS, 
2012).   Please consult the PLA NTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Oregon saxifrage is a strong perennial that 
comes  back from a simple or branched persistent and 
sometimes woody base, or caudex  (Hitchcock  and 
Cronquist , 1961).  The glandular, densely hairy leaves are 
3 -10 inches long  and  are linear to widely egg shaped , 
taper ing to a petiole  (leaf stem)  of 0 -2 inches in length 
( Hitchcock  and Cronquist , 1961; Turner and Gustafson, 
2006) .  Leaf margins may be entire  (smooth) or toothed.   
The 11 -47 inch tall f lowering stalks have a dense 
covering of hairs, becom ing glandular toward the top, and 
are leafless .  The inflorescence is comprised of clusters of 
small  white to greenish -white  flowers with oval petals.  
The fruit is a  capsule-like structure that has multiple 
chambers  which contain  the  tiny, brown seeds .  Plants 
flower  from April to August , depending on latitude and 
elevation.  
Distribution :  Oregon saxifrage is found on the w est 
slopes of the Cascade Mountains  from  Whatcom  County , 
WA, southward throughout the Willamette Valley and 
Cascade  Mountains of Oregon  and Northern California , 
into the Sierra Neva da range of California and Nevada 
(Hitchcock  and Cronquist , 1961; USDA- NRCS, 2012) .  
This species is also found in seasonally wet areas of the 
Rocky Mountains in  Alberta, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, 
and Colorado.   Oregon saxifrage  grows  from about  300 ft 
in Washington and Oregon  to elevations  of 3,200 to 8,200 
feet  in California  and up to 8,800 ft in the Rocky 
Mountains  ( Burke Herbarium, 2012;  Jepson Flora Project,