Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHAIRMAKER’S BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus americanus  
(Pers.) Volk. ex Schinz & R.  Keller 
Plant Symbol = SCAM6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
American bulrush, Olney’s three-square, three-
cornered grass, three-corn ered sedge, bayonet rush, 
three square sedge, American three square,  Scirpus 
americanus  
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : American three square stems were 
used by the Nuu-chah-nulth as the foundation 
material for their beautiful  wrapped-twine baskets of 
tall basket sedge (Pojar & Mackinnon 1994).  The 
leaves were used in making shopping bags and 
woven into hats (Moerman 1998).  The leaves mixed  with oil was rubbed on childrens’ heads to make their 
hair grow long and thick (Ibid.). 
 
Schoenoplectus americanus
 seeds are rich in protein 
and can be ground and added to flour when making 
breads and cakes.  The seed can be ground into a 
powder, mixed with water, boiled and eaten as a 
mush (Moerman 1998). 
 
Wildlife : American three square rhizomes are 
preferred by muskrat and snow goose.  The seeds are 
eaten by over wintering ducks in the south as a small 
part of their diet.  The achenes are eaten by 
waterfowl.  This species provides cover for many 
birds and small mammals. 
 R. Mohlenbrock  USDA,NRCS,Wetlands Institute  @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Sedge family (Cyperaceae).  American 
three square is a medium height to tall, erect native 
herbaceous plant, up to seven feet tall (Tiner 1987).  
This species is a perennial from long stout rhizomes; 
with single stems that are in small groups, sharply 
triangular, fifteen to one hundred centimeters tall 
(Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The leaves are firm, 
long, and strongly folded, sometimes flat and two to 
four millimeters wide.  The fruits are dark-brown, 
seedlike, pointy tipped achenes, two to three 
millimeters long (Ibid.). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site . 
 
Adaptation  
American three square occu rs along streams, around 
ponds and lakes, in sloughs, swamps, fresh and 
brackish marshes, wet woods, and roadside ditches; 
common at low elevations.  It also occurs in beach 
pools and sandy flats, often in shallow water up to 
about one foot or even 2.5 feet (Voss 1972). 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Sow seeds in a cold frame pot 
standing in three centimeters of water.  The seeds 
germinate quickly.  When they are large enough to

handle, plant them into their permanent positions in 
early summer. 
 
Large divisions can be planted directly into their 
permanent positions.  It is best to pot smaller 
divisions and grow them in a cold frame, out-planting 
after they are well established in the summer. 
 
Management 
Maintenance of American three square stands 
depends primarily on water levels and salinity levels.  
Maximum survival and growth in coastal areas occur 
where average minimum yearly water levels do not 
fall below five to four inches above the soil surface. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available through wetland plant nurseries.  Contact 
your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Braun, L.E. 1967.  The monocotyledoneae from cat-
tails to orchids .  The Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Bruggen, T. V. 1976.   The vascular plants of South 
Dakota .  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Gleason, H. A. 1952.   The new Britton and Brown 
illustrated flora of the northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  3 vols.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, New York, New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Mohlenbrock, R.H., ed. 1975.   Guide to the vascular 
flora of Illinois .  Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale, Illinois. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1965.   A California flora.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames Iowa. 
 
Strausbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
Swink, F. & G. S. Wilhelm 1979.   Plants of the 
Chicago region . 3rd ed.  The Morton Arboretum, 
Lisle, Illinois. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Tiner, R.W. Jr. 1987.   A field guide to coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States .  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Voss, E.G. 1972.   Michigan flora.  Cranbrok Institute 
of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, & University 
of Michigan Herbarium. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.