Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LEMMON’S WILLOW
Salix lemmonii Bebb 
Plant Symbol = SALE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Alternate Names 
Lemmon willow 
 
Uses 
Reclamation:  Lemmon's willow is used for 
revegetation of riparian areas, native plant 
community restoration and landscaping. 
 
Livestock and Wildlife:   All classes of livestock eat 
willows in the West, but cattle consume more than 
others because they frequent riparian areas.  
Lemmon's willow is palatable to livestock, but its 
importance in their diets is not reported. 
 
Deer and elk use Lemmon's willow for browse.   
 
Beavers prefer willo ws as food and building material. 
Ducks and grouse, other birds and small mammals 
eat willow shoots, catkins, buds and leaves.   
 
Lemmon's willow provides good cover for mammals 
and songbirds and provides shade for salmonids.   
 
Ethnobotany:  Native Americans and others have 
long used willows for basket making.  Willows are 
also a well-known source of salacin, which is 
chemically related to aspirin.   Willows have also  
 
been used by Native Americans for bows, arrows, 
scoops, fish traps, and other items. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
W. Crowder 
USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center 
Pullman, WA 
 
Description 
General:  Lemmon's willow is a multi-stemmed 
native deciduous shrub.  It reaches a mature height of 
10 - 16 feet.  Flowers appear before or with new 
leaves.  Leaves are alternate, pinnate-veined, entire or 
inconspicuously toothed, green shiny above and pale 
glaucous below.  Stipules are minute and 
inconspicuous.  Current season twigs are glabrous or 
sparsely pubescent, becoming strongly glaucous. 
 
Distribution :  Lemmon's willow occurs in foothills to 
mid-mountains from Hood River County, Oregon 
along the east side of the Cascades to the Sierras in 
California east to Owyhee County, Idaho and 
Nevada. 
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  Lemmon's willow occurs in riparian 
habitats which are usually bordered by coniferous 
forests of lodgepole pine ( Pinus contorta) or Douglas 
fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii ).  It also occurs in zones 
of mountain big sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata ssp. 
vaseyana ).  It grows near low gradient streams and 
rivers on floodplains.  It is probably an early seral 
species as are many other willows. 
 
Associated Species :  Associated shrubs include Geyer 
( S. geyeriana ), Drummond ( S. drummondiana ) 
planeleaf ( S. planifolia ) and Wolf willow ( S. wolfii).  
Bog birch ( Betula glandulosa ) and Kentucky 
bluegrass ( Poa pratense ) are also common.   
 
Adaptation 
Lemmon's willow is found on well-drained gravelly 
or sandy soils.  In Oregon, it is found on deep, fine-
textured alluvium over su bsurface soils of various 
textures ranging from silt to silty clay loam soil.  Soil 
pH ranges from 5.2 to 7.4 and annual precipitation 
requirement is from 20 to 40 inches.  Shade tolerance

is intermediate.   
 
Establishment 
Lemmon's willow may be propagated via seed or 
cuttings.  Seed is used to produce containerized 
plants.  Cuttings may either be planted directly at the 
site or planted to produce bareroot or containerized 
plants.  On-site wild hardwood cutting collections 
may not root as well as nursery grown stock.  
Nursery grown cuttings' growing conditions are 
maintained at a more optimum level, therefore the 
cuttings have better carbohydrate storage levels and 
less potential problems with disease and insects.   
 
Lemmon's willow should be established in the 
capillary zone in riparian revegetation plantings.  
Plantings should be protected with appropriate 
physical barriers such as wire cages or tree protector 
tubes where there is rodent or beaver activity.   
 
Much information is available for willow 
establishment, primarily in riparian zones.  See 
reference section. 
 
Management 
Lemmon's willow provides important streambank 
protection by effectively stabilizing soils.  Heavy 
grazing in Lemmon's willow communities can lead to 
lowered vigor, uneven stem age distribution and dead 
clumps.  Plants recover rapidly when browsing is 
excluded.  Grazing is particularly detrimental to the 
establishment of willows. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Poplar/willow borers are potential problems in stands 
of Lemmon's willow maintained for cutting 
production.  Borers must be controlled prior to 
entering the stems.  D ecadent stems with borer 
infestation should be pruned from commercial cutting 
production sites.  Consult local/state pesticide 
recommendations for further control. 
 
Willows plantings, especially during establishment, 
can be damaged by rodents including beaver, 
muskrat, mice, voles, etc. either cutting off or 
girdling stems.  Cuttings or plants should be 
protected from rodent damage, especially in grassy 
areas where vole/mice p opulations are active. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Lemmon's willow is easily propagated by use of 
hardwood cuttings without use of rooting hormone.  
Seed propagation is also used, but seed must be 
collected as soon as the fru its ripen.  Mature seed 
loses germination ability rapidly, so planting soon 
after collection is necessary.  Moistened seed may be  stored for up to a month in refrigerated sealed 
containers.  Seeds of willow are not generally known 
to exhibit dormancy.  Some native plant propagators 
prefer seed propagation for added diversity of genetic 
material and less labor requirement for handling of 
materials during collection, storage and propagation.  
(See reference section for production of hardwood 
cuttings in cutting blocks or stooling beds.) 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials 
'Palouse' Lemmon's willow was released as a cultivar 
by the NRCS Pullman, Washington Plant Materials 
Center in 1993.  "Palouse' originated from a riparian 
site near the Crooked River in Jefferson County, 
Oregon northwest of Redmond at an elevation of 
2500 feet.  Mature height is 19.7 feet and canopy 
width is 36.1 feet at Pullm
an, Washington.  'Palouse' 
is relatively fast growing, reaching a height of 13.1 
feet and canopy width of 11.5 feet in 3 years of 
growth at Pullman, Washington.  'Palouse' has 
excellent foliage density.  It easily roots from 
hardwood cuttings without use of rooting hormone 
treatment.  Recorded rooting rate in one study was 
85%.  Six year old plants produced 522 6-inch 
hardwood cuttings per plant after being cut back.  
Production the following year was 225 cuttings per 
plant.  'Palouse' is available commercially. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brinkman, K. A.  1974.  Salix L. willow.   In:  
Schopmeyer, C. S.   Seeds of woody plants in the 
United States .  Agriculture Handbook 450.  
Washington, DC. USDA, Forest Service, p. 746-750. 
 
Brunsfeld, S.J. & F.D. Johnson  1985.   Field guide to 
the willows of East-Central Idaho .  Bulletin Number 
39.  Forest, Wildlife and Range Experiment Station.  
University of Idaho.  Moscow, Idaho.  95 pp. 
 
Crowder, W.A. and D.C.Darris.  1999.   Producing 
Pacific Northwest native trees and shrubs in 
hardwood cutting blocks or stooling beds .  Plant 
Materials Technical Note 38.  USDA, NRCS.  
Spokane, WA. 
 
Edelen, W.J.  1996.  Beaver damage prevention 
alternatives for riparian revegetation projects in 
Washington State.  Biology Technical Note 19.  
USDA, NRCS.  Spokane, WA  4 pp.

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist  1964.  Vascular 
plants of the Pacific Northwest.  Part 2:  Salicaceae to 
Saxifragaceae.  Seattle, WA:  Univ. of Washington 
Press. 
 
Hoag, J.C.  September, 1993.   How to plant willows 
and cottonwoods for riparian rehabilitation.   Plant 
Materials Technical Note 23.  USDA, SCS.  Boise, 
ID. 
 
Kirkwood, J.E.  1930.   Northern Rocky Mountain 
trees and shrubs.   Stanford University Press.  
Stanford University, CA.  340 pp. 
 
Lambert, S.M.  January, 1989.   Streamside 
revegetation .  Plant Materials Technical Note 12 
(Revised).  USDA, NRCS.  Spokane, WA. 
 
Uchytil, R.J.  1989   Salix lemmonii.  In :  USDA, 
Forest Service Fire Effects Information System 
Database.  <
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis>  
[January 22, 2003].  Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, 
Montana 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2003. The PLANTS Database, 
Version 3.5 <
(http://plants.usda.gov)>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Wayne Crowder, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 Drafted 30jan03 wac;  Edited  13feb03 jlk, 19Octrln; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.