Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
SCARLET 
GLOBEMALLOW  
Sphaeralcea coccinea  (Nutt.) 
Rydb.  
Plant Symbol = SPCO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center and Idaho State Office 
   
Joy Viola, Northeastern University, Bugwood.org
 
 
Alternate Names 
Red false mallow, copper mallow, cowboy’s delight 
 
Uses 
Scarlet globemallow provides good ground cover on 
disturbed sites.  Although its value for erosion control 
is low to moderate, it is used in low rainfall area 
native seed mixtures to stabilize roadsides and other 
disturbed sites.  Livestock commonly eat scarlet 
globemallow particularly wh en grasses are dormant.  
It provides important forage for pronghorn antelope; 
is rated as excellent forage for domestic sheep, deer, 
and bighorn sheep.  Bison, prairie dogs, jack rabbits, 
and other small mammals utilize this species for 
forage.  Some small birds eat scarlet globemallow  fruits.  Palatability is rated poor to good depending 
on the animal species, location, and season of use.  
Palatability is generally rated fair for cattle and elk 
and poor for horses. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Website and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. st
ate noxious status). 
 
Description 
General : Mallow Family (Malvaceae).  
Scarlet globemallow is a low-spreading, warm 
season, long-lived perennial forb to half-shrub.  
Stems emerge from a woody caudex located just 
under the soil surface and reach a height of 10-40 cm 
(4-16 inches).  Plants are densely covered with 
stellate hairs.  Leaves are alternate, palmately lobed, 
1-3.7 cm long and 1-5cm wide.  The deep orange to 
pinkish colored flowers are clustered in dense, short 
racemes.  There are 5 distinct petals, 5 united sepals, 
and 5 to numerous styles.  Stamens are joined by 
their stalks into a tube and several pistils united in a 
ring.  The fruit is an indehiscent schizocarp with 1-
seeded carpels.  Plants are rhizomatous.  The main 
taproot is woody and stout and may remain un-
branched for 3 feet (90cm) before it divides into 
lateral roots.  Growth begins in March and April, 
flowering in May to July and seed matures unevenly 
between July and August throughout much of its 
range.  There are approximately 500,000 seeds per 
pound.  The seed has a hard seed coat. 
  Jim Pisarowicz , USDI National Park Service

Distribution 
Scarlet globemallow is most commonly found in the 
low rainfall areas of the Intermountain West, Great 
Basin, Rocky Mountains and Great Plains regions of 
the United States and Canada. 
 
Habitat 
Scarlet globemallow grows in desert, semi-desert, 
prairies, grasslands, scrub, pinyon-juniper, and 
sagebrush plant communities and also often on dry 
roadsides, disturbed areas and dry slopes.  It is 
adapted to a wide range of soil types from sandy to 
clay loams to gravelly to alkaline and moderately 
saline soils, but it is not generally found on sodic 
soils.  It is extremely drought tolerant and does not 
tolerate shady conditions.  It grows at elevations from 
3,500 to 9,000 feet (1,067-2,743 m). 
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to well-drained soils with a 
pH range of 5.0 to 8.0. For xeriscaping and low 
water-use gardening, the species is recommended for 
use in USDA hardiness zones 6-8 in areas receiving 6 
to 10 inches or more annual precipitation.  
 
Management  
When planted in a native reclamation mix, scarlet 
globemallow should be a  minor component of the 
mixture and establishing plant community.  
Therefore, management should be based on other key 
species in the established plant community.  Grazing 
on seeded lands should be deferred for at least two 
growing seasons to allow full stand establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Information on pests and potential problems of 
scarlet globemallow is limited.  Grasshoppers will eat 
scarlet globemallow but it is unpalatable to mormon 
crickets and appears to no t be affected by army 
cutworm infestations on rangeland.  In seed increase 
fields in western Colorado , two species of weevils 
were identified in the field.   Anthonomus sphaeralcea 
(Sphaeralcea weevil) was  the dominant species of 
weevil and an unidentified  Apion sp. was also 
present.  Weevils feed on developing seed pods and 
the potential for damage is high.  Any insecticide 
applications should be carefully considered and 
precautions taken to protect pollinators.  There are no 
known diseases that aff ect scarlet globemallow. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Fields for seed production can be established by 
transplanting greenhouse-grown containerized stock 
or from direct seeding. Di rect seeding should take 
place in the fall to allow fo r natural stratification of 
the seed. Seed germination can be increased by acid  or mechanical scarification.
  The pure stand seeding 
rate is 2 pounds PLS per acre.  When planting as part 
of a seed mix, adjust the rate to the percentage 
desired in the mix.  Seed should not be planted 
approximately 1/8 inch deep and no deeper than 1/4 
inch. 
 
For seed production, the seeding rate is 20 to 50 PLS 
per linear foot of row.  Row spacing should be 28-36 
inches.  Irrigation may be needed if planting in areas 
with less than 16 inches of annual precipitation.  Two 
irrigation applications are usually needed; once in the 
spring and then during the seed ripening phase.  
Scarlet globemallow is pollinated by insects, so the 
use of insecticides should be limited especially 
during flowering.  Bees of the genus  Diadaysia have 
been observed pollinating scarlet globemallow.  Seed 
may be harvested mechanically or by hand stripping 
and seed yields range from 75-100 pounds per acre 
(34-45 kg/ha).  Harvest seed when the lower capsules 
begin to dry.  Care should be used when handling 
seed because the stellate hairs on the seed can be a 
severe eye irritant. 
 
 Scarlet globemallow seedling (USDI National Park Service) 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Wildland harvested seed is available through 
commercial sources. The Agricultural Research 
Service released Pre-variety Selected Class ARS-
2936 Scarlet Globemallow in 1993.  The original 
collection was made in northern Idaho in 1987 and 
was selected for forage yield, spread from rhizomes

and relatively high palatability. Small seed samples 
are available for seed increase or research. 
 
References 
Arches National Park. Scarlet Globemallow.  
National Park Service. 
http://www.nps.gov/arch/naturescience/htm
 
(accessed 4 Feb 2009). 
 
Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho.  WM. C. Brown 
Company. Dubuque, Iowa. 828 p. 
 
Hammon, B. Western Colorado Entomology. Pests 
Affecting Native Plant Seed Production. The 
Sphaeralcea Weevil. 
http://wci.colostate.edu/Assests/html/Spco.html
 
(accessed 4 Feb 2009). 
 
Page, R., D. Goodwin and N. West. 1966. 
Germination requirements of Scarlet Globemallow. 
Journal of Range Management (19) p145-146. 
 
Rumbaugh, M., B. Pendery, H. Mayland and G. 
Shewmaker. 1993. Registration of ARS-2936 Scarlet 
Globemallow.  Crop Science (33) 1106-1107. 
 
Stevens, R., K. Jorgensen, S. Young, S. Monsen. 
1996. Forb and Shrub Seed Production Guide for 
Utah. Utah State University Extension. 51p. 
 
Tollefson, J. 2006. Sphaeralcea coccinea. In: Fire 
Effects Information Syst em. USDA-FS-RMRS, FSL. 
http://www.fed/us/database/feis/plants.html
 
(accessed 15 Jan 2009). 
 
USA National Phenology Network.   Sphaeralcea 
coccinea .  http://www.usanpn.org
 
(accessed 20 Jan 2009). 
 
Utah State University. 2009 . Range Plants of Utah. 
Scarlet Globemallow.  
http://extension.usu.edu/range/forbs/scarletglobemall
ow.htm (accessed 15 Jan 2009). 
 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
2008. The PLANTS database, version 3.5. URL: 
http://plants.usda.gov
 
(accessed 04 Feb 2009). Baton Rouge, LA. National 
Plant Data Center. 
 
Prepared By 
Loren St. John , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID   
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle
, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 020609lws; 020609dgo; 090209 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.