BASKET GRASS
Schoenoplectus pungens (M.
Vahl) Palla
plant symbol = SCPU10
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data
Center & Idaho Plant Materials Center, and the
Skokomish Tribe
Alternative Names
Known in most floras as Scirpus pungens.  There are
three known varieties occurring in the U.S.:
Schoenoplectus pungens (Vahl) Palla var.
longispicatus (Britt.) S.G. Sm.; Schoenoplectus
pungens (Vahl) Palla var. badius (J.& K. Presl) S.G.
Sm.; and Schoenoplectus pungens (Vahl) Palla var.
pungens.  This plant has many common names: beach
grass, sweet grass, American three-square, common
threesquare, bulrush, three-cornered “grass”, three-
square, and tule.  This plant is also known in some
floras as follows: Schoenoplectus americanus
(Persoon) Volkart ex Schinz & R. Keller var.
monophylla, Schoenoplectus olneyi Gray,
Schoenoplectus monophyllus Presl., or Scirpus
americanus Pers. var. monophyllus (J.& K. Presl) T.
Koyama.Uses
Ethnobotanic: The soft, spongy stems of basket grass
were traditionally used and are still used for
basketweaving; the triangular stems are commonly
used for the bottom and ‘ribs’ of the round, wrapped,
and twined “grass” baskets made by first people of
the west coast of Canada and Washington.  Tribes
using basket grass include the following; Nitinaht,
Tsimshian, Kwakwaka’wakw, Swinomish (Skagit
River delta area); Quinalt, Quileute, Hoh, Makah (all
coastal); Suquamish (Puget Sound), S’kallam (Strait
of Georgia and Hood Canal area); Lummi
(Bellingham area); Nuu-chah-nuulth (Vancouver
Island); Nlak’pamax (Thompson tribes); Tlinget and
Haida (British Columbia), Twana (Skokomish),
Chehalis, the coast Salish (Susquamish), possibly the
Duwamish, Nisqually, and the Puyallup (Ryan pers.
comm. 1999; Dublanica pers. comm. 1999; Storm
pers. comm. 1999; Kunlein and Turner 1991).
According to Teresa Ryan (1999), “Most of the Coast
Salish used basket grass.  My grandmother said that
she heard stories about canoes coming to (Coastal
Salish areas) to harvest basket grass.  We are
Tsimshian, from the Northcoast.”
Basket grass is apparently highly specialized in
habitat.  It occurs along the muddy shores and
estuarine marshes of the Cheewhat River, the east
coast of Vancouver Island, and the northwestern
shore of Nitinak Lake in Canada (Kunlein and Turner
1991).  In Washington, basket grass occurs in a large
estuarine wetland in Bowerman Basin in Grays
Harbor, Skagit Delta, Stilliguamish River, Port Susan
area in northern Puget Sound, Willapa Bay, and the
lower Columbia River (Dublanica pers comm. 1999).
According to Teresa Ryan (1999) there are two
basket grass locations left in Washington that are
“harvestable:” Bowerman Basin and the Skagit River.
Access has become an issue at Bowerman Basin due
to constraints from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, who manage the area as a wildlife refuge.
The Skagit area populations have been threatened by
Spartina species.  Native people are concerned about
the decline of basket grass and continued access to
remaining populations.
The stems are harvested in August.  When pulled, the
stems simply break off at the base, making a sort of
popping sound.  Cutting of the materials should be
strongly discouraged.  The floral industry has been
harvesting basket grass at Bowerman Basin through
cutting the materials aboveground; areas have been
observed in fairly large circular swaths leaving a
stem of upwards of twelve inches above ground.
© University of Florida
Center for Aquatic & Invasive Plants

After collecting stems, they are carefully bundled so
that they will not bend, then carried home and laid
out to dry.  Once dried, they are sorted according to
length and bundled for storage.
The pithy, cylindrical stalks were used to weave
matting, as well as for bedding and roofing material.
As thatching material, basket grass was spread out in
bundles, tied together, then secured in place with
poles.
Various indigenous peoples of Canada ate the fleshy
rootstocks and rhizomes (Kunlein and Turner 1991).
The Kwakiutl used the stalks and oil on a child’s
head to make the hair grow long and thick (Moerman
1986).
Conservation: Basket grass or common threesquare is
especially good for stabilizing or restoring disturbed
or degraded areas, for erosion and slope control, and
for wildlife food and cover.  Where it occurs, it is
widely distributed in wet ground.
Wildlife: The seeds, being less hairy and larger than
cattail, are the choice food for wetland birds:
baldpate, bufflehead, mallard, pintail, shoveler, blue-
winged teal, cinnamon teal, greater scaup, lesser
scaup, avocet, marbled godwit, clapper rail, Virginia
rail, sora rail, long-billed dowacher, and tricolored
blackbird (Martin et al. 1951).  The stems provide
nesting habitat for blackbirds and marsh wrens.
Snow geese are known to utilize Schoenoplectus
pungens on the Skagit Delta and Bowerman Basin on
their migratory flights (Ewing 1982).
Status
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s
current status, such as, state noxious status and
wetland indicator values.
Description
General: Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  This
herbaceous, rhizomatous perennial has upright,
triangular, and rarely concave stems.  The stems are
erect to strongly arched and 1.5-10 dm in height and
2-6 mm wide in the middle.  The narrow (2-4 mm)
wide, grasslike, basal leaves are all in the lower third
of the stem.  Leaves are flat to slightly rounded near
the base, and become more cylindric toward the tip.
The flowers are lateral clusters of 1-7 sessile
spikelets subtended by an involucral bract that
appears to be a continuation of the stem.  The scales
are yellowish to reddish brown.  Fruits are small,
brown, lenticular achenes.  The systematics on thisspecies or subspecies are very much in dispute in the
Pacific Northwest (Galen Smith pers. comm. 1999).
Distribution
For current distribution, please consult the Plant
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web
site.
Establishment
Adaptation: Basket grass (Schoenoplectus pungens)
occurs in playas, salt marshes, freshwater marshes,
ponds, streams, reservoirs, and lake fringes below
2,000 m elevation.  It is usually found in standing
water about 10-15 cm deep, and will tolerate alkaline
and saline conditions as well as freshwater.  Basket
grass can survive seasonal drought, when the water
table is more than 1 m below the surface.  It grows in
fine silty clay loam to sandy loam soil.
In its native habitat, basket grass grows primarily in
estuarine wetlands.  Due to the loss of estuarine
wetland habitat throughout the United States, it is
rarely appropriate to harvest wild plants in these
areas.  Wild plant collecting should be restricted to
salvage sites with appropriate approvals or permits.
Basket grass populations are declining due to loss of
habitat and commercial use.  Indian elders are quoted
as saying  “Today basket grass has become scarce
and is hard to find” (Ryan pers. comm. 1999, Storm
pers. comm. 1999, Dublanica pers. comm. 1999).
The following information on the propagation of
basket grass is obtained from the Aberdeen Plant
Materials Center, Chris Hoag (1999), and Keith
Dublanica (1999).
Propagation from Cuttings: When wild plants are
collected under very controlled and specific
conditions, no more than 4 dm 
2, 13-15 cm deep
should be removed from any 1 m² area; the hole will
fill in within one growing season.  Care should be
taken not to collect plants from weedy areas as these
weeds can be relocated to the transplant site.  In
addition, the hole left at the collection site may fill in
with undesirable species.
Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse or wild
transplants) is the surest way to establish a new stand
of this species.  Plug spacing of 30-45 cm will fill in
within one growing season.  Soil should be kept
saturated.  Basket grass can tolerate 5-8 cm of
standing water during the first growing season.
Fluctuate the water levels during the establishment
period to increase the rate of spread.  Water levels
can be managed to both enhance expansion of the
clone and to control weeds.

Basket grass can tolerate up to 30-45 cm of standing
water if the water level is fluctuated during the
growing season.  This species can tolerate periods of
drought and total inundation.  This subspecies grows
in the high salt marsh, and can tolerate both brackish
water and diurnal tidal inundation.  In non-tidal
situations, water levels can be managed to either
enhance or reduce spread as well as to control
terrestrial weeds.
The Skokomish Tribe is using a modified clam gun to
gather wild transplants from Bowerman Basin.  The
clam gun consists of a piece of tailpipe with a T-
handle and a siphon hole drilled on the top
(Dublanica pers. comm. 1999).  The edges are
sharpened and make a clean cut with the tube
approximately 1 foot long and three inches in
diameter.  Three to twelve tillers are recovered per
plug extraction.  Transplant success was highest in
borrow pits within the diked complex at the
Skokomish River where Schoenoplectus remnants
were already growing (Ibid.).
Propagation by Seed: Germination of this species is
difficult.  Seeds ripen from late July through August.
Seeds are held in the seed head for a couple of
months, if not disturbed by high winds, high tides, or
inundation.  Seeds may be collected by hand
stripping them from the plant or by clipping the seed
heads with a pair of hand shears.  A power seed
harvester may also be used.
To clean the seed, use a hammer mill to break up the
large debris and knock the seeds loose from the stem.
To clean seed by hand, run your thumbnail along the
stem, and then twist the seeds away from the larger
chaff.  Cleaning can be accomplished using a seed
cleaner with a No. 7 screen top screen and a 1/20 in
bottom screen.  Screens should be sized so desired
seeds will fall through and debris and weed seeds are
removed.  Air velocity should b adjusted so chaff is
blown away.  Air flow and screen size may require
adjustment to optimize the cleaning process for the
given situation.
Seed germination is difficult in this species.  Wide
differences in germination may occur between sites
and between different years.  Fertilization, especially
addition of nitrate, increases the number, the weight,
and the germination percentages of the seed.  When
collecting seed heads, make sure the spikelets feel
“full” and that the seeds have developed.  The
germination rate may be enhanced by light
scarification and wet pre-chilling the seeds in a
mixture of water and sphagnum moss at 2ºC for 30
days.  After pre-chilling, place the seeds on the soilsurface in pots or flats and provide light, moisture,
and heat for germination.  Press seed into soil surface
very lightly, and do not cover seed.  Plants will
desiccate if the soil dried out, and will either fail to
germinate or die as young seedlings.  The greenhouse
should be kept hot (32ºC - 38ºC).  Germination
should begin within a few weeks.  Maintain moisture
until plants are to be transplanted.
Management
Insectivores have not been a problem with basket
grass.  Aphids will feed on the stems, but will not kill
the plant.  If problems from an insect, herbivore (such
as small mammals), or disease should emerge, treat
as you would for any other plant species.  Basket
grass is tended by gathering and reducing the density
between plants to stimulate shoot production.  Fire
was used to manage Schoenoplectus dominated
wetlands in some areas.
Traditional resource management of basket grass
includes the following: 1) shared ownership of
individual patches and their output, ensuring long-
term care and enhancement of plant production; 2)
redistribution of plant wealth to basketweavers and
elders; and 3) individual patches and landscapes were
burned regularly.
Bowerman Basin, one of the two remaining
traditional gathering sites of basket grass in
Washington, is currently managed by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service as a national wildlife refuge.
They are processing permit requests through tribal
offices, and process a number of gatherers.  Tribal
members don’t feel comfortable with the permit
process, but recognize it’s to guarantee access
(Dublanica pers. comm. 1999).  The USFWS are also
providing Skokomish tribal representatives a permit
to collect plants to transplant to the Skokomish tribal
lands.
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and
area of origin)
Selected Materials:
• Market Lake Selection of common threesquare
(Scirpus pungens), Accession Number 9057648,
for Land Resource Region (LRR) B East from
Market Lake Wildlife Management Area, north
of Roberts, Jefferson County, Idaho.
• Fort Boise Selection of common threesquare
(Scirpus pungens), Accession Number 9057578,
for Land Resource Region (LRR) B West from
Fort Boise Wildlife Management Area, west of
the town of Apple Valley, Canyon County,
Idaho.

• Malheur Selection of common threesquare
(Scirpus pungens), Accession Number 9057610,
for Land Resource Region (LRR) D North from
Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, south of the
town of Bums, Harney County, Oregon.
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by
clicking on Plant Materials.  This species is available
from most nurseries handling wetland plants.
References
Cooke, S. 1997.  A field guide to the common wetland
plants of western Washington and northwestern
Oregon.  Seattle Audubon Society and Washington
Native Plant Society.  414 pp.
Dublanica, K. 1999.  Personal communication.
Skokomish Tribal biologist and graduate student at
The Evergreen State College.
Ewing, K. 1982.  Developing an environmental
matrix for the Skagit River delta.  Ph.D. Dissertation.
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
Frenkel, R. 1994.  A reconnaissance of tidal islands
at the Skokomish River mouth.
Gunther, E. 1973.  Ethnobotany of western
Washington.  University of Washington Publications
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington
Press, Seattle.
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, & F. T. Davies, Jr.
1990.  Plant propagation principles and practices.
Prentice Hall. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647
pp.
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.  The Jepson manual.
Higher plants of California.  University of California
press.  1400 pp.
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist (eds.) 1973.  Flora
of the Pacific Northwest. An illustrated manual.
University of Washington Press. Seattle and London.
730 pp.
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.  Anderson horticultural
library's source list of plants and seeds.  Anderson
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota
Libraries. Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp.
James, K. 1979.  Anthropological use of the
Skokomish tidelands.  Skokomish Consulting
Services.King County Department of Public Works, Surface
Water Management Division 1994.  Northwest native
plants, identification and propagation for
revegetation and restoration projects.  King County,
Washington.
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional plant
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  Nutrition,
botany, and use.  Food and Nutrition in History and
Anthropology Volume 8. Gordon and Breach Science
Publishers.  632 pp.
Leigh, M. (August) 1997.  Grow your own native
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and
landscaping with western Washington native plants.
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State
University Cooperative Extension.
Martin, A.C., H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.
American wildlife and plants. A guide to wildlife food
habits.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New
York.  500 pp.
Miller, B. 1997.  Personal Communication.
Skokomish tribal elder.
Norton, H.H. 1981.  Plant use in Kaigani Haida
culture: Correction of an ethno-historical oversight.
Econ. Botany 35:434-449.
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D. Haase 1998.
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants.
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, Oregon.
Ryan, T. 1999.  Personal communication.  Tsimshian
tribal member and University of Washington
graduate student studying Schoenoplectus pungens/
S. americanus.
Sheldon and Associates 1994.  Wetland inventory of
the Skokomish tribal lands.
Smith, G. 1999.  Personal communication.  Professor
Emeritus, University of Wisconsin, Whitewater.
Author of Cyperaceae treatment of North American
Flora.
Storm, L. 1999.  Personal communication.  Wetlands
ecologist and ethnobotanist for U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Seattle, Washington.
Turner, N. 1992.  Plant technology of first peoples in
British Columbia.  U.B.C. Press, Vancouver, B.C.
256 pp.

Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson &
A.Z. York 1990.  Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of
British Columbia.  Royal British Columbia Museum
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria.
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie
1983.  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of
Vancouver Island.  B.C. Provincial Museum
Occasional Paper No. 24, 165 pp.
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982.  Ethnobotany of the
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island.  B.C.
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2,
99 pp.
Turner, N.J. 1975.  Food plants of British Columbia
Indians.  Part I.  Coastal peoples.  B.C. Provincial
Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria.
University of Florida 1999.  Aquatic, wetland, and
invasive plant particulars and photographs.  Version:
000323.  <http://aquat1.ifas.ufl.edu/scipun.html>.
Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants.
USDA, NRCS 1985.  Western wetland flora: Field
office guide to plant species.  Wetland Science
Institute, Laurel, Maryland.
USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database.
Version: 000323.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan & S.
Hashisaki 1994.  A citizen's guide to wetland
restoration.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region 10. 71 pp.
Weinmann, F. 1998.  Unpublished vascular plant
lists of the Skokomish salt marsh and bog.
Washington Native Plant Society.
Prepared By:
Michelle Stevens
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center
Chris Hoag
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen,
Idaho
Keith Dublanica
Skokomish Tribe, Shelton, Washington
Species Coordinator
M. Kat Anderson
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Centerc/o Environmental Horticulture Department,
University of California, Davis, California
Edited 05dec00 jsp
For more information about this and other plants, please contact
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the
PLANTS <http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program
Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of
race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability,
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status.
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of
program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and
TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer.