Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STURDY BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus robustus  
(Pursh) M.T. Strong 
Plant Symbol = SCRO5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
bulrush, alkali bulrush, three cornered rush, leafy 
three-cornered sedge, stout bulrush 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Sturdy bulrush seeds are an important food 
source to muskrat, waterfall, ducks, geese, and other 
water birds.  This species also provide cover for 
nesting birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General
: Sedge family (Cyperaceae).  Sturdy bulrush 
is native, perennial sedge that grows up to three and a 
half feet tall.  The leaves  are grasslike, long and 
narrow, up to twenty-four inches long.  The flowers 
are born in three or more spiklets that are covered by 
brown scales (Tiner 1987), flowering between April 
and August.  The fruit is a dark brown or black 
achene with pits that fruit between July and October. 
 Vic Ramey © University of Florida @ Aquatic Plant Informa tion Retrieval System 
 
Distribution: Sturdy bulrush grows from Maine, 
south to Florida and west to Texas.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Sturdy bulrush occurs in swampy meadows, along 
streams, swamps, sloughs, and borders of oxbow 
lakes in river flood plains.  This is a wetland species 
that grows best in  Schoenoplectus communities with 
water levels between –6 and +5 inches with a soil pH 
ranging from 4.3 to 6.4. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Sturdy bulrush seeds should be 
sown in a cold frame as soon as they are ripe in a pot 
standing in three centimeters of water.  The seeds 
germinate quickly.  When they are large enough to 
handle, out-plant into their permanent positions in 
early summer. 
 
Large divisions can be planted directly into their 
permanent positions.  It is best to pot smaller 
divisions and grow them in a cold frame and out-
planting when they are well established in the 
summer. 
 
Management 
After seed planting, water level over sturdy bulrush 
seeds should be maintained at one foot for two 
weeks.  Periodic flooding up to three feet should 
occur until the seedlings are established.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available through commercial nurseries dealing with 
wetland plants.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the

phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Gleason, H.A. 1952.  The new Britton and Brown: 
illustrated flora of the northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  Vol 1.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Godfrey, R.K. & J.W. Wooten 1979.   Aquatic and 
wetland plants of southeastern United States: 
monocotyledons .  The University of Georgia Press, 
Athens, Georgia.  
 
Hitchock, L.C. & A. Cronquist 1973.   Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest .  University of Washington Press, 
Seattle, Washington. 
 
Howell, J.T. 1949.   Marin Flora: manual of the 
flowering plants and ferns of Marin County, 
California .  University of California Press, Berkeley 
& Los Angeles, California. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1965.   A California flora.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Munz, P.A. 1973.   A California flora and 
supplement .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of the southeastern flora .  
The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Strausbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
Tiner, R.W. Jr. 1987.   A field guide to coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States .  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
University of Florida 2002.  Center for Aquatic and 
Invasive Plants, Gainsville , Florida.  Accessed: 
11jan02.  <http://aquat1.ifas.ufl.edu/welcome.html> 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 10jan02 jsp; 24feb03 ahv; 060817 jsp  
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.