Plant Guide
CEREAL RYE 
Secale cereale L. 
Plant Symbol = SECE  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials 
Center , Missouri  
 
Flowering cereal rye in a cover crop experimental plot in April at 
Elsberry, Missouri.  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names:  common rye, rye, winter rye, 
grain rye, cultivated rye  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Secale montanum, Secale 
strictum, Triticum cereale  
Uses  
Cover crop and green  manure: Cereal rye is often planted 
in the fall for soil erosion control (Oelke et al. , 1990) . As 
a cover crop ,  cereal rye can scavenge nitrogen, build soil, 
loosen topsoil (reduce compaction), prevent erosion, and 
suppress weeds.  It can also  be used as a  livestock forage 
between cash crops.  
 
Cereal rye absorbs  unused soil nitrogen  (N) remaining 
from previously grown row crop . It  typically  assimilates 
25- 50 lb/acre  N, but  can retain  as much as 100 lb/acre N  
(Clark, 2007) . Cereal rye is compatible with  multiple crop 
rotation systems in many regions . It can be used as a strip 
cover crop, overseeded, drilled, and /or broadcast . I t 
overwinters well , and creates a physical barrier  to weeds 
by producing large amounts of biomass ( Clark, 2007) . It 
also  suppresses  weeds chemically by producing 
alle lopathic  chemicals  (Chase et al. , 1991) . Generally , 
cereal rye performs  best as a cover crop or green manure 
crop if it is planted with other species, usually a legume.   
Grain
: Cereal rye is  grown as a grain crop for alcoholic 
beverages , food, livestock feed, and seed ( Oelke et al., 
1990) . Rye flour can be used alone  to make leavened 
bread , but it is more commonly mixed with wheat flour 
(Bushuk,  2001).    
 
Annual Pasture:  Cereal rye can be  grazed during the late 
fall or  early spring when other forages are not available 
(Oelke et al. , 1990) .  When used as grazed  forage, cereal 
rye is usually mixed with other cool season species such 
as triticale.  
 
Hay : Cereal r ye can be cut for hay when it is in the early 
heading stage of  development (Oelke et al. , 1990).  It  
provides the best hay forage when it is grown with other 
species such as red or crimson clover , or annual ryegrass 
(Oelke et al. , 1990) . If used for forage production, cereal 
rye can contain up to 9% crude protein (Watson et al., 
1993).     
Status  
Cereal rye is considered a Class C noxious weed in 
Washington.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state n oxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).   
Weediness  
Cereal  rye has the potential to become a weed if it is 
allowed to produce mature seed (Clark, 2007).  It can be 
killed with herbicides, mowing, chopping, or roller 
crimping at the correct growth  stage (Clark, 2007; Oelke 
et al., 1990) . Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use . Weed information is also available from 
the P LANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information.  
Ethnobotany  
English and Dutch settlers brought cereal  rye to the 
northeastern United States. Flour made from cereal rye is 
gluten free (Oelke et al., 1990), which makes it an  ideal 
flour for people with celiac disease. It has been 
historically grown in the North Central states of South 
Dakota, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Minnesota (Oelke 
et al., 1990).  
T he witch hunts and executions that  have occurred 
throughout history  may have been the result of a 
misdiagnosis of rye ergot poisoning (Matossian, 1989). 
Many of the symptoms of ergot poisoning, such as