Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ALKALI BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus maritimus  (L.) 
Lye 
Plant Symbol = SCMA8  
 
Contributed by: Idaho Plant Materials Center & the 
Interagency Riparian/Wetland Project 
 
Alternative Names 
Cosmopolitan bulrush, Scirpus maritimus, 
Bolboschoenus maritimus  
 
Uses 
Erosion Control, Restoration,  & Constructed 
Wetlands: As a pioneering species, it will provide 
protection from wind and wave erosion especially for 
newly exposed soil.  The rhizomes form a matrix for 
many beneficial bacteria making this plant an 
excellent choice for wastew ater treatment constructed 
wetlands. 
 
Wildlife & Livestock: Livestock and big game will 
rarely use this species for food.  Palatability is low.   
 
Waterfowl will utilize the seed and use the stems for 
nesting cover.  Muskrats and beaver will eat the 
rootstocks and young shoots.  They will also use the 
shoots for building material. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Sedge Family (Cyperaceae).  Alkali bulrush 
is a native perennial, heavily rhizomatous, obligate, 
wetland plant that may reach 15 dm in height and 
form dense stands.  The stems are upright and 
angular with several leaves, up to 1 cm wide, along 
the lower two thirds of the plant.  The flowers are 
borne in sessile spikelets, densely clustered at the tip 
of the stem, and nestled in 3 or more leafy bracts.  
Spikelets are 1.2-2 cm long.  The seeds are brown 
lenticular achenes, 2.5 to 4 mm long. 
 
Distribution 
In the U.S., it ranges from the West Coast, east to 
Minnesota, and south to Louisiana.  It is also found in 
the northeastern United  States.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Alkali bulrush is found at low to mid 
elevations in marshes, transient wet spots, pond 
margins, and backwater areas .  It forms large dense 
stands in alkaline or saline sites.  It can handle a pH 
of up to 9.0.  It will grow on soils from fine clay to 
silt loam to sand.  It can survive periods of total 
inundation of up to 1 m deep.  It tends to spread and 
reproduce when the water table is within 10 cm of the 
surface.  It can occur in freshwater sites, but is 
usually a pioneering species that will be replaced 
over time with more permanent species.  Seed and 
rhizome growth spread it.  It  is fairly resistant to fire, 
which will increase its production and protein 
content. 
 
Seed Collection : Seed ripens in late August to 
October.  Seeds are held tightly in the seedhead, 
which means the collection time can be extended.

Seeds may be collected by hand stripping the seed 
from the plant or clipping it using a pair of hand 
shears.  A power seed harvester may also be used.  
The bracts, which are found  in the seed heads, are 
very irritating to the skin.  Gloves and protective eye 
ware should be worn, especially when using a power 
seed harvester. 
Seed Cleaning : The hammermill is used to break up 
the large debris and knock the seed loose from the 
stem.  Cleaning can be accomplished using a seed 
cleaner with a No. 8 round  top screen and a 1/8-inch 
bottom screen.  Screens should be sized so desired 
seed will fall through and debris and weed seed are 
removed.  Air velocity should be adjusted so chaff is 
blown away.  Air flow and screen size may require 
adjustment to optimize cl eaning process for given 
situation. 
 
Propagation : Stratifying the seed in a mixture of 
water and sphagnum moss at 2°C for 30 days may 
enhance the germination rate.  Seed viability is quite 
high if stored properly for up to 20 years. 
 
Within the greenhouse, seeds need light, moisture, 
and heat for germination.   Place seeds on surface of 
soil and press in lightly to assure good soil contact.  
Do not cover seed.  Soil should be kept moist.  The 
greenhouse should be kept hot (32°C to 38°C).  
Germination should begin with in about one week.  
Maintain moisture until plants are to be transplanted. 
 
Wild plants for transplant can be collected and 
transplanted directly into the desired site.  As long as 
no more than 4 dm2 is removed from any 1-m2 area, 
the hole will fill in within one growing season.  Care 
should be taken not to collect plants from weedy 
areas, as these weeds can be relocated to the 
transplant site, and the hole left at the collection site 
may fill with undesirable species. 
 
Planting : Planting plugs (either from the greenhouse 
or wild transplants) is the surest way to establish a 
new stand of this species.  Plug spacing of 30 to 45 
cm will fill in within one growing season.  Soil 
should be kept saturated.  It can handle from 5-8 cm 
of standing water during the establishment year.  
Fluctuating the water level during the establishment 
period is essential.  Water levels can be managed to 
enhance spread and control weeds. 
 
Maintenance : Plants can tolerate up to 1 m of 
standing water for short periods of time.  Typically, 
the water will be high in the spring and decrease 
throughout the growing season to within 1 m of the 
surface in the fall.  This species can tolerate periods 
of drought and total inundation.  Water levels can be  managed to enhance or reduce spread as well as 
control terrestrial weeds.  
 
Environmental Concerns
: Generally, insects and 
disease are not a problem.  If an insect or disease 
problem is encountered in the greenhouse, treat as 
you would for any other type plant. 
 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, WSI @ PLANTS 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Intermountain Interagency Riparian/Wetland 
Plant Development Proj ect released four 
performance-tested ecotyp es for areas within its 
service area in 1997.  These are listed below. 
 
Bear Lake Selection: Accession Number 9067380, 
for Land Resource Region  (LRR) B East from Bear 
Lake National Wildlife Refuge (NWR), just south of 
Montpelier, Bear Lake County, Idaho. 
 
Fort Boise Selection : Accession Number 9057579, 
for LRR B West from Fort Boise Wildlife 
Management Area, west of Apple Valley, Canyon 
County, Idaho. 
 
Stillwater Selection: Accession Number 9067428, for 
LRR D North from Stillwater NWR, northwest of 
Fallon, Churchill County, Nevada. 
 
Bear River Selection : Accession Number 9067374, 
for LRR D South from Bear River Migratory Bird 
Refuge, west of Brigham City, Box Elder County, 
Utah. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.”

References 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Reveal, & P.K. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain flora.  
Volume Six.  The monocotyledons .  Columbia 
University Press, New York, New York.  584p. 
 
Hoag, J.C. 1997.   Riparian/wetland project 
information series no. 2: Planning a project .  USDA, 
NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho.  13p. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Sellers 1994.   Riparian/wetland 
project information series no. 8: Use of greenhouse 
propagated wetland plants versus live transplants to 
vegetate constructed or created wetlands .  USDA, 
NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho.  4p. 
 
Hoag, J.C. & M. Sellers 1995.   Riparian/wetland 
project information series no. 7: Constructed wetland 
system for water quality improvement of irrigation 
wastewater.  USDA, NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  8p. 
 
Hoag, J.C., G.L. Young, & J. Gibb 1992.  
Riparian/wetland project information series no. 1: 
Planting techniques for vegetation riparian areas 
from the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center .  USDA, 
NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho.  8p. 
 
Prepared By 
Chris Hoag 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
Chris Hoag 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 Edited 07jun00 jsp; 14feb03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.