Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE PANICLE ASTER  
Symphyotrichum lanceolatum  
(Willd.) Nesom ssp. 
lanceolatum  var. lanceolatum  
Plant Symbol = SYLAL4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Name 
panicled aster, Aster lanceolatus 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The dried and powdered plant was 
used as a salve on abrasions (Moerman 1998). A 
decoction of the plant was used to dress wounds 
(Ibid.).  Smoke from the crushed blossoms was 
inhaled in the treatment of nosebleeds. 
 
Wildlife : White panicle aster is known for attracting 
butterflies and moths to areas where it is found 
growing.  This is a good bee plant providing nectar in 
the autumn.  Most species in this genus seem to be 
immune to the predications of rabbits (Thomas 
1990). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Aster family (Asteraceae).  White panicle 
aster is a perennial growing up to two meters tall.  
The leaves are alternate, long, narrow, widest near 
the middle, and sometimes irregularly toothed along 
the edges, ranging up to six inches long (Ladd 1995).  
The flower heads are in an open, leafy, conical 
cluster at the top of the plan t (Ibid.).  The flowers are 
hermaphrodite (having both male and female organs) 
and are pollinated by bees,  butterflies, flies, beetles 
and moths. 
 
Distribution : White panicle aster ranges from Maine 
and south to South Carolina, west Texas and North 
Dakota.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation 
This plant is common throughout the tallgrass region 
in wet prairies, low wet depressions and along 
streams (Ladd 1995).  It requires well-drained soil 
and prefers sandy, loamy and clay soils. This species 
can grow on nutritionally poor soil but prefers rich 
soil.  It grows well in a sunny location and can 
succeed in partial shade. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Seeds should be sown fresh in 
the fall or spring (Heuser 1997).  Pre-chill spring 
sown seeds to improve germination (Ibid.).  When 
the seedlings are large en ough to handle, place them 
into individual pots and plant them out in the 
summer. 
 
Division of this species should be done in the spring 
or autumn.  Large divisions can be planted into their 
permanent positions whereas smaller clumps should 
be kept in a cold frame until they are growing well. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Occasionally available thr ough native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”

References 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut.   
 
Huxley, A. 1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillan Press, New York, New York. 
 
Ladd, D. 1995.   Tallgrass prairie wildflowers : a 
falcon field guide.  Falcon Press Publishing 
Company, Helena, Montana. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Thomas, G.S. 1990.   Perennial garden plants .  J.M. 
Dent & Sons, London 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp: 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.