Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUFFALOBERRY 
Shepherdia canadensis  (L.) 
Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = SHCA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
soapberry, buffalo-berry, russet buffaloberry, russet 
red buffaloberry, Canadian buffalo-berry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Buffaloberry berries were used to 
make “Indian ice cream” which has a bitter taste but 
was often sweetened with sa lal berries, camas bulbs, 
or hemlock cambium (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  
The berries were also eaten fresh or dried.   
 
The Wet’suwet’en used the tw igs, leaves, berries, and 
juice medicinally for everythi ng from heart attacks to 
indigestion.  The berries were also chewed by 
Wet’suwet’en women to induce childbirth.  The 
Salish and Kootenai tribes  boiled debarked branches 
and used the solution as ey ewash.  A poultice of the 
inner bark, softened by hot water and mixed with pin 
cherry bark ( Prunus pensylvanica ) has been used to 
make a plaster or bandage for wrapping broken limbs 
(Moerman 1998). 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Shepherdia canadensis  
plants are grown occasionally for ornamental use.  
The berries are browsed by grouse, black bears, 
grizzly bears, and snowshoe hares. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Oleaster Family (Elaeagnaceae).  
Buffaloberry is a native, deciduous, nitrogen-fixing 
shrub that ranges in height from three to thirteen feet.  
The leaves are opposite, oval, two to six centimeters 
long, dark greenish on  upper surface with whitish 
silvery hairs and rusty brown spots on the 
undersurface (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  The 
flowers are small, yellowish  or brownish, male and 
female flowers on separate shrubs.  The fruits are 
drupelike, red or yellowish, ovoid achenes, that are 
fleshy and edible but almost tasteless or bitter 
(Viereck & Little 1972). 
 © Robert Kowal Plant Systematics Teaching Collection University of Wisconsin-Madison
 
Distribution : Buffaloberry is found from 
Newfoundland to Alaska, south to Maine, to western 
New York, Ohio, and northern Mexico.  For current 
distribution, please consult the PLANTS profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation  
Shepherdia canadensis  occurs in dry to moist open 
woods and thickets, from lowlands to middle 
elevation forests (Pojar  & MacKinnon 1994).  It 
prefers moist to wet soil and is generally found on 
rocky, sandy, or gravelly soils and is able to survive 
on nutrient poor soils because of its nitrogen fixing 
ability.  This species prefer s partial shade or partial 
sun to full sun. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Buffaloberry seeds should be 
harvested in the autumn a nd sown immediately in a 
cold frame.  The seeds must not be allowed to dry 
out.  Seeds have a hard seed coat and scarification 
with sulfuric acid for twenty to thirty minutes 
followed by two to three months of cold stratification 
will help the embryo to develop (Dirr & Heuser 
1987).  Place the seedlings into individual pots when 
they are large enough to ha ndle.  If sufficient growth 
is made by the summer, it is possible to plant them 
out, otherwise grow them in a cold frame for the first 
winter and out plant the following spring or early 
summer.

Management 
Shepherdia canadensis fruit contain low 
concentrations of a bitter principle, saponin, which 
foams in water.  It is very poorly absorbed by the 
body and can be broken down by thoroughly cooking 
the fruit.  Saponin is much more toxic to some 
creatures, such as fish, if eaten in large quantities. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Somewhat available from native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.   An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada .  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.   Trees and shrubs of New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M. A. & C. W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Fernald, M.L. & A.C. Kinsey 1958.   Edible wild 
plants of eastern North America.  Harper & Brothers 
Publishers, New York, New York. 
 
Kowal, R. 2002.   Shepardia canadensis .  IN Plant 
Systematics Teaching Collection, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.  Accessed: 11jan02.  
<http://www.wisc.edu/botit/systematics/contributors.
html> 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Mozingo, H.L. 1987.   Shrubs of the Great Basin: a 
natural history .  University of Nevada Press, Reno, 
Nevada. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.   Woody plants of the North 
Central Plains .  The University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.   Alaska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service.  Agriculture Handbook 
No. 14.  Washington, D.C. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.