Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK 
GREASEWOOD  
Sarcobatus vermiculatus  
(Hook.) Torr.  
Plant Symbol = SAVE4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
 Black Greasewood. Photo by Brock Benson, USDA NRCS, UT 
 
Alternative Names 
Greasewood, seepwood, saltbush 
 
Uses 
Wildlife habitat/forage: Although often considered 
poor browse, black greasewood provides important 
cover for wildlife and livestock, especially during the 
winter. Plants are low to low fair in protein levels 
depending on soil and growing conditions.  
 
Caution:  Black greasewood plants contain sodium 
and potassium oxalates and are toxic to livestock. 
Browsing black greasewood can be fatal if even low 
to moderate quantities are consumed without large 
quantities of other forage in the diet.  Black 
greasewood is poisonous year round, but plants can 
be consumed safely in light to very moderate 
amounts in the spring while the leaves are growing, 
as long as there is a substantial amount of other 
preferable forage available. As the season progresses,  toxins accumulate and the plant becomes the most 
toxic in the fall. Animals can also be poisoned in fall 
and winter by eating the 
leaves from the ground. 
Signs of poisoning develop 4 to 6 hours after an 
animal has eaten a toxic amount, approximately 2 
pounds for sheep and 3 pounds for cattle (James et al 
1980; Weathers 1998).  Jame s et al (1988) state that 
grazing black greasewood properly and with a great 
deal of caution can be be neficial to the grazing 
animal. 
 
Ethnobotanical : The tough wood from Sarcobatus  
was used by Native Ameri can Indians for tools and 
firewood (Welsh et al 2003). 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Goosefoot Family (Chenopodiaceae): Black 
greasewood is a rapidly growing, tall (3 to 10 ft), 
erect spiny deciduous to semi-evergreen shrub (it is 
more deciduous in northern  reaches and less so in the 
southern reaches of its ra nge). Black greasewood has 
a long lifespan with very good seedling vigor. Leaves 
are bright green to light olive green in color, round, 
narrow and fleshy. 
 
Black greasewood plants are generally monoecious 
(having separate male and female flowers on the 
same plant) but can also be dioecious (having 
separate male and female plants) [Hickman 1993]. 
The male (staminate) flowers are small and clustered 
in pine cone shaped spikes that are 1/2 to 1 inch long.  
Male flowers lack both sepals and petals. Flowers are 
found at the ends of the top most branches on the 
plant. The female (pistillate) flowers are green, small 
in size (about 3/16 in), very inconspicuous with a 
wing-like membrane that becomes enlarged as the 
fruit matures. The fruit reaches approximately 1/2 
inch at maturity. Fruit are green while growing, 
turning reddish nearing the end of development and 
tan when fully mature. Black greasewood plants 
flower in May through July with the fruit maturing in 
July through September. Both male flowers and 
female flowers can be found on plants from May 
through July. The male flowers persist on the plant 
through the end of the growing season, while the

female flowers are found on the plant from mid July 
through November.  
 
Bark is white on young plants and new growth, but 
turns gray to black on old growth. Spines are found 
along the branches and at the tips of the branches 
(spines are not considered to be true spines, but the 
ends of branches which grow  out at about a 90 degree 
angle). These serve as m echanical protection from 
grazing.  
 
 Mature Seed. Photo courtesy  of the PLANTS database. 
 
Distribution:  
Black greasewood can be found in saline seeps as 
well as dry upland communities in arid to semi-arid 
habitats in all western states east to Texas and North 
Dakota. For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  
Black greasewood plants inhabit a wide range of 
plant communities in the lowlands of the western 
deserts. Plants are typically found growing in saline 
soils that can be quite moist (wet saline meadows) to 
dry uplands. Black greasewood is often the dominant 
species in the plant community, but plants are also 
found associated with seepweed, saltbush, saltgrass, 
shadscale, basin big sagebrush and Wyoming big 
sagebrush communities. Some ecological sites may 
only have a minor component of black greasewood, 
but black greasewood will often increase to become 
dominant under certain circumstances giving the 
impression that it is a “greasewood site”. 
 
Adaptation  
Black greasewood tolerates mildly to strongly sodic 
soil as well as non-saline to strongly saline soils. It is 
normally found on soils that are primarily fine-
textured and saline and/or sodic, but this plant will 
grow on a wide variety of soils from very heavy clays 
to cobbly loams. It has very high tolerance to sodic to  saline affected soils. Plan
ts are highly drought 
tolerant but can also tolerate high water tables and 
can survive prolonged flooding (up to approximately 
40 days). 
 
Black greasewood plants can  have an extremely long 
root system (reported from 1.5 meters (5 ft) to 6.1 
meters (20 ft) long) with lateral roots 0.9 meters (3 ft) 
to 3.7 meters (12 ft) in length. Adventitious buds are 
found all along the lateral root system which initiate 
sprouting when the main plant or the root system is 
damaged. Plants have the ability to crown sprout 
whenever the crown is damaged.  
 
Management  
Although black greasewood is not usually considered 
to be a weedy species, sites containing the plant are 
often in poor ecological condition due to the 
combination of past management coupled with the 
harsh environment in which the plant normally 
occurs. Recovering the health of sites that are in poor 
condition can be very challenging and may take years 
to achieve.  
 
Characteristics of greasewo od, such as adventitious 
buds and crown sprouting, make it relatively difficult 
to manage. Unlike black greasewood, big sagebrush 
species do not tolerate high levels of salinity or 
sodicity. In general, the more big sagebrush that is 
found on the site the bette r the chance of being able 
to successfully treat the site.  Where there is very 
little to no big sagebrush, the treatment of the site 
will most likely fail or be  a very poor investment 
of capital.  Other criteria that should be considered 
are climate, available water holding capacity of the 
soil, depth of soil, soil surface texture, surface rock 
fragments and slope. 
 
Control of black greasewood is not easily 
accomplished. 2, 4-D and 2, 4-D + dicamba 
(Banvel®) are the most common control methods, 
but these rarely work wi th a single application. 
Normally two applications on subsequent years are 
needed. Occasionally three applications are required 
to gain acceptable control. Picloram (Tordon®) 
works fairly well. Metsulfuron (Ally®, Cimmaron®, 
or Escort®) have produced mixed results. 
Metsulfuron, when it works, will work very well, but 
apparently there are some  environmental factors that 
contribute to its effectiveness. These factors do not 
appear to be clearly defined at this time. Other mixes 
that have been successfully applied are 2, 4-D + 
Tordon and 2, 4-D + Metsulfuron. Adding a 
surfactant to any chemical application seems to 
improve the success of the control project. Spraying 
should be completed in the spring when plants are

actively growing and the new leaves are about 1/2 to 
3/4 inches long. Be sure to read and follow pesticide 
label instructions. 
 
Deep plowing to a depth of 10 inches or deeper and 
plowing in two directions is often the most effective 
treatment where soil conditions are favorable. After 
the first plowing, wait until the plants start growing 
again and then make the second pass at a 45 degree 
angle to the previous pass. Regrowth normally occurs 
in the next growing season but can happen in the year 
of the first plowing. 
 
Where the site is not conducive to brush removal, but 
improving the understory is needed, broadcast 
seeding around the plants without disturbing them is 
an option. The likelihood of success for this type of 
seeding is low; however, some of the seed may grow 
and improve the opportunity for livestock and 
wildlife use. 
 
One way of seeding areas where a drill can not be 
used, due to soils being too  fluffy or where there are 
shrubs or plant stumps in the way, is to broadcast or 
aerially apply seed and then  put a large number of 
animals in the area for a shor t period of time to work 
the seed into the soil surf ace. Seed trampling works 
best where the soil surface is too soft to be drilled at 
the right depth, or where  you are trying to seed 
around and/or through an existing stand of black 
greasewood that needs understory improvement. 
 
Areas of black greasewood that are burned, crowned, 
brush beat, or shallow plowed and/or shallow disked 
will often result in a much higher density of black 
greasewood. Over-grazi ng of the understory 
vegetation also gives greasewood the chance to 
increase on the site to the point of site domination.  
 
Not all of the ecological sites where black 
greasewood is found are suitable for manipulation. 
Thus, extreme caution should be exercised when 
selecting which sites have the best potential for 
improvement. 
 
The following points should be kept in mind when 
managing black greasewood sites: 
 
•  Proper grazing management of understory 
vegetation is critical to maintaining healthy 
greasewood sites. 
 
•  If proper grazing prac tices are not followed 
after improvements are made, the site will 
quickly revert back to their former state. 
•   Conditions such as low precipitation, high 
sodicity and high salinity can reduce the 
success of improvements. 
 
•  Black greasewood is a sprouting plant and 
will come back vigorously if only the plant 
crown is disturbed and the root system is not 
destroyed. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Black greasewood is a species native to the western 
United States. The species is  not considered weedy or 
invasive, but plants can spread to adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal environmental 
conditions.  This species can be toxic to livestock. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Seed can be wildland collected by hand in late fall 
when the fruit has turned a light brown color. 
Containerized seedlings can be propagated after 
placing seed in cold stratification. Germination 
occurs best at 10º C and 30D/20N C alternating 
temperature cycle (Baskin and Baskin 2002). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no comm ercial releases of black 
greasewood. 
 
References 
Baskin, C. C., and J.M. Baskin. 2002. Propagation 
protocol for production of container  Sarcobatus 
vermiculatus  (Hook.) Torr. plants; University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky. In: Native Plant 
Network. URL: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(accessed 29 January 2007). Moscow (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery.  
 
Hickman, J.C. ed. 1993.  The Jepson Manual: higher 
plants of California . University of California Press. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA. 1400p. 
 
James L.F., R.F. Keeler , A.E. Johnson, M.C. 
Williams, E.H. Cronin, J.D. Olsen. 1980.  Plants 
poisonous to livestock in the western states . 
USDA/SEA Agricultural Information Bulletin 415. 
 
James, L.F., M.H. Ralphs and D.B. Nielsen. 1988. 
The Ecology and Economic Impact of Poisonous 
Plants of Livestock Production. Westview Press. 
Boulder, CO. 
 
Weathers, S.A. 1988.  Field Guide to Plants 
Poisonous to Lives tock: Western U.S. Rosebud Press. 
232p.

Welsh, S. L., N. D. Atwood, S. Goodrich and L. C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University Press, Provo, Utah. 
 
Prepared By 
Brock Benson , Area Range Conservationist 
USDA NRCS, Ogden, UT 
 
Derek Tilley, Range Conservationist (Plants) USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John , Manager 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Shane Green, State Range Conservationist 
USDA NRCS, Salt Lake City, UT 
 
James Briggs , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, WNTSC, Portland, OR 
 
Species Coordinator 
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 Edited: 020707dgo; 013107lsj; 013107bb; 020607jb; 020707djt; 070209jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.