Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE HEATH ASTER  
Symphyotrichum ericoides  (L.) 
Nesom var.  ericoides 
Plant Symbol = SYERE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names  
Aster ericoides, Aster ericoides  forma caeruleus, 
Aster ericoides  forma ericoides , Aster ericoides 
forma gramsii, Aster ericoides  ssp. ericoides, Aster 
multiflorus, Aster multiflorus  var. caeruleus, Aster 
multiflorus  var. exiguous, Aster multiflorus  var. 
pansus, Aster pansus, Aster polycephalus, Aster 
stricticaulis , blue aster, dense-flower aster, elongate 
aster, farewell-to-summer, goodbye-to-meadow, 
heath aster,  Lasallea ericoides , squarrose white aster, 
Symphyotrichum ericoides , tufted white prairie aster, 
Virgus ericoides , white aster, white prairie aster, 
white-wreath aster, wreath aster. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used white heath 
aster in sweat baths.  Flowering plants served as 
binding to the structure of  the sweat lodge and were 
added to hot rocks to produce herbal steam.  White 
heath aster was also used medicinally to revive 
unconscious patients. 
 
Economic:  White heath aster is economically 
valuable as an ornamental. 
 
Gardening:  The showy flowers of white heath aster 
make it a popular plant for use in wildflower and 
native plant gardens. 
 
Livestock and forage:  Livestock will not consume 
white heath aster.  It can lower the forage quality of 
prairie hay. 
 
Wildlife:  White heath aster is a source of nectar and 
shelter for butterflies.  It is resistant to deer browsing. 
 
Legal Status 
White heath aster is endangered in Tennessee.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda. 
gov) and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current st atus (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 Theodore S. Cochrane.  Robert W. Freckmann Herbarium. 
 
Weediness 
White heath aster is reported to be invasive by  Weeds 
of Nebraska and the Great Plains .  This plant may 
become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
General:  Aster family (Asteraceae).  White heath 
aster is a hardy perennial with an extensive root 
system of rhizomes and stolons.  This bushy plant 
grows to be 0.5 to 1 m tall and can have a 30 cm 
spread.  Leaves are narrow (1cm wide) and linear (7 
cm long), resembling the leaves of heather.  At the 
time of flowering, most leaves drop except for those 
directly beneath the flower head.  The remaining 
leaves are reduced to bracts.  One plant can produce 
up to 100 flower heads.   Ray flowers are white-to-
pink, center disc flowers are yellowish-to-purple.  
Seeds are achenes that have tufts of white bristles to 
help them blow away with the wind.  Flowering takes 
place August thro ugh November. 
 
White heath aster is difficult to distinguish from other 
white flowered species.  A  key characteristic is the 
blunt point of the bracts be neath the flower head.  
Other asters have sharply pointed bracts, bracts 
pressed against the infl orescence, or both.

Distribution: White heath aster is native to the United 
States.  It occurs from Maine to southern 
Saskatchewan, south to Virginia, Texas, northern 
Mexico and southeast Arizona.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: White heath aster is found in dry-mesic 
prairies, open black oak or jack pine woods, sand 
dunes and savanna communities.  It is weedy in 
disturbed areas like roadsides, railroads, sandy fields, 
gravel pits and quarries, and sometimes riverbanks 
and lakeshores. 
 
Adaptation 
The USDA hardiness zones for white heath aster are 
5 to 8.  It is best adapted to dry and medium wet, 
well-drained soils found in  open areas like prairies 
with sandy, gravelly, or rocky substrates.  It is 
drought hardy and does well in sun and partial sun. 
 
Establishment 
Like other aster species, white heath aster seeds are 
ready for collection in September when achenes 
separate easily from the receptacle.  Dry seeds prior 
to cleaning and store in sealed containers at 3 to 5
oC.   
If sowing indoors, damp stratify white heath aster 
seeds at 1 to 2oC for 2.5 to 4 months.   
 
For springtime seeding, sow seeds either inside an 
unheated greenhouse or outside before the last frost.  
White heath aster can also be  direct sown outdoors in 
the fall or mid-winter in covered containers, cold 
frames, or unheated greenhouses.  Germination will 
occur within 2 weeks. 
 
Cut clumped plants into several separate pieces, each 
piece having buds and roots,  to divide prairie plants 
like white heath aster.  Th ese “seedlings” can then be 
transplanted.  Divisions should be made in late 
summer and transplanting can take place from 
September through November, or mid-April to mid-
June.  If not transplanting until spring, store potted 
seedlings in outdoor temperatures under insulating 
foam (if necessary). 
 
Management  
White heath aster resprouts from the underground 
stem after fire and responds  to fire with vigorous 
growth the following growing season.  As part of 
prairie restoration, prescrib ed burns should take place 
annually for the first 5 to 6 years, and biannually after 
the initial phase.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The NRCS Plant Materials Program has not released 
any cultivars of white heath aster for conservation 
use.  Ornamental cultivars of this species include 
‘Blue Star,’ ‘Ester,’ ‘Mont e Cassino,’ ‘Pink Cloud,’ 
‘Pink Star,’ and ‘Snowflurry.’ 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cochrane, T.S. and H.H. Iltis. 2004.  Atlas of the 
Wisconsin prairie and savanna flora: Aster ericoides 
(http://www.botany.wisc.edu/herbarium/ wisflora/ 
atlas/ASTERIvERI.gif, 26 February 2004). 
Wisconsin State Herbarium, Madison. 
 
Connecticut Botanical  Society. 2003. Heath aster: 
Aster ericoides (Symphyotrichum ericoides)  (http:// 
www.ct-botanical-society.org/galleries/astereric.html, 
31 January, 2004). New Haven. 
 
Kantrud, H.A. 1995.  Native wildflowers of the North 
Dakota grasslands  (http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/ 
resource/literatr/wildflwr/wildflwr.htm, 31 January 
2004). USGS, Northern Pr airie Wildlife Research 
Center, Jamestown. 
 
Kennedy, H. 2004.  Heath aster (http://plantsdatabase. 
com/go/1277/, 16 February 2004). The Plants 
Database, Kerrville. 
 
Mark, R. 1999.  Twin Swamps Nature Preserve trail: 
Aster ericoides  (http://www.usi.edu/science/biology/ 
TwinSwamps/Aster_ericoides.htm, 31 January, 
2004). Twin Swamps Nature Preserve, University of 
Southern Indiana, New Harmony. 
 
McClain, W.E. 2004.  Prairie establishment and 
landscaping  (http://dnr.state.il.us/conservation/ 
naturalheritage/prairie/CNTNT1.HTM, 16 February 
2004).  Illinois DNR, Division of Natural Heritage, 
Springfield. 
 
North Central Resources. 2004.  Weeds of the north 
central states  (http://www.extension.uiuc.edu/~vista/ 
html_pubs/WEEDS/190.html). Illinois Extension 
Service, Urbana.

On-line Plants Information. 2004. Aster ericoides 
(http://www.horticopia.com/hortpix/html/pc831.htm, 
31 January, 2004). Horticopia, Inc. 
 
Plant Finder. 2003. Kemper Web: Aster ericoides 
(http://ridgwaydb. mobot.org /kemperweb/plantfinder/ 
Plant.asp?code=J48D, 31 January, 2004). Missouri 
Botanical Garden, St. Louis. 
 
Rechenthin,  C.A. 2004. USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database,  Version 3.5 (http://plants.usda.gov, 21 
February 2004). National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge. 
 
Slaby, P. 2001.  Symphyotrichum ericoides 
(http://web. kadel.cz/flora/kvInfo.html, 31 January 
2004). Rock Garden Plants, version 2.7. 
 
Stubbendieck, J., G.Y. Friisoe, and M.R. Bolick. 
1994.  Weeds of Nebraska and the Great Plains . 
Nebraska Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, Lincoln. 
 
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 
2003.  GRIN online database  (http://www.ars-grin. 
gov). National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville. 
 
Vascular Plant Species Database. 2004.  Aster laevis 
L. var. laevis  (http://www.botany.wisc.edu/wisflora / 
scripts/detail.asp?SpCode=ASTERIvERI, 31 January, 
2004). Wisconsin State Herbarium. 
 
Prepared By:  
Sarah Wennerberg 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Mark Skinner  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 26Feb2004 sbw; 21Oct2004 rln; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.