Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEW YORK ASTER 
Symphyotrichum novi-belgii 
(L.) Nesom var.  novi-belgii 
Plant Symbol = SYNON  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Name 
Michaelmas daisy, Aster novi-belgii 
 
Uses 
Landscape: New York aster is an excellent upright 
perennial for a mixed bed or border.   This species 
provides a color accent, bringing autumn color to the 
garden. 
 
Wildlife : New York aster is known for attracting 
butterflies and moths to areas where it is found 
growing.  This is a good bee plant providing nectar in 
the autumn.  Most species in this genus seem to be 
immune to the predictions of rabbits (Thomas 1990). 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Aster family (Asteraceae).  New York aster  
is an upright, native perennial that grows between 
one and a half to five feet tall.  The leaves are elliptic 
to linear, smooth to scab rous above and glabrous 
beneath (Radford, Ahles & Bell 1968).  The disc 
flowers are red to yello w.  The flowers are  hermaphrodite (having both male and female organs) 
and are pollinated by bees, 
butterflies, flies, beetles 
and moths. 
 
Distribution : New York aster ranges from 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia south to Georgia, 
apparently to Alabama, chie fly near the coast (Tiner 
1987).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
 © Don Kurz @ PLANTS 
Adaptation 
New York aster is found growing in slightly brackish 
and tidal fresh marshes, o ccasionally borders of salt 
marshes; inland marshes, shrub marshes, shores and 
other moist areas (Tiner 1987).  This plant requires 
well-drained soil and prefer s sandy, loamy and clay 
soils.  It can grow on nutritionally poor soil, in semi-
shade or no shade but pr efers a sunny location. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed: New York aster seeds should 
be sown fresh in the fall or spring (Heuser 1997).  
Pre-chill spring sown seeds to improve germination.  
When the seedlings are large enough to handle, place 
them into individual pots and plant them out in the 
summer.  Division of this species should be done in 
the spring.  Large divisions can be planted into their 
permanent positions whereas smaller clumps should 
be kept in a cold frame until they are growing well. 
 
Management 
Divisions of New York aster should be done in the 
spring every three years to maintain vigor (Heuser 
1997).  Regular spraying is recommended for this 
species because it is prone to  mildew and attack from 
pests. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Available through some native plant seed sources.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of the 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and

adjacent Canada.  2nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Heuser, C.W. 1997.   The complete book of plant 
propagation .  The Taunton Press, Newtown, 
Connecticut.   
 
Huxley, A. 1992.   The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillan Press, New York, New York. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C. Bell 1968.   Manual 
of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  The 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Thomas, G.S. 1990.   Perennial garden plants .  J.M. 
Dent & Sons, London 
 
Tiner, R.W., Jr. 1987.   A field guide to the coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States .  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.