Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOFTSTEM BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus 
tabernaemontani (K.C. Gmel.)  Palla 
Plant Symbol = SCTA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
Alternative Names 
great bulrush, soft-stemmed bulrush, common 
bulrush, giant bulrush, bull whip,  Scirpus validus 
(SCVA) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans wove the stems of 
softstem bulrush into mats (Guard 1995).  The dried 
beaten rootstocks were used by some Indian tribes as 
meal for bread, while the young tip of the rootstock  was edible and reputed to serve as a thirst-quencher; 
the boiled young roots yield sweet syrup (Steyermark 
1963). 
 
Wildlife
: Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani  provide 
food and cover for fish, muskrats, raccoons, and 
otters (Guard 1995).  The hard-coated fruits are an 
important and common food source for ducks, shore 
birds, and marsh birds (Ibid.).  This species provide 
nesting cover for water birds, waterfowl, and marsh 
wrens.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Sciences Institute @ PLANTS 
 
Description 
General : Sedge family (Cyperaceae).  Soft-stem 
bulrush  Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani  is a tall, 
perennial, herbaceous plant th at grows up to ten feet 
tall.  The leaves are highly modified into long sheaths 
that closely girdle stem bases (Guard 1995).  The 
flowers are borne in an op en inflorescence of many 
stalked, budlike spikelets, covered by reddish brown 
scales below the top of the stem (Tiner 1987).  The 
fruit is a brownish gray achene (Ibid.). 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Soft-stem bulrush occurs in deep or shallow water, or 
in muddy or marshy ground around lakes, ponds, 
streams, and wooded wetlands (Guard 1995).  This 
species usually occurs in poorly drained soil.  It 
grows better in saline conditions than in fresh water, 
and it tolerates a wide range of salinity. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Schoenoplectus 
tabernaemontani  seeds should be sown in a cold 
frame as soon as they are ripe in a pot standing in 
three centimeters of water.  The seeds germinate 
quickly.  When they are large enough to handle, large 
divisions can be planted directly into their permanent 
positions in early summer.  Place smaller divisions in 
pots and grow them in a cold frame, planting them 
when they are well established in the summer.

Management 
Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani can survive 
following periodic draining and flooding of marshes.  
However, softstem bulrush stands can be reduced if 
prolonged draining and flooding continuously occurs. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Braun, L.E. 1967.  The monocotyledoneae from cat-
tails to orchids .  The Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.   Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada .  2
nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Guard, J.B. 1995.   Wetland plants of Oregon and 
Washington .  Lone Pine Publishing, Redmond, 
Washington. 
 
Kantrud, H.A., J.B. Miller, & A.G. Van Der Valk 
1989.   Vegetation of wetlands of the prairie pothole 
region .  In: Northern prairie wetlands.  Iowa State 
University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Magee, D.W. 1981.   Freshwater wetlands: a guide to 
common indicator plants of the northeast .  University 
of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, Massachusetts. 
Munz, P.A. 1965.   A California flora.  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California. 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963.   Flora of Missouri.  The 
Iowa State University Press, Ames Iowa. 
 
Strausbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.   Flora of West 
Virginia .  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., Morgantown, 
West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.   Flora of 
the Great Plains .  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.