Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE SAGE 
Salvia apiana Jepson 
Plant Symbol = SAAP2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: White sage seeds were one component 
in pinole, which was a staple food of the Indians of 
the Pacific coast (Barrows 1977).  Seeds were 
collected with a seed beater  basket and flat basket, 
and were parched and ground into meal.  The 
Cahuillas of southern California used this meal to 
create a mix with one part meal, three parts wheat 
flour, and a little sugar.  This mixture was eaten dry, 
mixed with water to form gruel, or baked into little 
cakes or biscuits.  The seeds were harvested in 
quantity and stored in baskets in the home.  The 
tribes, north of Santa Barbara, kept small baskets of 
seeds and other foodstuffs on hand, with some stored 
for the winter.  The Chumash and other California 
tribes also ate leaves and stems of white sage.  
 
The Cahuilla, Costanoan, Diegeño, Kawaiisu, and 
Maidu tribes of California used white sage or chia 
seeds to clean and heal thei r eyes (Strike 1994).  One 
method was to place a few  Salvia seeds in their eyes 
at bedtime.  During the night, the seeds would swell 
and become gelatinous.  Moving around under the 
eyelids during sleep, the seeds collected any foreign 
substances on the eyeballs.   In the morning the seeds 
were removed, leaving the eyes clear and free of 
contaminants.  Cahuilla women drank an infusion of 
white sage roots after giving birth to remove the 
afterbirth and promote internal healing.  White sage  seeds were eaten by the Cahuilla to cure colds.  The 
Diegueño used white sage tea for this purpose.  
Leaves of white sage were smoked, made into a tea, 
and used in sweathouses to cure colds.  White sage 
leaves were also used by the Diegueño as a shampoo 
to clean their hair and to 
keep it from turning gray.  
Crushed leaves were rubbed on the body to eliminate 
body odor; this was often done by Cahuilla men 
before they went hunting.  The smoke from burning 
white sage is used widely by many Native groups as 
part of their purification ceremonies.  White sage is 
widely valued and cherished among many Indians 
and other cultures today, prized for its soft 
"feminine" qualities (Stevens, unpublished field 
notes, 1998). 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Today the leaves and stems of  Salvia apiana are 
gathered, dried, and used for smudging by many 
tribes around the country.  The Chumash and other 
California Indian people are concerned about over-
harvesting and disrespect of this plant for commercial 
purposes.   
 
Sage tea will decrease sweating, salivation, milk 
secretions, and mucous secretions of the sinuses, 
throat, and lungs (Moore 1979).  It is the best herbal 
treatment for decreasing lact ation during weaning in 
either animals or humans.  A cold cup of the tea is a 
good stomach tonic.  The lukewarm tea is sufficiently 
bacteriostatic and astringent to make it useful for 
treating nearly all sore throats, first gargled and then 
drunk.  The crushed leaves are made into a reliable 
uterine hemostatic tea, good for heavy menstruation 
but inadvisable for the new mother who plans to 
nurse. 
 
Wildlife : White sage is an important browse plant for 
deer, antelope, elk, mountain sheep, and rabbits.  The 
flowers attract hummingbirds, butterflies, bees, and 
other insects.  Small mammals, sparrows, grouse, and 
quail eat the seeds.   Salvia apiana is a beautiful low 
maintenance ornamental plant. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Mint Family (Lamiaceae).  White sage is a 
perennial sub-shrub less than 1 m tall.  Leaves are

generally 4-8 cm long, lanceolate, with a tapered base 
and minute teeth.  The leaves are simple, with dense 
hairs and a distinctive fragrance.  The inflorescence is 
many-flowered raceme with white to pale lavender 
blossoms.  The fruits are light brown, shiny nutlets.    
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  White sage generally occurs at elevations below 
1500 m.  It is common on dry slopes in coastal-sage 
scrub, chaparral, and yellow pine forests.  It occurs in 
the South Coast, Transverse Ranges, Peninsular 
Ranges, and the western edge of the Desert Province.  
Salvia apiana  extends south from southern California 
to Baja California.  
 
Establishment 
Salvia apiana requires well-drained, fairly dry soils 
and full sun.  Excessive watering of white sage, 
especially during summer months, is likely to kill the 
plant.  White sage is particularly good for stabilizing 
or restoring disturbed or degraded areas.  Bart 
O’Brien, Director of Horticulture, Rancho Santa Ana 
Botanic Garden and Rick Hepting, Theatrum 
Botanicum, provided the following horticultural 
information: 
 
Seeds:  Salvia apiana  propagates more easily from 
seed than from cuttings.  Plant seeds in flats in an 
appropriate planting soil.  Seeds may respond to 
light, so plant seeds at the soil surface or plant 1/8" to 
1/4" in a well-drained soil mix.  Immediately after 
planting, soak flats thoroughly, and then water 
sparingly as needed.  Seeds germinate in 2-3 weeks at 
20 to 30° C (68 to 86° F).  Plant the seedlings into 2" 
or 4" pots after they grow 2-4 leaves beyond the 
cotyledons.  Water as needed, but do not overwater.  
Salvia apiana  plants grow rapidly; they are usually 
ready to outplant in 6 months to a year.  It is best to 
outplant in the fall; don't plant in the summer. 
 
Cuttings : Gather soft wood cuttings of young 
vegetative shoots before the plant has flowered.  The 
rooting ability of these cuttings is enhanced by 
collection and preparation in the spring.  Collect 
cuttings 3-4 inches long, and remove the lowest pair 
of leaves.  Dipping the basal 1-2 inch portion of the 
cutting in rooting hormones enhances rooting.  Bury 
the cuttings so that the lowest node is ½ inch under 
ground.  Plants will root quickly if they are going to 
survive.  If the cutting material is too hard, rooting 
may take a long time, or cuttings won't ever root.  If 
the cutting material is too soft, it will rot.  It takes 
some experience to collect the cuttings at the right 
time.  Cuttings establish more readily if kept warm  under the flats for weeks at 20 to 30° C (68 to 86° F). 
Once roots are established on cuttings, plant them in 
2" or 4" pots.  Pot them in bigger containers as the 
plants grow.  
Salvia apiana  grows rapidly, so it is 
usually ready to out-plant in 6 months to a year in 
southern California (warmer climates).  In northern 
California, out-plant when the plants are a year old 
because the winters are sometimes too severe for 
them.  It is best to outplant in the fall; don't plant in 
the summer. 
 
Management 
Horticultural management includes avoiding over-
watering seedlings and plants.  Plants will mildew if 
they experience excessive humidity or too much 
shade.  Aphids can be a problem for younger plants, 
particularly in the spring.   As the plants grow older, 
they are fairly resistant to herbivores. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: Traditional 
management of white sage includes the following: 
•   Pruning leaves and branches to stimulate new 
growth.   
•  Since this is a valued medicine plant, prayer, 
thanksgiving, and ceremony are important 
components of harvest and renewal.   
•  Burning occurred during September and October 
after seeds ripened.   Salvia species were burned 
for plant improvemen t by the Cupreño, 
Mountain Cahuilla, Northern Digueño, and 
Southern Digueño. 
•   Seeds were planted from wild plants.  A 
Diegueño woman reported her people always 
cleared a small spot near their dwelling to plant 
seeds of plants with gr eens, seeds, or roots. 
•  Ownership of seed-gathering grounds promoted 
long term care and sustainable harvest practices.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily av ailable from native plant 
nurseries throughout its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly 
Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, K.M. 1993.  Native Californians as 
ancient and contemporary cultivators .  IN: Thomas 
C. Blackburn and Kat Anderson (eds.).  Before the 
wilderness.  Environmental management by native 
Californians. Pages 151-174.  Ballena Press.

Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933. Miwok material 
culture.  Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Yosemite 
Association, Yosemite National Park, California.  
388 pp. 
 
Barrows, D.P. 1977.   Ethno-botany of the Coahuilla 
Indians .  Malki Museum Press. Morongo Indian 
Reservation, Banning, California.  82 pp. 
 
Bean, L.J. & H.W. Lawton 1993.   Some explanations 
for the rise of cultural complexity in native California 
with comments on proto-agriculture and Agriculture .  
IN: Thomas C. Blackburn and Kat Anderson ( eds .)  
Before the wilderness.  Environmental management 
by native Californians.  Pages 27-54.  Ballena Press. 
 
Clebsch, B. 1997.   A book of Salvias.  Sages for every 
garden.  Timber Press, Inc.  220 pp.  
 
Hartmann, H. T., D. E. Kester, F. T. Davies, Jr. 1990.  
Plant propagation principles and practices .  Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  647 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.)  1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C.,  H. S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants.  A guide to wildlife 
food habits .  Dover Publications, Inc., New York.  
500 pp. 
 
Mayer, K. E. & W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. (ed.) 1988.   A 
guide to wildlife habitats of California .  USDA 
Forest Service, California Department of Fish and 
Game, and PG&E.  
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants .  
Mendocino County Historical Society.  81 pp. 
 
O’Brien, B.C. 1998.   California’s Salvias (part 2).   
The Southern California Gardener 7(3):2-5 
 
O’Brien, B.C. 1997.   California’s Salvias (part 1) .  
The Southern California Gardener 7(2):2-5. 
 
O’Brien, B.C. 1997.   Horticulture and classification 
of the section Audibertia of the Genus Salvia.   IN: 
Out of the wild and into the garden II: California’s 
horticulturally significant plants .  1995 Symposium 
Proceedings Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden 
Occasional Publications  #2.  Pages 136-163. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.  Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians.  Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California's  indigenous plants
.  Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany.  220 pp. 
 
Timbrook, J., J.R. Johnson, & D.D. Earle 1993.  
Vegetation burning by the Chumash . IN: Thomas C. 
Blackburn and Kat Anderson. (eds .).  Before the 
wilderness.  Environmental management by native 
Californians .  Pages 117-150.  Ballena Press.  
 
USDA, NRCS 1999.   The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
Version: 990518. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Bart O’Brien 
Director of Horticulture, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic 
Garden, Claremont, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.