Plant Guide
PURPLE SAGE 
Salvia dorrii (Kellogg) Abrams  
Plant Symbol = SADO4 
 
Contributed by:   NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA  
 
 Salvia dorrii.  Pamela Pavek, Pullman Plant Materials 
Center
 
Alternate Names  
Dorr sage, Grayball sage, desert sage, tobacco sage  
 
Uses  
Ornamental:  Purple sage is an attractive, low -
maintenance, drought -tolerant shrub that can be used 
as an accent plant or small hedge in landscaped areas 
(Mee et al. 2003).  It will maintain its rounded shape 
without pruning (Mee et al. 2003) and is resistant to 
browsing by deer and rabbits (High Country Gardens 
2010).  
 
Pollinators:  Purple sage provides nectar and pollen 
for bees, butter flies and moths.  
 
Range revegetation : This plant can be used for 
revegetation and diversification of rangeland, 
particularly in harsh, rocky sites.  
Forage:   Purple sage is undesirable as forage to both 
livestock and wildlife.  
 
Ethnobotanical:   This plant w as used for multiple 
medicinal and cultural purposes by tribes throughout 
its range.  People of the Kawasiiu, Paiute, Shoshoni, 
Washoe and Okanagan -Colville tribes made infusions 
and decoctions of the leaves and stems of purple sage 
for a cold remedy.  The y also made poultices of the  leaves to apply to the chest, smoked dried leaves and 
made steam baths with the leaves to ease congestion.  
Infusions, decoctions, washes and poultices of this 
plant were also used to treat headaches, 
stomachaches, fever, influ
enza, pneumonia, 
gonorrhea, swollen leg veins, eye problems and 
general illness (Native American Ethnobotany 
Database 2010).  The Hopi used smoke and an 
infusion of the plant to alleviate epilepsy and 
faintness and the Kawaiisu threw the plant into fire to  
keep away spirits and ghosts (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database 2010).   The Hopi, Kumiai, 
and Paipai also used the plant to treat stomachaches, 
headaches and other medical conditions (Huisinga 
2001).  
 
Status  
S alvia  dorrii  ssp. mearnsii  is listed by th e United 
States Forest Service as a sensitive species in Arizona 
due to its limited distribution and threats to its 
survival (Huisinga 2001).  Consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g.,  threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
 
 
Salvia dorrii  flowers.  Pamela Pavek, Pullman Plant 
Materials Center
 
Description  
General :  Mint family (Lamiaceae).   Salvia dorrii is a 
woody  perennial shrub that grows to 20 to 80 cm (8 
to 32 in) tall and  20 to 150 cm (24 to 36 in) wide.  It 
has an upright to spreading form, with the exception 
of  S. dorrii ssp.  dorrii var. clokeyi   which forms mats 
and occasionally roots at the nodes (Strachan  1982).  
The plant has rough bark that peels off the mature 
woody branches.  Leaves are  opposite, oval, 1.5 to 4 
cm (0.6 to 1.6 in) long, 0.5 to 1.5 cm (0.2 to 0.6 in) 
wide, are widest at the tip and taper to the stem.  
Leaves have a smooth margin, are sil ver-gray,