SEASIDE GOLDENROD 
Solidago sempervirens L. 
Plant Symbol = SOSE 
Seaside goldenrod (Solidago simpervirens  L.) Photo by, William 
Skaradek, USDA NRCS.  
Alternate Names 
Common Names:   
salt -marsh goldenrod  
 
Scientific Names:   
Aster sempervirens  (L) Kuntze;  
A. mexicanus ;  
Solidago mexicana  L.;  
S. sempervirens  subsp.  mexicana ;  
S. sempervirens  var.  Mexicana  
Description  
General :  Seaside goldenrod is a native, late- flowering 
perennial forb. It may grow up to 6 f t tall at maturity, 
blooming August through October. The terminal 
flowering heads are dense, clustered spikes of bright 
yellow flowers that are larger  than those of other 
goldenrod species.  
 
The leaves are fleshy, somewhat succulent, dark green, 
oblong, and lance -shaped. They are arranged alternately 
along the entire length of the stem. The leaves at the base 
are the largest,  up to 8 in long and ½ – 1 ½ in wide, 
gradually decreasing in size towards the top of the plant.   
 
In winter, the plant ’s persistent whitened leaves, coarse 
stalks, and dried flower parts  make it easily identifiable. 
Red leaves sprout i n late February and early March, and 
soon become dark green. From late August to early 
October, its bright yellow flowers provide an attractive 
contrast to its lush, thick, green vegetation.  
 
Seaside goldenrod is a short -day perennial (flowering 
coincides with shortened photoperiods). So that at some 
poi nt as a critical dark periods lengthens, flowering is  initiated. 
The flowers are an important food/energy source 
for fall migrating monarch butterflies traveling the 
Atlantic coastal flyway.  This species can hybridize with 
rough -stemmed  goldenrod ( Solidago rugosa). 
 
The fruit of the seaside goldenrod is a capsule with a 
pappus in a single circle of bristles. The seeds require no 
cold stratification for germination. When buried, s eed 
viability decreases after the first year in both disturbed 
and undisturbed areas (Lee, 1993). Therefore, seaside 
goldenrod does not appear to have a persistent seed bank.  
 
Transition areas (areas of greater sand movement and 
accumulation) tend to have greater amounts of seed in the 
seed bank (up to 58 seeds/m
2) when compared to 
g rasslands (Lee, 1993). However, studies have also found 
germination of the plant limited to areas of minimal sand 
accumulation.  
 
Distribution :  Seaside goldenrod mainly grows east of the 
Mississippi. It grows in the northeast  from Canada and the 
Great  Lakes region,  south along the Mid -Atlantic  coast to 
Florida,  and as far west as Texas.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat :  Stands of seaside goldenrod colonize blowouts, 
grassl ands, and transition areas.  Seaside goldenrod often 
occurs with other native dune plants such as coastal 
panicgrass ( Panicum amarum ), switchgrass ( Panicum 
virgatum ), salt meadow cordgrass ( Spartina patens), and 
American beachgrass ( Ammophila breviligulata) . 
Adaptation  
Seaside goldenrod can  grow  in coarse to medium infertile 
soil s with a pH range from 5.5 –7.5.  Seaside goldenrod is 
well adapted to coastal habitats including the backside of 
primary dunes, low secondary dunes, and edges of salt 
marshes. It has some tolerance for drought, allowing it to 
survive in the dry conditions of the dunes. Seaside 
goldenrod is  also  tolerant of high salinity, salt spray, and 
fire.  
Uses  
Wildlife Use:  Like many  Solidago spp., seaside goldenrod 
is an important resource for over -wintering , gall -
producing insects. Some of these insects are predatory 
wasps that are beneficial to have near crops. In addition, 
gall larvae provide an excellent so urce of nutrition in the 
winter for birds such as the chickadee or woodpecker. It 
increases  the value of wildlife habitat by providing food 
and shelter for butterflies, birds, and small mammals. The 
migrating monarch butterfly uses seaside goldenrod as 
one  of its primary food sources in the fall.  
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

Along with American beachgrass (Ammophila 
breviligulata ), seaside goldenrod plays an important role 
in providing nesting habitat between primary and 
secondary dunes for birds such as willets ( Catoptrophorus 
semipal matus), killdeer ( Charadrius vociferous ), piping 
plovers ( Charadrius melodus ), and black skimmers 
( Rynchops niger )(Safina and Burger, 1983).  
 
Erosion Control:  Seaside goldenrod is a native perennial 
that has been successfully used in dune stabilization and 
erosion control projects. Stems arise from short, stocky 
rhizomes. The root -length is a minimum of 14 in and 
provides excellent erosion control. Seaside golde nrod 
initiate s dune formation by trapping sand and debris. Sites 
with seaside goldenrod help the  secondary establishment 
of annual forbs such as seaside sandmat ( Euphorbia 
polygonifolia ), and American searocket ( Cakile edentula) 
(Ailstock, n.d.).  
Ethnobotany  
While the medicinal value of this particular species of 
goldenrod remains unknown, many species in the  
Solidago  genus have been used for generations as a 
natural remedy for a variety of health conditions (ex. S. 
Canadensis  and  S. vigaurea).  Thomas Edison explored 
ways of using latex from the seaside goldenrod for the 
production of natural rub ber (caoutchouc).  
Status  
Threatened or Endangered:   No. 
Wetland Indicator:  FACW (Facultative Wetland). 
Seaside goldenrod usually occurs in wetlands, but may 
occur in non- wetlands. 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/
)  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
Planting Guidelines 
Seaside golden rod may be propagated by seed or division. 
Currently the only developed method of establishing seed 
production plots and dune restoration plantings is  with 
containerized stock transplanted in late winter to early 
spring.   
 
The first year of establishment is the most critical for 
survival. Once the stand is established, it requires little 
maintenance and only minimal irrigation due to its ability 
to withstand hot and dry conditions. Producers should 
irrigate if an extended dr y period occurs. Fertilization will 
increase vigor of seaside goldenrod, but is not necessary 
for survival.  
 
To establish, prepare a clean, weed -free seedbed. Start 
s eeds in 2 -inch deep trays, grown into vegetative plugs, 
planted every 2 feet in rows with 3 feet in between 
centers. When planting into a dune site, it is important to  keep the substrate attached to the roots of the seedling to 
prevent desiccation (Shumway, 2008). 
 
 
Growing plants with  American beachgrass ( Ammophila 
breviligulata ) in both broadcast and seed -drilled 
experimental plots  improves production . These nurse 
crops may lower temperature and increase moisture for 
seaside goldenrod populations. S. sempervirens  has 
dehydromatricaria ester in the roots (Lam et al., 1992). 
This allelopath ic compound is lethal to nematodes and 
inhibits  the growth of rice seedlings.  
Management  
Producers often manage weeds with a pre -emergent 
herbicide and after establishment with mechanical 
cultivation.  The decline in health of the closely associated 
Americ an beachgrass could be used to signal when 
goldenrod should be fertilized.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
It has been reported that the release of root exudates by 
seaside goldenrod produce allelochemicals that negatively 
affect the growth of nearby vegetat ion. Studies by 
C heplick and Aliotta (2009) found that seaside goldenrod 
has a negative effect on the growth of native grasses such 
as purple sandgrass ( Triplasis purpurea) and sanddune 
sandbur ( Cenchrus tribuloides ). Being a perennial, 
seaside goldenrod should also have a distinct advantage 
over annuals when competing for limited resources. 
Nevertheless, because seaside goldenrod has a moderate 
growth rate, a shorter life span than other  Solidago  sp p., a 
limited ability to spread through seed, and produce s 
seedlings with low vigor, it is not considered an invasive 
plant.  
 
Goldenrods in general are popular hosts to ove rwintering 
gall insects. Approximately  half of all gall insects are lost 
to predation. Three common herbivores that feed on 
seaside goldenrod  are the goldenrod leaf miner 
( Microrhopala vittata), red goldenrod aphid ( Uroleucon 
pieloui ) and the goldenrod leaf beetle ( Trirhabda 
Canadensis ).The goldenrod leaf miner feeds on the upper 
leaves, creating numerous small holes. Unlike aphids, 
population  densities for the goldenrod leaf miner remain 
low and only occasionally create severe damage. The 
goldenrod leaf beetle is strongly attracted to the odor of 
the host plant S. sempervirens , and has been shown to 
prefer it to the odor of non- host plants (Puttick et al., 
1988). There is no known research suggesting that S. 
sempervirens  can negatively affect the growth of nearby 
food crops.   
There is no significant herbivory recorded. Coastal or 
island herbivores such as rabbits and deer will 
occasionally brows e plants in fall and winter.   
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no environmental concerns  with use of this 
plant.

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how t o use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instruc tions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to  
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
nam ed, and other products may be equally effective.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Researchers are trying to develop effective methods to 
grow seaside goldenrod from  direct seeding in a dune 
s etting. Seed consistently has  good germination rates 
when grown in controlled settings such as a  greenhouse or 
germination chamber, but stands fail to develop  when 
directly seeded in dune trials.  Currently the best way to 
propagate the plant is with vegetative plugs. The seed has 
a 3 -year average of 70 % germination from 2009– 2011 at 
the Cape May PMC, in Cape May, NJ.  
 
S easide goldenrod produced 75 lb/ac  of seed (first y ear of 
establishment) to 220 lb/ac  of seed (2 years after 
establishment) at the Plant Materials Center. Plants were 
sown 1.5 f t apart, in r ows with 3.5 ft between centers. For 
this same population, the germination rate was 72 %  after 
one  year of storage at 40° F and 64 % after two years of 
storage. The plant bed was prepared with a pre- emergent 
herbicide and the weeds in the inter -rows were c ultivated 
once per season.  
 
C old stratification and use of a light source can break 
dormancy and encourage germination. Seed will 
germinate only on the surface of sand at high 
temperatures.  These seeds can easily dry out and die if 
there is no supplemental  moisture or irrigation.  Cross -
pollination is required for viable seed . There are 
approximately 700,000 seeds/lb.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
Monarch G ermplasm seaside goldenrod is a source-
identified composite germpla sm from several native 
populations developed by the Cape May Plant Materials 
Center in Cape May, NJ. Seed  was collected from natural 
stands among the dunes of several Mid- Atlantic States: 
New Jersey, Delaware, and the eastern shore of Virginia.  
Cape May Plant Materials Center has evaluated s easide 
goldenrod for over ten years.  
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 
your local land grant university, local extension  or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area . 
 
Literature Cited  
Ailstock, M.S. n.d. The in -vitro propagation of seaside 
goldenrod  Solidago sempervirens . Anne Arundel  Community College, Arnold, Maryland. 
http://im
ages.library.wisc.edu/EcoNatRes/EFacs/Wet
lands/Wetlands12/reference/econatres.wetlands12.i00
10.pdf (accessed: 02 Feb. 2012)  
Austin, D. F. 2004. Florida ethnobotany. CRC Press,  Boca Raton, FL. p. 1075.  
Cheplick, G.P., and M. Aliotta. 2009. The abundance and  
size of annual herbs in a coastal beach community is 
related to their distance from seaside goldenrod 
( Solidago sempervirens ). J. Torr. Bot. Soc. 136 (1): 
102- 109. 
Duncan, W.H., and M. B. Duncan. 1987. Seaside plants  of the gulf and Atlantic coasts. Smithsonian 
Institution Press, Washington, D.C. p. 298.  
Lam, J., L.P. Christensen, T. Farch, and T. Thomasen.  1992. Acetylenes from the roots of Solidago  species. 
Phytochemistry 31(12): 4159- 4161.  
Lee, P.C. 1993. The effect of seed dispersal limitations on  the spatial distribution of a gap species, seaside 
goldenrod  (Solidago sempervirens).  Can. J . Bot. 71: 
978  -984.  
Puttick, G.M., P.A. Morrow, and P.W. Lequesne. 1988. 
Trirhabda canadensis  (Coleoptera:Chrysomelidae 
responses to plant odors. J. Chem. Ecol., 14 (8): 
1671- 1686. 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/u6150263v540
7623/fulltext.pdf (accessed: 02 Feb. 2012)  
Radford, A.E, H.E Ahles, and C. R. Bell. 1968. Manual of  the vascular flora of the Carolinas. The University of 
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC . 
Safina, C., and J. Burger. 1983. Effects of human  disturbance on reproductive success in the black 
skimmer. Condor. March -April. 85(2): 164- 171. 
Shumway, S.W. 2008. Atlantic seashore: beach ecology  from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras. A Falcon 
Guide.  Morris Book Publishing, LLC, China.  
The University of Texas at Austin. 2012. Native plant  database. Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. 
Austin, Texas. 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant
=SOSE (accessed: 20 Jan. 2012)  
USDA -ARS GRIN. Dr. Duke’s phytochemical and 
ethnobotanical databases. http://www.ars -
grin.gov/cgi -bin/duke/ethnobot.pl (accessed: 31 Jan. 
2012)  
 
Citation  
Sheahan, C.M. 2014. Plant Guide for seaside goldenrod 
( Solidago sempervirens ). USDA- Natural Resources 
C onservation  Service, Cape May Plant Materials Center. 
Cape May, 08210.  
Published   February, 2014 
Edited: 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
  and visit the

PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the   
Plant Materials Program Web site : 
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER