Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SNOWBERRY 
Symphoricarpos albus  (L.) 
Blake 
Plant Symbol = SYAL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
White coralberry, common snowberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Some southern groups made brooms 
out of the branches and the Gitksan hollowed out the 
twigs to make pipe-stems (MacKinnon, Pojar, & 
Coupe´ 1992).  One or two  of the berries were eaten 
by the Stl’atl’imx to settle the stomach after too much 
fatty food (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  An infusion 
of the fruit was used as ey ewash for sore eyes and the 
berries were rubbed on the skin as treatment for 
burns, rashes, and sores (Moerman 1998).  A 
decoction of the roots and stems was used in the 
treatment of the inability to urinate, venereal 
diseases, tuberculosis and the fevers associated with 
teething sickness (Ibid.).  A tea made from the roots  of this species was used to 
clear up afterbirth (Fielder 
1975).   
 
Wildlife : Snowberry is an important browse for many 
types of livestock and wildlife.  It is important for 
shelter and food for various birds and small 
mammals.   
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Saint Mary's College @ CalPhotos 
 
Description 
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Snowberry ( Symphoricarpos albus ) is a shrub or 
small tree that grows up to six meters tall.  The leaves 
are large, opposite, divided into five to seven leaflets, 
and toothed or irregularly lobed.  The fruits are white, 
berry like drupes, and one to one and a half 
centimeters in diameter.  Th e flowers are small, white 
to creamy, with a strong  unpleasant odor; numerous 
in a rounded or pyramidal parasol-like cluster (Pojar 
& MacKinnon 1994); blooming from mid May to 
July.  The fruits are roundish, dull-white berries 
about 3/8 inch in diameter, soon becoming blackish, 
ripening August or September (Grimm 1993).   
 
Distribution : Snowberry inhabits slopes and valley 
bottoms of the foothills of the Coast Ranges, the 
Sierra Nevada, and the mountains of southern 
California (McMinn 1939).  It extends northward to 
British Columbia and eastward to Pennsylvania and 
the New England states (Ibid.).   
 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
 
Adaptation 
Symphoricarpos albus  is found along stream banks, 
in swampy thickets, moist clearings and open forests 
at sea level to middle elevations (Pojar & MacKinnon 
1994).  It tolerates soil types but grows best in heavy 
clay soils.  Snowberry grows well in sun or shade.   
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed : Symphoricarpos albus  seeds 
are best sown in the fall after maturity.  Dormancy of 
this species is caused by hard seed coat and immature 
embryo, which can be broken by stratification in sand

and peat for 90 days at 77º, plus 180 days at 41ºF.  
When the seedlings are large enough to handle, place 
them into individual pots and grow them in the 
greenhouse for their first winter.  Plant seedlings into 
their permanent positions in late spring or early 
summer.   
 
Management 
Snowberry fruit contains low concentrations of a 
bitter principle, saponin, which foams in water.  It is 
very poorly absorbed by the body and can be broken 
down by thoroughly cooking the fruit.  Saponin is 
much more toxic to some creatures, such as fish, if 
eaten in large quantities.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Commonly available through native plant nurseries, 
except in the south.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Carter, J.C. 1997.   Trees and shrubs of New Mexico .  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & M.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens, Georgia. 
 
Fielder, M. 1975.   Plant medicine and folklore .  
Winchester Press, New York, New York. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
Canada .  2
nd ed.  New York Botanical Garden, New 
York, New York. 
 
Grimm, W.C. 1993.   The illustrated book of 
wildflowers and shrubs .  Stackpole Books, 
Mechanisburb, Pennsylvania. 
 
Guard, J.B. 1995.   Wetland plants of Oregon and 
Washington .  Lone Pine Publishing, Redmond, 
Washington. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.   The Jepson manual: higher 
plants of California .  University of California press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
MacKinnon, A, J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
McMinn, H.E. 1939.   An illustarted manual of 
California shrubs .  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. 
 
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Press. 
 
Prepared By: 
Jammie Favorite 
Formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.