Plant Guide
STREAMBED 
BRISTLEGRASS  
Setaria leucopila  
(Scribn. & Merr.) K. Schum.  
Plant Symbol = SELE6 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS 
Alternate Names  
Setaria macrostachya  Kunth in H.B.K.  
 
Setaria  vulpiseta  ( plains  bristlegrass) , Setaria texana 
(Texas bristlegrass) and  Setaria leucopila are all 
sometimes  included under the common name  of p lains 
bristlegrass .  It is suspected that all three species, along 
with  S. scheelei,  may hybridize.  (W hen ordering 
bristlegrass seed, it should be realized that the seed may 
belong to any of the se three species .  Much of the seed 
industry still uses the common name plains b ristlegrass to 
include  Setaria macrostachya, S. vulpiseta,  S. leucopila, 
and  S. texana .  However, t here are notable ecological and 
morphological differences between the three species 
which may affect the suitability of the plants for a specific 
site or pro ject). 
 
Uses  
Streambed  b ristlegrass  provides fair to good forage for 
livestock and wildlife.  It is a good seed producer, and its 
seeds can provid e a source of food for upland- bird 
habitats ( Hatch, Schuster and Drawe,  1999).  It is also 
useful for highway right -of -ways and ecosystem 
restoration.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values).
 
 
Description  
General : Streambed  bristlegrass is a native , warm season, 
perennial bunchgrass  which turns a pale whitish color at 
maturity.  It has stiffly erect stems and  can grow  up to 
three feet in height . Leaf blades are flat, 3 to 10 inches 
long and typi cally less than ¼ inch wide.  Sheaths have 
long hairs along the upper margins.   Plants produce a 
densely flowered, contracted seedhead that is generally 2 -
4 inches long and only about a ¼ inch thick.  The bristles, 
by which it gets its common name, are 4 to 15 mm long 
and are usually solitary below each spikelet.   Spikelets are 
from 2.1 -2.7 millimeters (Gould, 1975).  
 
Distribution :  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found mainly i n Texas, New Mexico and 
Arizona.  It also can be encountered in Colorado, 
Oklahoma, Arkansas and Florida.   
 
Habitat :   Streambed bristlegrass is generally found in the 
dry rangelands of Texas to Arizona with annual rainfall of 
10 to 26 inches.  In the west  it occurs at elevations of 
3,000 to 7,000 feet (Gay and Dwyer, 1980).  It is located 
on bottomlands and alluvial flats as well as well- drained, 
dry, open sites.  However, it predominates on loamy 
bottomland, clay flat, and saline clay range sites.  It is 
associated with false Rhodes grass, pink pappusgrass, and 
Arizona cottontop.  
 
Adaptation  
Streambed  bristlegrass is found on open dry ground, in 
dry woods, and on well drained , sandy loam soils .  I n 
Texas i t most often is found  on clay to clay loam soils . 
 
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool -season weeds, streambed 
bristlegrass can be planted in the fall.  In Arizona and 
New Mexico planting should be timed to catch the 
summer monsoons.  Establish a clean, weed -free seedbed 
by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site 
should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.    
 
Streambed bristlegras s is best seeded using a grass drill to 
ensure a good planting of the small seed.  Broadcast 
seeding may be used in areas not easily planted with a 
drill, but some type of additional coverage such as culti -
packing or light dragging will be beneficial to en sure 
good seed to soil contact.