Plant Guide
SHORTSPINE 
HORSEBRUSH  
Tetradymia spinosa Hook. & Arn.  
Plant Symbol = TESP2 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Shortspine horsebrush.  Photo by Matt Lavin, Montana State 
University  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  catclaw horsebrush, 
cottonthorn  
Uses  
Shortspine horsebrush is seldom used by livestock or 
wildlife except in early spring when young shoots and 
buds may be consumed.  Palatability is rated as poor 
(H oward, 2002).  It provides some  cover for small 
animals and helps stabilize soil on erodible desert sites 
that are sparsely vegetated.  The species can be poisonous 
to  domestic sheep .  It is pollinated  by moths, bees  
(including honey bees) , flies, beetles, and other insects 
(Howard, 2002).  
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, sta te 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Ethnobotany  
The Western Shoshone Indians used shortspine 
horsebrush concoctions as external medicine and used the 
spines as piercing instruments (Howard, 2002).
 
Description  
General :  Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Shortspine 
horsebrush is a native, deciduous, taprooted, much-
branche d shrub 5 -12 dm  (19 -47 in)  tall and usually as 
wide as it is tall.   Rhizomes extend from the parent plant 
to about 30 cm (12 in) and it sprouts from the root crown.  
Primary leave s form into spines 5- 25 cm  (1.97- 9.84 in)  
long.  Secondary leaves are green, glabrous, linear -
filiform to spatulate, up to 1 cm (0.39 in) long.  One or 
two  bright yellow f lowers occur in the  axil of  the  spines.  
The flower heads have 4 -6 bra cts.  Achenes are very 
densely pubescent with very long, erect, white hairs that 
usually conceal the scanty and fragile pappus.  
Chromosome number is 2n=60.   There are 2 varieties 
recognized, var. spinosa  and var. longispina.   
The variety spinosa  has recu rved  spines 0.5 -1.5 cm  (0.20-
0.59 in)  long and is more common while variety 
longispina  has spines mostly 1.5 -5 cm (0.59- 1.97 in) long 
and are mostly straight and is found in the southwestern 
part of the species range (Cronquist et al.,  1994;  Flora of 
North  America, online; Jepson Flora Project, online).  
 
Distribution :  Shortspine horsebrush occurs from 
Montana south to New Mexico and west to the Pacific 
coast with the exception of Arizona and Washington.   For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant P rofile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Shortspine horsebrush is common throughout 
the Great Basin and Mojave Desert but does not occur in 
pure stands.  Isolated individuals or small colonies are 
usually found in saltbush ( Atriplex spp.) scrub, low 
elevation sagebrush ( Artemisia spp.) and pinyon- juniper 
( Pinus -Juniperus  spp.) communities.  Common associated 
species in the Great Basin are shadscale ( Atriplex 
confertifolia ), winterfat ( Krascheninnikovia lanata)  and 
broom snakeweed ( Gutierrezia sarothrae ).  In Nevada 
and California  it is commonly found in  black greasewood 
( Sarcobatus  vermiculatus ) –  shadscale communities.  It 
also occurs in sagebrush, creosotebush ( Larrea 
tridentata ), singleleaf pinyon ( Pinus monophylla) and

Joshua tree (Yucca brevifolia ) communities in California 
(Howard, 2002).  
Adaptation  
Shortspine horsebrush occurs on dry, plains, foothills and 
alkali sinks, often on harsh, bare ground with elevations 
ranging from 1,400 to 7,900 feet  (426- 2408 m) .  It grows 
on shallow  to deep soils with clay and loam textures and 
pH 6.5- 8.2.  Average annual precipitation ranges from 8 -
14 inches  (203- 356 mm) .  Flowering occurs from April to 
June (Howard, 2002; PLANTS database).  
Establishment  
Documented establishment of plants from seed  is rare.  
Seedling s have been observed on a prescribed fire in 
Oregon  (Howard, 2002) .  There is no i nformation on 
shortspine horsebrush seed production, viability, and 
seedling establishment.   Seed of Tetradymia spp. may be 
pre -chilled for 4 -6 weeks  to  enhance germination  (Young 
and Young, 1992) . 
Management  
Because shortspine horsebrush is usually scattered as 
individual plants or in small colonies  and is seldom 
utilized by browsers , it has not caused large losses of 
sheep.  However, all species of  Tetra dymia  should be 
considered toxic .  The most toxic species is T. glabrata.   
Sheep that feed on horsebrush species  just following or in 
conjunction with consumption  of black sagebrush 
( Artemisia nova ) or big sagebrush ( A. tridentata ) and then 
are exposed to bright sunlight may develop a 
characteristic swelling of the lips, ears, and face, 
commonly referred to as “bighead”.   Sheep grazing 
horsebrush  in the absence of sagebrush m ay  still die 
without developing  bighead .  They suffer from swollen, 
engorged liver with severe fatty changes and low grade 
nephritis (inflammation of nephrons) of the kidney along 
with hemor rhaging of the sub -skin and organ linings.  
Abortions may also occur (Burrows and Tyrl, 2001; 
Panter  et al., 2011).  Geographic distribution of the 
different  species of Tetradymia  generally corresponds to 
distribution of disease caused from  plant consumption 
(Burrows and Tyrl, 2001).  
 
Most sheep losses occur during stormy periods when 
sheep change their grazing habits as they are trailed 
through areas  of  horsebrush  when desirable forage is 
lacking.  H ungry/thirsty sheep may also eat toxic amounts 
of horsebrush after they are watered.  The plant  is 
especially dangerous during the bud stage (Panter  et al. , 
2011).  Poisoning has resulted in losses of as m any as 
1,000 sheep at a time (Burrows and Tyrl, 2001).  The best 
management advice is to avoid these conditions or 
situations as much as possible.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests of shortspine horsebrush.  
  Environmental Concerns
 
Short spine horsebrush is a native shrub  found scattered or 
in small colonies .  It can spread from seed and rhizomes 
from the root crown.  Increased fire frequencies on 
sagebrush dominated rangelands caused by exclusion of 
wildfire resulting in invasion of annua l grasses may also 
favor shortspine horsebrush and other sprouting shrubs 
over sagebrush (Howard, 2002). 
Control  
There is no published information on the control of 
shortspine horsebrush.   Please contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA  NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
Seed and Plant Production  
No i nformation on the establishment of s hortspine 
horsebrush  was found. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no commercial releases of shortspine 
horsebrush.  There are several commercial sources of seed 
and plants (California Native Plant Link, Online).  
References  
Burrows, G., Tyrl, R. 2001.  Toxic Plants of North 
America.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa.  
1342 p.  
California Native Plant Link Exchange.  Tetradymia  spinosa. [Online].  http://www.cnplx.info/nplx 
(Accessed April 5, 2012)  
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A. Holmgren N., Reveal, J., 
Holmgren, P.  Asterales.  I ntermountain Flora.  
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 
Volume Five. The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York.  496 p.  
Flora of North America.  Tetradymia spinosa. [Online]   http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx  (Accessed 
April 5, 2012)  
Howard,  J. 2002.  Tetradymia spinosa.  In: Fire Effects 
Information System [Online]. U .S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station,  Fire Sciences L aboratory.  
http:www.fs.fed .us/database/feis/plants/shrub/tetspi/a
ll.htm l (Accessed April 4, 2012)  
Jepson Flora Project.  Tetradymia spinosa. [Online]   http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi -bin/get  (Accessed 
April 5, 2012)  
Panter, K., Ralphs, M., Pfister, J., Gardner, D., 
Stegelmeier, B., Lee, S., Welch, K., Green, B., Davis, 
T., Coo k, D. 2011.  Plants Poisonous to Livestock in 
the Western States. United States Department of

Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Natural Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Agriculture Information Bulletin Number 415. 120 p.  
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
PLANTS Database. Tetradymia spinosa.  [Online].   http://plants.usda.gov . U.S. Department of 
Published April 2012  
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.   Edited: 
(Accessed April 4, 2012).  
10Apr2012ls;11Apr2012djt;16Apr2012jab;24Apr2012gm  
Young, J. and Young C. 1992.  Seeds of Woody Plants in 
North America.  Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon.    
407 p.  
  For more information about this and other plants, please 
Prepared By : 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
Aberdeen, ID  
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
Aberdeen, ID  
Citation  PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012.  Plant Guide for  of other Web sites.
 
shortspine horsebrush ( Tetradymia spinosa). USDA -
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER