Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN HEMLOCK
Tsuga canadensis (L.) Carr. 
Plant Symbol = TSCA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Canada hemlock, hemlock spruce     
 
Uses  
Industry: Eastern hemlock was early valued for its 
bark, an important source of tannin for the leather 
industry.  Trees were felled and stripped of their bark, 
which was then milled for tannin extraction.  To 
simplify stripping the bark and turning the logs, trees 
were often felled into lakes.  Many of these logs were 
much later extracted from northern lakes and milled.     
 
The wood has been used for light framing, roofing, 
boxes and crates, and pulping, but it tends to be 
brittle and eastern hemlock is not presently important 
as a timber tree.  Commercial stands have been 
greatly reduced by prior harvesting and lack of 
restocking.   
 
Ethnobotanic : American Indians used the cambium 
as the base for breads and soups or mixed it with 
dried fruit and animal fat for pemmican.  Natives and 
white settlers also made tea from hemlock leaves, 
which have a high vitamin C content.   
 
Conservation : Eastern hemlock can be used as a 
specimen, screen, or group planting, and it can be 
sheared over time into a  formal evergreen hedge, 
which is densely leafy all the way to the ground (due  to its full shade tolerance), although as a hedge it 
must be repeatedly pruned to
 keep it in size.  It has a 
naturally open growth habit – if bought with a dense 
canopy effect, it may have be en repeatedly sheared at 
the nursery (or Christmas tree farm).    
 
Numerous cultivars of eastern hemlock have been 
developed, including compact shrubs, dwarfs, form 
mutants (weeping, fastigiate , prostrate, etc.), color 
mutants (variegated), and gr aceful trees.  The wild 
type apparently also is common in cultivation.  
Eastern hemlock stands are considered important as 
shelter and cover for white-tailed deer and other 
wildlife species, such as tu rkey, ruffed grouse, and 
others.   
 ©  R.A. Seelig Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Pine family (Pinaceae).  Native trees to 30 
meters tall, with a broadly  conic crown, the branches 
often drooping at the ends and “feathery;” twigs 
yellow-brown, densely pubescent.  Bark brownish, 
scaly and fissured.  Needle s evergreen, flat, mostly 
appearing 2-ranked, (5-)15-20(-25) mm long, 
narrowed to a petiole-like base and set on peg-like 
projections, the lower surface waxy, with 2 broad, 
conspicuous stomatal bands (like pale lines), the 
upper surface shiny-green to yellow-green, the 
margins minutely toothed, especially toward apex.  
Seed cones ovoid, 1.5-2.5 cm long, borne near the 
branch tips, hanging.  The common name pertains to 
its distribution in eastern North America.    
 
Variation within the species : various studies have 
recorded physiological and morphological variation 
within the species, but no major discontinuities have 
been found to suggest that named entities should be 
recognized.   
 
The geographic distribution of eastern hemlock 
completely overlaps that of Carolina hemlock ( Tsuga 
caroliniana), which differs in its high elevation 
habitats, leaves mostly spreading all directions from 
the twigs, and more elongate seed cones.    
 
Distribution : Eastern hemlock is a species of the 
northeastern and Appalachian regions of North

America: from New Brunswick and Nova Scotia to 
southern Quebec and Ontario, south to northern 
Georgia and Alabama, west in the lake states to 
Minnesota with outliers in southern Michigan, 
western Ohio, and southern Indiana.  Many disjunct 
populations, probably glacial relicts, occur east of the 
Appalachians in the middle Atlantic states.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Eastern hemlock grows from about sea level to 1500 
meters.  In the more southern parts of its range, 
eastern hemlock occurs only where there is drainage 
of cool, moist air -- on moist rocky ridges, valleys 
and ravines, hillsides, and lakeshores.  In the northern 
hardwood forest, it is found on a greater variety of 
sites, including low rolling hills and glacial ridges.  
Eastern hemlock most commonly grows in mixed 
stands with species such as white pine, northern red 
oak, sugar maple, American beech, yellow birch, and 
white ash.   
 
Establishment 
Eastern hemlocks begin to produce cones at about 
age 15 in vigorous trees or much later in suppressed 
trees.  There is a high frequency of cone crops and 
individual trees have a long duration of cone 
production (excellent cone production has been 
reported for trees more than 450 years old), but the 
viability of seed usually is low.  Seeds are 
particularly easily damaged by drying.  The best 
conditions for germination and seedling 
establishment are under a 70-80% crown cover on an 
exposed, partially decomposed layer.  Otherwise, 
regeneration is restricted to rotten logs, stumps, and 
mounds that normally have warmer surfaces and 
better moister retention than the forest floor.     
 
Eastern hemlock is the most shade tolerant of all tree 
species and individuals may remain in the understory 
in natural stands for 25-400 years.  After a plant 
reaches 1-2 meters in height, the root system has 
reached a depth not radically afffected by surface 
drying, and release from overstory competition may 
greatly increase annual growth.  In general, eastern 
hemlock is a slow-growing tree that may take 250 to 
300 years to reach maturity and may live for 900 
years or more.   
  
Management   
Eastern hemlock generally does not tolerate nutrient-
poor soils, wet soils or poorly drained sites, 
prolonged drought, prolonged heat, sun scorch, 
windy and exposed sites, aerial pollution, or winter 
salt spray.  Drought is probably the most serious  damaging agent to the species, especially during the 
seedling stage.  Damping-off fungi and root rots also 
are seriously damaging to young plants.  
Containerized plants are best for transplanting – 
move into sites that are cool, well-drained, and wind-
protected, in partial sun to partial shade.  Good 
drainage is essential for transplant success -- the 
porosity of the soil should be improved with peat 
moss or sand, with the root ball elevated about 2" to 
4" above the surrounding soil grade.   
 
A shallow root system makes trees highly susceptible 
to wind-throw when exposed through timber cutting 
or planted in open sites.  Plants should be staked for 
the first two or three years following transplant, to 
prevent wind-throw.  Saplings and small trees are 
highly susceptible to damage from fire because of the 
thin bark, and root injury often occurs from high 
intensity fires because of heavy litter concentration.   
 
The most severe insect pest is the Asian hemlock 
woolly adelgid, a phloem-feeding insect that causes 
branch dieback and tree decline.  Trees typically die 
after several years of adelgid infestation.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References  
Godman, R.M. & K. Lancaster 1990.  
Tsuga 
canadensis.  Pp. 604-612, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. 
Honkala.   Silvics of North America . Volume 1.  
Conifers.  USDA Forest Service Agric. Handbook 
654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Taylor, R.J. 1993.   Tsuga.  Pp. 362-365, IN:  Flora of 
North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
21SEP2000.  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana.  <http://plants.usda.gov>

Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.