Plant Guide
WHITE CLOVER 
Trifolium repens L. 
Plant Symbol = TRRE3 
 
Contributed by: Idaho Plant Materials Program  
Uses  
Forage: White clover is one of the most important pasture 
legumes.  It is highly palatable and nutritious forage for 
all classes of livestock and most wildlife. White clover is 
commonly planted with orchardgrass, ryegrass, 
bromegrass, or tall fescue.  „Ladino‟ white clover planted 
with orchardgrass produces the premier forage 
combination for intensive grazing systems in the 
Northeast.  „Ladino‟ grows tall enough to be harvested for 
hay, silage, and green chop.  Common white clover 
seldom grows tall enough to be harvested for hay or 
silage.     
 
Beautification: White clover is seeded at 2 pounds per 
acre with grass for stabilization on moist soils.  On dry 
sites it usually establishes only on wet or moist areas.   
 
Wildlife: White clover is an excellent forage plant for 
wildlife.  Leaves are grazed by white-footed voles, bears, 
moose, mule and white-tailed deer and blue grouse.  
Seeds are eaten by northern bobwhite, bufflehead, 
American coot, sage grouse, ruffed grouse, sharp-tailed 
grouse, horned lark, mallard, gray partridge, greater 
prairie chicken, willow ptarmigan, American pintail, 
California quail and American robin.   
 
Erosion control: Grass seedings benefit from the nitrogen 
produced by white clover included in the seed mixture.  
Solid stands of white clover form a good erosion control 
cover on moist fertile soils, but stands may be sparse or 
spotty on dry sites.   
Pollinators: Honeybees and other insects cross-pollinate 
the flowers as they collect nectar and pollen.   
 
Status Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant‟s current 
status (e.g. wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Consult your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, or state 
natural resource or agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description  
Trifolium repens, white clover, is a perennial legume that 
originated in Europe and has become one of the most 
widely distributed legumes in the world.  It generally has 
a prostrate, stoloniferous growth habit.  The leaves are 
composed of three leaflets, which may or may not have a 
“crescent” or “water mark” on the upper surface.  Leaves 
and roots develop along stolons at nodes.   
 
The flower heads, each consisting of 40 to 100 florets, are 
borne on long stalks from the leaf axils.  Florets are white 
but may have a pink hue.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution  
White clover thrives best in a cool, moist climate in soils 
with ample lime, phosphate, and potash.  In general, white 
clover is best adapted to clay and silt soils in humid and 
irrigated areas.  It grows successfully on sandy soils with 
a high water table or irrigated droughty soils when 
adequately fertilized.  White clover seldom roots deeper 
than 2 feet, which makes it adapted to shallow soils when 
adequate moisture is available.  Dry soils limit 
establishment and persistence of white clover.  Lack of 
winter hardiness also limits the use of white clover in 
areas that have cold winters and lack of snow cover.   
 
White clover has a circumboreal distribution.  It was 
introduced to North America from Europe and has 
naturalized throughout Canada and the United States, 
including Hawaii and Alaska.  For a current distribution 
map, consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website.  
 
Establishment White clover has approximately 776,000 
seeds per pound.  The full seeding rate is 4 pounds PLS 
per acre for a solid stand.  The recommended seeding rate 
for a grass/legume pasture is 25 percent or 1 pound PLS

per acre.  For pasture establishment, seed is drilled into a 
well-prepared seedbed that has been plowed, harrowed, 
and compacted to produce a firm seedbed.  The seed 
should be inoculated with the correct Rhizobium before 
seeding.  Seeding depth should be 1/8 - 1/4 inch deep.  
Typically, in grass/legume mixtures, the grass is drill 
seeded in rows and white clover is over seeded to limit 
competition from grass.  For stabilization use, seed is 
broadcast on roadside cuts and fills by cyclone seeders, 
hydroseeders, or blower-type equipment.   
 
The proper time of seeding is determined by seasonal and 
moisture conditions.  In most areas, this may vary from 
early April to mid May.  Late summer and fall seedings 
should only be conducted when site is irrigated and when 
at least six weeks of growing season remain to assure 
establishment before freezing conditions.  
 
Management White clover is normally used as a 
companion crop with forage grasses (smooth brome, 
meadow brome, timothy, ryegrass or orchardgrass) to 
provide a source of nitrogen while also providing high-
yielding forage rich in protein.  In the southeastern United 
States, grass forages grown with white clover average as 
high or higher than grass (by itself) fertilized at nitrogen 
rates up to 300 pounds per acre.  Including white clover in 
a grass forage mix also increases the calcium 
concentration of the forage compared to grass alone.   
 
When seed is properly inoculated at time of planting, 
white clover can fix nitrogen from N2 in the atmosphere, 
requiring little or no additional nitrogen fertilizer.  
However, it requires relatively large amounts of 
phosphorus, potassium and sulphur, and will respond to 
these fertilizer applications.  In grass-legume mixtures, it 
is not possible to supply the ideal combinations of 
elements for both grass and legume.  If nitrogen is applied 
to a grass-legume mixture, the grass will tend to increase 
at the expense of the  
legume.  Well-fertilized grass will outgrow clover in fall 
and winter and could smother the clover.   
 
Management for forage is aimed at maintaining 40% to 
50% clover.  Close grazing (2 inch stubble height) favors 
clover, whereas light grazing favors grass.    White clover 
should be rotationally grazed.  In order to use white 
clover as a protein and energy supplement on small 
acreages, livestock should be allowed to graze only 1 to 2 
hours each day.  This will allow for optimum utilization 
of the white clover pasture.  In a continuous grazing 
system, graze white clover when it reaches 6 inches and 
to a minimum of 2 inches at intervals of 15-30 days.   
 
White clover has medium to high bloat potential when 
grazed.  It usually is recommended as a mixture with one 
or more grasses for pasture.  Crude protein ranges from 
12 to 23%, acid detergent fiber from 24 to 32% and total 
digestible nutrients from 70 to 80% depending on the 
amount of white clover present in the grass/legume 
mixture.   
 
Spring applications of nitrogen will stimulate grass and 
provide early feed, but excessive rates are detrimental to 
the clover stand.  Phosphate applications are broadcast in 
fall or spring according to soil tests.  Sulfur, boron, or 
magnesium may be needed for maximum production on 
some soils in the western part of white clover‟s range.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems Disease and insect pests of 
white clover vary with the location, cultural practices and 
use of white clover and vary among and during the 
growing season.  White clover is susceptible to leaf 
diseases, root and stolon diseases, nematodes, viral 
diseases, insects, spider mites and slugs.  Practical control 
of many plant diseases can be accomplished by harvesting 
to remove disease inoculum and planting disease resistant 
cultivars.  Judicious grazing management combined with 
chemical control can limit damage from insects, spider 
mites and slugs.   
 
Environmental Concerns White clover spreads by both 
seed and stolons and is considered weedy in some 
locations.  It can spread into adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions.   
 
Seed Production  
Plant white clover seed at 1 to 3 pounds PLS per acre in 
20 to 24 inch rows.  To facilitate seed production and 
between-row weed control, it is desirable to plant white 
clover in spaced rows instead of solid stands. 
 
Most of the seed production of white clover occurs in 
California. Average seed yields are about 300 pounds per 
acre but yields can easily be doubled by using proper 
production practices. Time and frequency of irrigation is 
critical as white clover can lodge easily. Irrigation should 
be stopped when the degree of bloom and seedhead 
maturity is maximized. Honeybees are essential for seed 
production. Hives should be placed at the rate of 7-24 
hives per acre to maximize pollination and seed yield.  
 
Seed is usually harvested by swathing to allow the seed to 
complete maturity and dry followed by combining. Spray 
curing windrows with a chemical defoliant followed by 
direct combining is also used and can be quite efficient.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
The three general types of white clover usually 
recognized are (1) large, (2) intermediate, and (3) small.  
 
Large type: „Ladino‟ is the recommended cultivar of the 
large type. It is two to four times as large as common 
white clover. It is very well suited to the Northwest 
interior areas away from the coast. It will winter kill 
under dry winter conditions, and is susceptible to slug

damage. It requires a high soil phosphate level and good 
management for maximum production. „Pilgrim‟ and 
„Merit‟ have been developed for winter hardiness.  
 
Intermediate type: „Grassland Huia‟ is representative of 
the intermediate type. It was formerly designated „New 
Zealand‟. It is very well adapted to locations along the 
coast and interior areas where slugs are a problem.  
 
Small type: “New York‟ wild white clover is an example 
of the small type, which is adapted to higher elevations 
and colder areas. It is the most drought-resistant type. It is 
very persistent in pastures, withstands close grazing, and 
is the least productive of the white clovers. „Kent Wild‟ 
white clover is also a small type.  
 
White clover seed is available from most commercial seed 
vendors.  
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information. USDA, NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References  
Carlson, G.E., Gibson, P.B. and D.D. Baltensperger. 
 1985. White Clover and other perennial clovers. 
 Chapter 13. In: Forages: The Science of Grassland 
 Agriculture. Iowa State University Press. 643 p. 
Coladonato, Milo. 1993. Trifolium repens. In: Fire Effects 
 Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of 
 Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
 (Producer). http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [2008, 
 November 20].  
Jensen, Kevin et al. 2004 Intermountain Planting Guide. 
 Pg 82. Mississippi State University. Forages: White 
 Ladino Clover. 
 http://msucares.com/crops/forages/legumes/cool/whit
 eclover.html [2008, November 20].  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth. 
 2008. Grass, grass-like, forb, legume and woody 
 species for the Intermountain West. Natural 
 Resources Conservation Service. Boise, Idaho. Idaho 
 Plant Materials Technical Note 24. 43 p.  
Ogle, D., L. St. John, J, Cornwell, M. Stannard, and L. 
 Holzworth. 2008. Pasture and Range Seedings: 
 Planning, Installation, Evaluation, Management. 
 Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, 
 Idaho. Idaho Plant Materials Technical Note 10. 36 p. 
 Oregon Clover Seed Production. 
 http://oregonclover.org/seedproduction.html [2008, 
 November 25].  
Shewmaker, Glenn. 2005. Idaho Forage Handbook. 
 University of Idaho. 99 p.  
 
Prepared By  
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID  
 
Species Coordinator: Loren St. John, USDA NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Citation 
Ogle, D., St. John, L. 2008.  Plant Guide for white clover 
(Trifolium repens L.). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 
Published January, 2009 
 
Edited: 1Dec2008 LWS; 1Dec2008 DGO; 2Dec2008 JSP 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER