Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPANISH MOSS 
Tillandsia usneoides  (L.) L. 
Plant Symbol = TIUS  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Graybeard, long moss, air-plant, Florida moss, con 
rape moss, wool crape, old man’s beard, 
grandfather’s whiskers 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Various Native American tribes, 
including the Houma and the Seminole, have used 
Spanish moss for a variety of purposes.  When the 
outer coating of the plant is cleaned away, tough, 
black, curly inner fibers are exposed.  These strong 
fibers were useful in many ways.  The fibers were 
woven into a course cloth that was used for bedding, 
floor mats and horse blankets.  The fibers could be 
twisted into cordage that was used as rope.  The ropes  were used to lash together the poles that composed 
the framework of housing.  The dried fibers were 
used to remove scum in cooking.  The process used 
to strip off the outer coating is still used today.  It 
consists of placing bundles of the green moss into a 
shallow pond for six weeks, long enough for the 
outer coat to rot away.  Dry Spanish moss was used 
for fire arrows.  The moss was wrapped around the 
base of the shaft, lit on fire and then shot from the 
bow.  The moss was also an
 ingredient in the clay 
that was used to plaster the insides of houses.  Fresh 
Spanish moss was gathered, soaked in water and 
stuffed into dugout canoes to keep them from drying 
out and splitting.  The Natchez tribe of Louisiana 
played a game that used fist-size balls that were 
stuffed with Spanish moss.  The plant was boiled to 
make a tea for chills and fever.  There is evidence 
that Spanish moss was used  over 3,000 years ago to 
make fire-tempered pottery.  Although the moss 
burned away during the firing, the distinctive pattern 
of the fibers is still evident in the clay pottery.  
Spanish moss is still used today by many Native 
American tribes.  For ex ample, the Houma and the 
Koasati use Spanish moss in the construction and 
decoration of small dolls.   
 © J.R. Manhart @ Texas A&M University 
 
Wildlife : Several species of bats including the 
Seminole bat roost in clumps of Spanish moss.  
Yellow-throated warblers and northern parulas build 
their nests inside clumps of living Spanish moss.  
Several other species of birds gather the moss for 
nesting material.  There is at least one species of 
spider that only occurs in Spanish moss.   
 
Livestock : The plant is used as  fodder for animals.   
 
Other: Spanish moss is used in flower arrangements 
and as decorations for handicrafts.  It is said to be 
excellent mulch for the garden.  Spanish moss is 
grown commercially for use as packing material and 
as a replacement for horsehair in upholstery and 
mattress stuffing.  Campers,  because of red bugs and 
chiggers do not recommend the plants for use as 
bedding.  If you wish to use fresh Spanish moss you 
may get rid of these pests by boiling small portions of 
the plant in water or heating them in the microwave.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).

Description 
General: Pineapple Family (Bromeliaceae).  Spanish 
moss is a native, perennial epiphytic herb.  It is not 
Spanish, nor a moss, but a flowering plant.  The 
slender, wiry, long, branch ing stems (reaching 8m or 
more) grow as suspended, bluish-gray streamers and 
garlands draping among tree branches and sometimes 
telephone lines and fences.  The plant and is not 
parasitic, as is often thought, but attaches itself to 
trees for support.  The plant has no roots but derives 
its nutrients from rainfall, detritus and airborne dust.  
The stems and leaves are covered with overlapping 
silver-gray scales, which are important for absorbing 
water and trapping dust and nutrient particles.  It is 
thought that these plants may play a critical role in 
nutrient cycling.  The very narrow, linear, awl-shaped 
leaves (2.5 to 8 cm long) are whitish gray.  
Numerous, small, solitary blue or pale green flowers 
with three petals (6 to 8 mm long) grow in the axils 
of the leaves.  The flowers,  which bloom for a period 
of three to four months from spring to fall, form 
interesting seeds (2.4 to 3 mm) with hairy sails that 
float on the wind and stick to tree branches.   
 
Distribution : Spanish moss is native to the 
Southeastern United States and Tropical America.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
 
Habitat: Spanish moss grows on trees in areas of high 
humidity.  It can be found on live oak and pines that 
border estuaries, rivers, swamps, and along the 
coastal plains of the Southeastern United States.   
 
Establishment 
Spanish moss may be propagated by seed or by 
division.  The plants are very easy to grow, as they 
need no soil or transplanting, requiring only warmth 
and moisture.  They are grown in greenhouses or 
outside in warm climates.  The plants need 
temperature of 70 degrees  or warmer in the summer 
and not less than 60 degrees in the winter.  The plants 
grow well in full sunlight to partial shade.  To 
propagate by division, place  divided plantlets on bark 
slabs in areas with plenty of  light and moisture.  Mist 
plants regularly with lukewarm water.  Spanish moss 
rarely blooms in cultivation.   
 
Management 
Although Spanish moss does not take nutrients from 
the host tree, it should be thinned if it becomes too 
thick.  This is because it  may either shade the tree’s 
leaves or, when it is wet  it can become very heavy 
and the branches may break under its weight. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Barbour, M.G., & W.D. Billings, Editors 2000.  
North American terrestrial vegetation , Second 
Edition.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.  708 pp. 
 
Brown, R.C. 1994.   Florida’s first people: 12,000 
years of human history .  Pineapple Press, Inc., 
Sarasota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns .  Second Edition.  
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Columbia State University 1999.   Spanish moss. 
[Online].  Available: 
http://oxbow.colstate.edu/moss.htm. (20 June 2001). 
 
Duncan, W.H. & L.E. Foote 1975.   Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Floridata.com. L.C. 1999.   Plant profile: Tillandsia 
usenoides .  [Online].  Available:  
http://www.floridata.c om/ref/t/till_usn.cfm. (20 June 
2001).  
 
Greene, W.F. & H.L. Blomquist 1953.   Flowers of 
the South: Native and Exotic .  University of North 
Carolina Press. Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  208 pp. 
 
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, & G.A. Stokes 1994.  
The historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana .  Louisiana 
State University Press, Bato n Rouge, Louisiana.  324 
pp. 
 
Lemke, C. 1999.   Plant of the week: Tillandsia 
usneoides .  Department of Botany and Microbiology,

University of Okalahoma.  [Online].  Available: 
http://www.plantoftheweek.org/week056.shtml. 
(20 June 2001).   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(19 June 2001) 
 
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administraton.  
Spanish Moss. Ecological characterization of Otter 
Island, South Carolina.  [Online].  Available: 
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/otter/htmls/data/species/mo
ss.htm. 
(20 June 2001). 
 
Pacific Island ecosystems at risk (PIER).  Invasive 
plant species .  2000.  [Online].  Available:  
http://www.hear.org/pier/tiusn.htm.  (20 June 2001).  
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp. 
 
Speck, F.G. 1941.  A list of plant curatives obtained 
from the Houma Indians of Louisiana .  Primitive 
Man Quarterly Bulletin of the Catholic 
Anthropological Conference 14(4): 49-75. 
 
Sturtevant, W.C. 1954.   The Mikasuki Seminole: 
medical beliefs and practices .  Doctoral Dissertation, 
Yale University.  538 pp. 
 
Wilson, H. 1998.  Bromeliaceae-The pineapple 
family .  IN Wilson, H. Taxonomy of flowering plants .  
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.  
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/Wilson/tfp/zin/b
mlpage.htm>.  Accessed: 27sep01. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.