Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN WHITE CEDAR  
Thuja occidentalis  L. 
Plant Symbol = THOC2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Eastern arborvitae, American arborvitae, eastern 
white-cedar, swamp-cedar,  Atlantic red cedar, swamp 
cedar  
 
Uses 
Conservation : More than 120 named cultivars of 
northern white cedar have been named and used as 
ornamental trees and shrubs, where the name 
“arborvitae” is usually applied.  Selections offer 
variety in habital form, color, cold hardiness, heat 
tolerance.  It is often used for hedges and other types 
of border or shelter plantings.  The species was 
introduced into Europe for cultivation in the 16th 
century. 
 
Wildlife : Stands of northern white cedar also are 
valuable for wildlife habitat, particularly in severe 
winters for white-tailed deer, which use it for both 
shelter and browse.  These tr ees also provide habitats 
for many species of birds.   
 
Industry : The wood’s light weight and resistance to 
decay makes it useful for a number of applications.  
The principal commercial uses of northern white-
cedar are for rustic fencing and posts; other important 
products include cabin logs, lumber, poles, and 
shingles.  Smaller amounts are used for paneling, 
piling, lagging, pails, potato barrels, tubs, ties, boats  (especially canoes), tanks, novelties, and 
woodenware.  The timbers were used to make the 
ribs in birchbark canoes.  "Cedar leaf oil" is distilled 
from boughs and used in medicines and perfumes.  
Boughs are also used in floral arrangements.    
 
Ethnobotanic
: The essential oil of northern white 
cedar is used in cleansers, disinfectants, hair 
preparations, insecticides, liniment, room sprays, and 
soft soaps.  The Ojibwa are said to have made soup 
from the inner bark of the young twigs.  The twigs 
are used by some to make teas for relief of 
constipation and headache.      
 ©  R.A. Seelig Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Cypress family (Cupressaceae).  Native 
shrub or tree growing to 15 (-38) meters tall, the 
crown narrowly conic to broadly pyramidal, with 
spreading, densely crowded branches; branchlets 
flattened, in fan-shaped sprays.  Bark is gray to 
reddish-brown, 6-9 mm thick, fibrous, separated into 
flat, connected ridges.  Leaves are evergreen, scale-
like and abruptly pointed, 2 mm long, opposite in 
alternating pairs (in 4 rows), bright green above and 
pale green below, sometimes becoming yellow-
brown in winter, with a spicy fragrance when 
crushed.  Seed cones are  ellipsoid, (6-)9-14 mm long, 
brown; seeds ca. 8 per cone, 4-7 mm long, with 
lateral wings about as wide as the body.  The 
common name pertains to its northern distribution, 
cedar-like appearance, and white wood.   
  
Variation within the species : ecotypic variation 
within the species has been documented but no 
naturally occurring variants have been formally 
recognized.  Significant genetic variation has favored 
the artificial selection of many cultivars, which differ 
primarily in leaf color and growth habit.   
 
Northern white cedar differs from western red-cedar 
( Thuja plicata) in leaf color (dull yellowish-green on 
both surfaces), minutely mucronate scales of the seed 
cones, and geography.   
 
Distribution : The primary range of northern white-
cedar is in eastern-south eastern Canada (west to

Manitoba) and adjacent states of New England and 
the Great Lakes region (west to Minnesota); south of 
the main range, it occurs in scattered stands and 
southward along the Appalachians into North 
Carolina and Tennessee, where it is generally rare or 
extirpated.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
It commonly grows in cool, moist, nutrient-rich sites, 
on mostly calcareous soils that are neutral or nearly 
so -- lakes and river shores, uplands, cliffs, and talus, 
at 0-600 (-900) meters elevation.  Although it grows 
best on well-drained sites, it may be dominant in 
swamps.  In cultivation, it grows in a wide variety of 
soils.   
 
Establishment 
Cones may be produced by northern white-cedars as 
young as 6 years old, but seed production in large 
quantities begins when the trees are about 30 years 
old and is best after 75 years.  Good seed crops are 
produced at intervals of 2 to 5 years, or more 
frequently in local areas.   
 
Seedbeds of moss-covered,  decaying logs and stumps 
account for more than 70 percent of the northern 
white-cedar seedlings in undisturbed areas.  
Seedlings can be established on burns, if the burn 
was severe enough to expose favorable, mineral soil 
seedbeds on uplands or to improve moss seedbeds in 
swamps.  Best root and shoot development occur in 
full light, but drought-caused mortality of northern 
white cedar seedlings may be extremely high under 
any light condition.  
 
Layering may account for a significant portion of 
northern white-cedar reproduction in swamps, 
because adventitious roots can be produced from any 
branch or stem.  It is most common in young stands 
and those with leaning  trees, where the lower 
branches become covered by moss.  New trees also 
develop vegetatively from uprooted trees where roots 
are formed from vertical branches.   
 
Northern white cedar grows relatively slowly in 
swamps or on other saturated lowland sites, but it 
apparently reaches ages of 400 years and greater in 
these habitats.  An individual from Ontario has been 
dated at more than 1650 years old.   
 
Management 
Northern white-cedar forests are stable without major 
disturbance such as fire, because the trees are long-
lived and balsam fir is the only important associate  sufficiently shade tolerant to grow in competition.  In 
stands that have been opened by timber harvesting or 
severely browsed by white-tailed deer, succession is 
often to balsam fir or swamp hardwoods, especially 
black ash.  Northern white-cedar responds well to 
thinning-release after successful establishment, 
although it is shade tolerant and can withstand severe 
suppression for several years.    
 
Even-aged management, through shelterwood cutting 
or clear cutting is recommended for maximum 
benefit to deer.  Satisfact
ory reestablishment after 
clearcutting often requires some kind of site 
preparation, particularly broadcast burning of slash.  
In some areas, however, heavy winter browsing of 
seedlings and saplings by deer greatly reduces 
reproductive success.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Chambers, K.L. 1993.   Thuja.  Pp. 410-411, IN: 
Flora of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York.  <http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
  
Johnston, W.F. 1990.   Thuja occidentalis.  Pp. 580-
589, IN: R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of 
North America . Volume 1.  Conifers .  USDA Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp: 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.