Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINESE TALLOW TREE 
Triadica sebifera  (L.) Small 
Plant Symbol = TRSE6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Louisiana State University-Plant Science; 
partial funding from the US Geological Survey and 
the US National Biological Information 
Infrastructure 
 
Caution: This plant has toxic properties. 
 
Alternate Names 
This plant appears in most floras as  Sapium  
sebiferum .  Common names include popcorn tree, 
chicken tree, and Florida aspen. 
 
Uses 
Ingestion of plant material causes gastrointestinal 
upset with nausea and vomiting.  Contact with the 
plants can cause dermatitis (Westbrooks & Preacher  1986).  The milky sap in both the leaves and the 
berries is poisonous to animals (Redlus 1997).  Sheep 
and goats have been known to eat the leaves of 
Chinese tallow, but the plant is toxic to cattle 
(Jubinsky & Anderson 1996; Russell et al. 1969). 
 
Chinese tallow is very invasive.  The Chinese tallow 
tree was introduced into the United States from China 
in 1776 by Ben Franklin (Randall & Marinelli 1996).  
The common name comes from the waxy tallow 
derived from the white covering of the seed that has 
been used historically to make soap and candles.  It 
has been cultivated in China for at least 14 centuries 
as a seed crop and as an ornamental.  In the early 
1900s, the Foreign Plant Introduction Division of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture promoted tallow tree 
planting in Gulf Coast states to establish a local soap 
industry (Flack & Furlow 1
996).  Since that time, the 
species has been planted in the U.S. mainly for its 
unique ornamental qualities including colorful, 
autumnal foliage. 
 © L. Urbatsch 
 
The plants have tremendous reproductive potential.  
They may reach reproductive  age in as little as three 
years and remain produc tive for 100 years (Duke 
1983).  In greenhouse experiments, some trees grown 
from seed flowered in th eir first year of growth 
(Grace 1997).  A mature tree may annually produce 
an average of 100,000 seed s that are spread mainly 
by birds and water (Duke 1983; Jubinsky & 
Anderson 1996).  Stumps have the ability to resprout 
and roots readily develop shoots. 
 
The species causes large-scale ecosystem 
modification by replacing native vegetation thereby 
reducing native species dive rsity that, in turn, has a 
negative effect on wildlife (B ruce et al. 1995; Randall 
& Marinelli 1996).  The ability of this species to 
drastically modify natural landscapes has earned it a 
spot on The Nature Conservancy’s list of "America’s 
Least Wanted -The Dirty Do zen" (Flack and Furlow 
1996).  The species can re adily become the dominant 
plant in disturbed vacant lots and abandoned 
agricultural land.  It has the ability to invade natural, 
wet prairies and bottomland forests.  Once 
established, it is virtually impossible to eliminate by 
known methods, and efforts to achieve effective 
control are being explored (Jubinsky & Anderson 
1996).  
 
Jubinsky & Anderson (1996) demonstrate the 
invasive nature of Chinese tallow in Florida.  Their

work has shown Chinese tallow has become 
naturalized in over half (57%) of Florida’s counties.  
Vegetation analysis demonstrates its potential 
dominance in Florida’s wetlands.  Quantification of 
trees at their study site revealed that Chinese tallow 
had the greatest density of all woody plants despite 
being present for only 20 years.  In relative 
frequency, it was second to sweetgum ( Liquidambar 
spp.).  Compared to other woody species, Chinese 
tallow was found to reproduce prolifically.  Beneath 
tallow trees of reproductive  age, 14.6 seedlings were 
present per square meter.  Percent cover of seedlings 
of Chinese tallow was significantly greater than all 
other woody species combined.  Relative frequency 
of tallow seedlings was also greater than that of all 
species except for sweetgum.  Native species 
negatively impacted at the site-included sweetgum, 
various species of oak ( Quercus spp.), black willow 
( Salix nigra ), swamp dogwood ( Cornus foemina), 
and elderberry ( Sambucus canadensis ). 
 
Chinese tallow is the most successful exotic invader 
of the chenier woodlands in southwestern Louisiana.  
It has had a major impact on plant community 
structure and species composition by becoming the 
most abundant woody species.  It has the potential to 
invade surrounding marshes, changing them from 
herbaceous to woody plant communities (Neyland & 
Meyer, 1997).  
 
In Texas, the introduction of tallow trees has 
produced large-scale conversi on of much of the upper 
coastal prairie to woodlan d (Bruce et al. 1995).  
Presettlement vegetation was dominated by little 
bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium ) and other 
typical prairie species.  The new, anthropogenic 
woodlands are essentially monospecific stands of 
tallow trees with some native tree species.  Besides 
altered species composition, Chinese tallow 
woodlands have altered ecosystem processes.  Their 
primary productivity is higher, and ion concentrations 
in the soil have been changed (Bruce et al. 1995).  
Tallow tree woodland is expected to either persist as 
a novel, stable, exotic vegetation type or to gradually 
give way to a novel type dominated by native species 
(Bruce et al. 1995).  Rega rdless of which scenario 
takes place, this species has supplanted naturally 
occurring prairie where it has invaded. 
 
Associated animal species  are dramatically affected 
by such habitat modifications.  Attwater’s prairie 
chicken ( Tympanuchus cupido attwateri ), once 
abundant in the coastal prairie of Texas and 
Louisiana, is near extinction due to loss of habitat.  
Other bird species dependent on coastal prairie 
habitat are dickcissels, mottled ducks, and a large  number of neotropical migratory songbirds including 
five critically imperiled species.  Data indicate that a 
dramatic decline has occurred over the past 25 years 
in grassland bird species (Knopf 1994).  
 
To determine its potential to invade and persist in 
hardwood forests, the sh
ade tolerance of Chinese 
tallow was compared to American sycamore 
( Platanus occidentalis ) and cherrybark oak (Quercus 
pagoda) in a series of experiments (Jones & McLeod 
1989).  Tallow tree grow th was shown to exceed 
sycamore and oak in shade, and tallow tree and 
sycamore growth exceeded oak in full sun.  Such 
findings are consistent with observed patterns of 
tallow tree growth in North America.  With its ability 
to grow rapidly in sunlight or under closed canopies, 
the species is likely to invade and persist in many of 
the floodplain forests of the coastal Southeast. 
 
 © L. Urbatsch Cross-section of seed showing tallow portion. 
The precise mechanism of  spread remains somewhat 
open to question.  Chinese tallow trees are reported to 
have allelopathic capabilities in that the leaves 
contain substances that alter the soil chemistry and 
negatively impact native vegetation (Flack & Furlow 
1996).  However, Conway et al. (1997) investigated 
the effects of tallow leaf-litter water extracts on the 
germination of bald cypress ( Taxodium distichum) 
and black willow ( Salix nigra), and found no 
evidence for allelo-chemical  effects.  They concluded 
that suppression of asso ciated species would be 
expected due to shading and other methods of 
resource reduction, and if present, allelopathy 
contributes less significantly to tallow’s spread and 
dominance in habitats that were once more natural. 
 
Wildlife : The flowers of Chinese tallow are favored 
by honeybees, which produce a desirable, light-
colored honey from it.  Birds, including domestic 
fowl readily eat its fruits.  It has been considered a 
desirable plant for bird-food (Duke 1983).

Oil: Chinese tallow tree  seeds are a source of 
vegetable tallow, a drying oil, and protein food.  The 
tree is also planted for ornamental purposes.  The 
outer covering of the seeds contains solid fat known 
as Chinese vegetable tallow and the kernels produce 
a drying oil called Stillingia oil.  Candles, soap, cloth 
dressing, and fuel are made from the tallow.  The oil 
is used in machine oils, as a crude lamp oil, and in 
making varnishes and paints, because of its quick-
drying properties.  Also, the oil reportedly is used in 
Chinese medicine, but overdoses probably would 
cause violent sickness and perhaps death (Duke 
1983).  After the seeds ha ve been processed, the 
residual cakes are used as manure. 
 
Biomass : More recently, the tree has been regarded as 
a promising biomass candidate in the Gulf coast 
region of the United States, because of its ability to 
re-sprout, its rapid growth rate, and its drought and 
salt tolerance (Scheld & Cowels 1981).  Field trials 
demonstrate that the species  can produce six times as 
much woody biomass as  Populus selections grown in 
Wisconsin (Scheld & Cowles 1981).  Chinese tallow 
can be grown over larg e areas by conventional 
agricultural methods and can provide woody biomass 
for direct burning or conversion to charcoal, ethanol, 
and methanol (Scheld & Cowles 1981).  Oil from the 
seeds can potentially substitute for petroleum.  
Scheld et al. (1980) report yields of 4,000 to 10,000 
kg/ha, and cite estimates of 25 barrels of oil per year 
as a sustained energy yield.  In addition to its biomass 
and energy value, the tree is extensively propagated 
for ornamental purposes.  From 200,000-300,000 
trees are grown for ornamental purposes in Houston, 
Texas alone (Duke 1983). 
 
Construction : Tallow wood is white and close-
grained, suitable for carving and for making blocks in 
Chinese printing.  The wood is also used for furniture 
making and incense.  A black dye can be made by 
boiling leaves in alum water (Duke 1983). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Spurge Family (Euphorbiaceae).  Chinese 
tallow is a fast-growing, medium-sized tree that may 
reach heights of 50 feet (Godfrey 1988).  This 
noxious plant causes large-scale ecosystem 
modification throughout the southeastern U.S. by 
replacing native vegetation.  It quickly becomes the 
dominant plant in disturbe d vacant lots, abandoned  agricultural land, natural wet prairies, and bottomland 
forests.  Once established, Chinese tallow is virtually 
impossible to eliminate. 
 
Tallow leaves are alternat
e (one per node), with 
broad rhombic to ovate blades, 1.5-3.5 inches long, 
1.5-4 inches wide, the leaf blade bases are wedge-
shaped and the apex supports a gradually tapering 
appendage, margins are entire (without teeth).  The 
upper leaf surface is dark green and the lower is 
somewhat paler.  The veins are yellow and 
conspicuous on both surfaces.  In autumn, the leaves 
turn orange to scarlet (sometimes yellow) and fall as 
the cold season approaches.  The leaf stalks (petioles) 
are 1-4 inches long, with 2 swollen glands on the 
upper side immediately below  the leaf blade.  At the 
base of the petiole is a pair of stipule-like appendages 
about one-eighth inch long. 
 © L. Urbatsch Glands at base of leaf. 
 
Chinese tallow trees are monoecious (i.e., an 
individual tree has separate pollen and seed bearing 
flowers).  The pollen producing (staminate) flowers 
occur in greenish-yellow, ta ssel-like spikes up to 8 
inches long that terminat e the branchlets, and each 
flower cluster along the spike has a basal pair of 
nectar glands.  A few seed producing (pistillate) 
flowers (each having a three lobed ovary and three 
style branches) are located on short branches at the 
base of the staminate spike.  The pistillate flowers 
mature into three-lobed, three-valved capsules about 
1/2 - 3/4 inch long and about 3/4 inch wide.  As the 
capsules mature, their color changes from green to 
nearly black.  When mature, the capsule walls fall 
away typically exposing three globose seeds that 
have a white, tallow-containing covering.  Seeds 
usually persist on the plants for a period of weeks.  
Flowers typically mature April-June and fruit ripens 
in September-October.

Distribution: Chinese tallow is native to many 
provinces of central China,  especially north of the 
Yangtze Valley, and Japan (Duke 1983).  It has been 
cultivated for 14 centuries as a seed crop (Duke, 
1983; Jubinsky & Anderson 1996) and is presently 
grown in mainland China, Hainan Island, Hong 
Kong, Japan, Taiwan, and Ko rea.  Chinese tallow has 
been introduced to many parts of the world including 
Sri Lanka, Indochina, Bengal, India, Sudan, 
Martinique, southern United States, southern France, 
and Algeria (Duke 1983; Jubinsky & Anderson 
1996).   
 
Adaptation : Chinese tallow is naturalized in the 
United States from Cameron and Hidalgo counties in 
southernmost Texas northward to southern Oklahoma 
and northwestern Arkansas eastward to North 
Carolina and Florida.  The species is very adaptable 
and can thrive in various environments.  It is 
generally found in low, sw ampy places, and along the 
margins of bodies of fresh water; moreover, it can 
invade dry uplands as well, and it will tolerate some 
salinity.  Tallow trees grow best in full sunlight but 
can tolerate shade.  The spread of Chinese tallow 
appears to be limited by frigid and/or arid conditions 
(Jubinsky & Anderson 1966).  Though widely 
planted as a street and ornamental tree in California, 
it has yet to become a pest there, presumably because 
of insufficient rainfall.  For current U.S. distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Vectors: The major dispersal methods of Chinese 
tallow are birds and water (Duke 1983; Jones et al. 
1989).  Jubinsky (1993) observed seeds being 
consumed and dispersed by pileated woodpeckers 
(Dryocopus pileatus) and boat-tailed grackles 
(Quicalus major) in Florida.  Cardinals (Cardinalis 
cardinalis), and probably many other species of birds, 
also consume and presumably disperse the seeds 
(Skinner 1998).  Seeds were also observed along 
riverbanks in central and north Florida after heavy 
rains, once higher waters receded (Jubinsky & 
Anderson 1996).  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective.  
 
Manual and Mechanical Control 
Hand removal of trees is limited to trees usually less 
than three feet tall or to small areas.  Sawing down 
large trees will help to remove seed sources.  
However, fruit should be removed from fallen trees 
in order to reduce the number  of seeds present at the 
site.  In order to prevent resprouting, stumps will 
require herbicide treatment.  Heavy equipment can be 
effectively used to control tallow trees on canal banks 
and in areas where soil dist urbance and non-selective 
species removal are not important considerations.  
Stumps remaining following such treatment will 
require herbicide application to prevent re-growth 
from cut surfaces. 
 
Environmental/Cul tural Control 
In certain situations, altering the environment, such 
as raising or lowering the water levels, can cause 
sufficient stress to kill the plants (Jubinsky & 
Anderson 1996).  Fire is another possible control 
means in appropriate habitats.  Fire can have various 
effects on tallow trees: (1) complete kill, preliminary 
data suggest that this is unlikely; (2) top kill where 
the aerial portions of the trees are killed but re-
sprouting occurs from the base, and (3) incomplete 
top-kill where the crown can re-sprout after fire.  
Preliminary data on the use of fire to control tallow 
trees in wet, coastal prairie appear to be limited.  
Only 17% of tree dominated plots burned compared 
to drier sites where 71% of the trees were exposed to 
fire.  In areas with sufficient  fuel, such as in prairies 
with good grass cover, summer burns killed or top 
killed trees as tall as three meters.  However, control 
of trees growing in wet sites where fuels were poor 
was much less effective.  Additional experimental 
work is being done on the effect of fire on tallow 
trees (Grace 1997). 
 
Chemical Control 
When considering chemical control, local laws 
affecting herbicide use must be observed, and care 
must be taken to avoid damage to non-target species.  
The various methods for applying herbicide to woody 
vegetation include basal bark, foliar, frill, or girdle 
treatments (Jubinsky & Anderson 1996).  Basal bark 
treatment reportedly is the most effective for tallow 
trees (Jubinsky & Anderson 1996; Randall & 
Marinelli 1996).  Several organizations including the 
Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the 
Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council, Florida Native 
Plant Society, Florida Natu re Conservancy, and the 
Texas Nature Conservancy, have adopted this method 
of treatment (Jubinsky & Anderson 1996).

Effective treatment consists of spraying a band at 
least six inches wide around the lowest 12 to 24 
inches of the trunks with a triclopyr herbicide 
(Garlon ® 4; DowElanco trademark) at a 
concentration of about 15%.  Concentrations up to 
20% might be required for larger trees.  A spray 
adjuvant formulated to mix with oil-soluble 
herbicides, such as JLB OIL PLUS or vegetable oil 
products are effective diluents (Kline & Duquesnel 
1996; (13); Jubinsky & Anderson 1996).  
Pathfinder®II and Chopper® herbicides (DowElanco 
trademarks) are ready-to-apply basal-bark products.  
Such treatment can be done at any time of the year.  
Complete control of foliage, stems, and roots is 
possible with this method (Kline & Duquesnel 1996). 
 
For cut surface treatment, excellent results are 
reported with a 50% solution of Garlon 3A or with a 
10% solution of imazapyr herbicide (Arsenal®, 
American Cyanamid trademark).  The latter is a soil-
active herbicide that requ ires careful use when 
applied near desirable plants or trees (Kline & 
Duquesnel 1996).  A colorant is often added to the 
herbicide mix to aid in treatment monitoring, 
especially if done on a contractual basis.  Examples 
of suitable dyes for this purpose include Blazon Blue 
Spray Pattern Indicator and Bullseye Spray Pattern 
Indicator (Kline & Duquesnel 1996). 
 
Biological Control 
Chinese tallow trees are remarkably free of insect 
pests and serious pathogenic organisms.  This 
precludes the use of biological controls or integrated 
pest management programs.  A few organisms known 
to associate with tallow trees include the bagworm, 
Eumeta , which feeds on the leaves.  The root-knot 
nematode,  Meloidogyne javanica, has been reported.  
Fungi known to attack this tree include  Cercospora 
stillingiae, Clitocybe tabescens , Dendrophthoe 
falcata , Phyllactina corylea , Phyllosticta stillingiae , 
and  Phymatotrichum omnivorum  (Duke 1983). 
 
Illustrations and Photographs 
Godfrey, R. K. 1988.  Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
of northern Florida and adjacent Georgia, and 
Alabama.  The University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
Georgia.  734 pp.  (excellent line drawing showing 
leaves, flower, fruit, and  seeds in detail, p. 284). 
 
Hunter, C. G. 1989.  Trees, shrubs, and vines of 
Arkansas .  The Ozark Society Foundation, Little 
Rock, Arkansas.  p. 207.  (photograph of a fruiting 
branch of tallow tree. p. 116). 
 
Radford, A. E., H. E. Ahles, & C. R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas .  University of North Caro
lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  (small line drawing, p. 666). 
 
Randall, J. M. & J. Marinelli 1996.   Invasive plants, 
weeds of the global garden .  Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Handbook #149, Brooklyn, New York.  99 p.  
(photograph of the seeds and the tree in flower, p. 
41). 
 
Schopmeyer, C. S. 1974.   Seeds of woody plants in 
the United States .  USDA, Forest Service, 
Agricultural Handbook No. 450.  883 p.  (photograph 
and illustration of seeds of Triadica sebifera, p. 760). 
 
Vines, R. A. 1960.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 1104 p.  (illustration of a leafy shoot with fruit 
pg. 622). 
 
Westbrooks, R. G. & J.  W. Preacher 1986.  
Poisonous plants of eastern North America .  
University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, South 
Carolina.  172 p. (photograph showing the seeds and 
the tree in flower, p. 106). 
 
References 
Bruce, K. A., G. N. Cameron, & P. A. Harcombe 
1995.   Initiation of a new woodland type on the Texas 
coastal prairie by the Chinese tallow tree (Sapium 
sebiferum (L.) Roxb.) .  Bulletin of the Torrey 
Botanical Club 122:215-225. 
 
Cameron, G. N. & T. W. LaPoint 1978.   Effects of 
tannins on the decomposition of Chinese tallow 
leaves by terrestrial and aquatic invertebrates .  
Oecologia 32:349-366. 
 
Cameron, G. N. & S. R. Spencer 1989.   Rapid leaf 
decay and nutrient release  in a Chinese tallow forest.  
Oecologia 80:222-228. 
 
Conner, W. H. 1994.   The effect of salinity and 
waterlogging on growth and survival of baldcypress 
and Chinese tallow seedlings .  Journal of Coastal 
Research 10:1045-1049. 
 
Conway, W. C., L. M. Smith, & J. F. Bergan 1997.  
The allelopathic potential of an exotic invasive  tree: 
Chinese tallow .  Bulletin of the Ecological Society of 
America 78:72. 
 
Correll, D. S. & M. C. Johnston 1970.   Manual of the 
vascular plants of Texas .  The Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, Texas.  p. 1881.

Cowles, J. R. & H. W. Scheld 1987.  Cultural and 
management practices for the Chinese tallow tree as 
a biomass fuel source .  Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory.  ORNL/Sub/81-09059/1.  49 p. 
 
Diamond, D. D. & F. E. Smeins 1984.   Remnant 
grassland vegetation and ecological affinities of the 
upper coastal prairie of Texas .  Southwestern 
Naturalist 29:321-334. 
 
Duke J. A. 1983.   Handbook of energy crops .  
unpublished.  (2 October 1996). 
 
Flack, S. & E. Furlow 1996.  America's least wanted 
"purple plague," "green cancer" and 10 other 
ruthless environmental thugs .  Nature Conservancy 
Magazine.  Vol. 46, No. 6 November/December. 
 
Grace, J.B. 1977.   Personal communications .  
Research Ecologist.  USDI, GS, National Wetlands 
Research Center, Lafayette, Louisiana. 
 
Godfrey, R. K. 1988.   Trees, shrubs, and woody vines 
of northern Florida and adjacent Georgia and 
Alabama.  University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
Georgia.  p. 734. 
 
Harcombe, P. A., G. N. Cameron, & E. G. Glumac 
1993.   Above-ground net primary productivity in 
adjacent grassland and woodland on the coastal 
prairie of Texas, USA .  Journal of Vegetation Science 
4:521-530. 
 
Hunt, K. W. 1947.   Charleston woody flora .  Amer. 
Midl. Naturalists 37:670-786. 
 
Jamieson, G. S., & R. S. McKinney 1938.   Stillingia 
oil .  Oil and Soap 15:295-296. 
 
Jones, R. H. & K. W. McLeod 1989.   Shade 
tolerance in seedlings of Chinese tallow tree, 
American sycamore, and cherry bark oak .  Bull 
Torrey Bot. Club 116:371-377. 
 
Jubinsky, G. 1993.   A review of the literature: 
Sapium sebiferum Roxb .  Report No. TSS 93-03.  
Florida Department of Natural Resouces, Bur. Aq. 
Plant Management, Tallahassee, Florida. 
 
Jubinsky, G. & L. C. Anderson 1996.   The invasive 
potential of Chinese tallow-tree (Sapium sebiferum 
Roxb.) in the southeast .  Castanea 61:226-231.  
 
Kline, W. N. & J. G. Duquesnel 1996.   Management 
of invasive exotic plants with herbicides in Florida .  Down to Earth.  Vol 51. No. 2.  Also available at: 
http://fleppc.org/trtguide.htm 
 
Knopf, F. L. 1996.  
Prairie legacies - birds .  IN: F. B. 
Sampson and F. L. Knopf (eds.).  Prairie 
Conservation.  Island Press, Washington, DC. 
 
Lin, W. C., A. C. Chen, C. J. Tseng & S. G. Hwang 
1958.   An investigation and study of Chinese tallow 
tree in Taiwan (Sapium sebiferum Roxb.) .  Bulletin of 
the Taiwan Forestry Research Institute 57:1-37. 
 
Neyland, R. & H. A. Meyer 1997.   Species diversity 
of Louisiana chenier woody vegetation remnants .  
Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 124:254-261. 
 
Princen, L. H. 1977.   Potential wealth in new crops: 
Research and development .  Pp. 1-15.  IN: Seigler, 
D.S. (ed.), Crop resources  Academic Press, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Randall, J. M. & J. Marinelli 1996.   Invasive plants, 
weeds of the global garden .  Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Handbook #149, Brooklyn, New York.  99 p. 
 
Redlus, H. 1997.   National animal poison control 
center information .  (9 June 1997). 
 
Russell, L. H., W. L. Schwartz, & J. W. Dollahite 
1969.  Toxicity of Chinese tallow tree (Sapium 
sebiferum) for ruminants .  American Journal of 
Veterinary Research 30:1233-1238. 
 
Scheld, H. W. & J. R. Cowles 1981.   Woody biomass 
potential of the Chinese tallow tree Sapium 
sebiferum .  Econ. Bot. 35:391-397. 
 
Scheld, H. W., N. B. Bell, G. N. Cameron, J. R. 
Cowles, C. R. Engler, A. D. Kridorian, & E. B. 
Schultz Jr. 1980.   The Chinese tallow tree as a cash 
and petroleum substitute crop .  Pp 97-112.  IN: Tree 
crops for energy co-production on farms .  U. S. 
Department of Energy, Solar Energy Research 
Institute, CP-622-1086.  Washington, DC. 
 
Scheld, H. W., J. R. Cowles, C. R. Engler, R. 
Kleiman, & E. B. Schultz, Jr. 1984.   Seeds of Chinese 
tallow tree as a source of chemicals and fuels .  Pp 
97-111.  IN: E. B. Schultz, Jr. and R. P. Morgan 
[eds.],  Fuels and chemicals from oil seeds: 
Technology and policy options .  AAAS Selected 
symposium 91.  Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
 
Seibert, M., G. Williams, G. Folger, & T. Milne 
1986.   Fuel and chemical co-production from tree 
crops .  Biomass 9:49-66.

Singh, R. P. & A. Pal 1990.  Development and 
structure of seeds in Ch inese tallow tree Sapium 
sebiferum Roxb. (Euphorbiaceae).   Flora 184:15-20. 
 
Skinner, M.W. 1998.  Personal communication .  
Cardinals ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) seen feeding on 
Chinese tallow ( Sapium sebiferum ) seeds in 
Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana, on January 31, 1998. 
 
Westbrooks, R. G. & J.  W. Preacher 1986.  
Poisonous plants of eastern North America .  
University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, South 
Carolina.  172 p. 
 
Prepared By 
Lowell Urbatsch 
Department of Plant Biology, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Mark Skinner 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 18sep00 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.