Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN RED CEDAR  
Thuja plicata  Donn ex D. Don 
Plant Symbol = THPL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Giant arborvitae, western ar borvitae, giant red-cedar, 
Pacific red-cedar, shinglewood, canoe cedar 
 
Uses 
Industry : The wood of western red cedar is primarily 
used in roofing for shingles and shakes, because of its 
attractive appearance, du rability, lightness, and 
superior insulation qualities.  It is also used in 
exterior finishings, utility poles, fence posts, piling, 
paper pulp, and various types of containers.  The 
species is managed for timber in Europe and New 
Zealand.  Cedar leaf oil is often the basis for 
production of perfumes, insecticides, medicinal 
preparations, veterinary soaps, shoe polishes, and 
deodorants.    
 
Wildlife : The leaves of western red cedar are a major 
winter food for big game in the northern Rocky 
Mountains, and deer brow se it all year along the 
coast.  Many cultivars  are grown for ornament, 
including those used for hedges.  It is the provincial 
tree of British Columbia.   
 
Ethnobotanic : Western red cedar has been called “the 
cornerstone of northwest  coast Indian culture” and 
the large-scale use of its wood and bark delineates the  cultural boundary of the northwest coast peoples 
within its range.  Wood served for house planks, 
house posts, roof boards, various kinds of boxes, and 
canoes.  It is easy to split and was often used for 
bentwood boxes.  Bark was made into skirts, capes, 
and complete dresses for women, and roots and limbs 
were used for baskets and rope.  The inner bark was 
used for slow matches to carry the fire from camp to 
camp, and also as mats, and baskets.  Various 
medicines were derived from the tree.    
 
 Dendrology: Department of Botany ©
 Iowa State University 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Cypress family (Cupressaceae).  Native 
trees growing to 50 (-75) me ters tall, often buttressed 
at base, with a conical to irregular crown, old 
individuals frequently with many leaders and many 
dead spike tops; branches arching, branchlets 
pendent, flattened, in fan-shaped sprays; bark gray to 
reddish-brown, 10-25 mm thick, fibrous, separated 
into flat, connected ridges.  Leaves are evergreen, 
scale-like and sharply poin ted, (1-) 3-6 mm long, 
opposite in alternating pairs (in 4 rows), glossy green 
above, white-striped on the lower surface, with a 
spicy fragrance when crus hed.  Seed cones are 
ellipsoid, 10-14 mm long,  brown; seeds 8-14 per 
cone, 4-7.5 mm long, with lateral wings about as 
wide as the body.  The common name pertains to the 
western distribution and cedar-like appearance.   
 
Variation within the species : although small inter-
populational differences have been documented, 
western red-cedar seems to show less within-species 
genetic variation than other northwestern conifers.  
Horticultural varieties with color and growth form 
differences have been developed ( atrovirens, 
fastigiata,  pendula).   
 
Distribution : The range of western red-cedar is 
essentially in two segments: a Coast Range-Cascade 
Range segment from southeastern Alaska to 
northwestern California and a Rocky Mountain 
segment from British Columbia and Alberta to Idaho 
and Montana.  For current  distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.

Adaptation  
The trees occur on various substrates, commonly on 
moist sites (swamps, wet ravines, poorly drained 
depressions), but on a variety of landforms, including 
rocky slopes, at 0-1500 (-2300) meters elevation.  
They usually occur in mixed coniferous forests, 
rarely in pure stands.  In cultivation, they prefer 
moist, acid, well-drained soils but have been grown 
in heavy clays of the Midwest.   
 
Establishment 
Cone production begins in open-grown trees of 
western red cedar at about 10-20 years of age but 
peak production occurs after 70-80 years and may 
continue for several centuries.  Good seed crops are 
produced at intervals of 2-3 years.   
 
In clearcuts and other disturbed areas, seedlings 
account for most of the western red-cedar 
regeneration, but seedlings in mature stands may be 
less abundant than individuals produced by 
vegetative reproduction from layering, rooting of 
fallen branches, and branch development on fallen 
trees.  Disturbed mineral soil seems to be a major 
requirement for regeneration from seed.  Unburned 
soil provides better seedbed than scorched soil, but 
slash burning may create mineral soil surfaces in cut-
over areas.  In mature stands of western red cedar, 
rotten wood in contact with the soil provides an 
effective seedbed.  Par tial shade, which lowers 
evaporation and soil temperature, is beneficial to 
seedling growth.   
 
Western red cedar is often  present in pioneer, seral, 
and climax stages of forest succession.  Vegetative 
regeneration may be predominant in ecologically 
stable communities, but wide seed distribution allows 
it to invade disturbed areas.  It is highly shade-
tolerant and is well suited for reforesting high brush-
risk areas near the coast.   
 
Age determination of western red-cedar is 
complicated by buttress form ation and the associated 
complex growth patterns, but ring counts of trees 
from Washington and British Columbia indicate that 
some trees live at least  up to 1460 years.   
  
Management 
In mixed-species and uneven-aged stands, western 
red cedars tolerate shady understory conditions and 
can maintain slow but acceptable growth rates over 
long periods.  In timber harvest of these mixed-
species stands, most of these trees are taken by 
clearcutting.  Because of steep terrain, decay, and 
breakage, harvesting costs are high and lumber 
recovery is low.  Because  of its high susceptibility to  windthrow in wet environments and in the moist sites 
where growth and yield are highest, western red 
cedars should not be left as scattered seed trees.  
Even those along clearcut margins may be lost to 
wind throw or exposure.   
 
Severe browse damage to western red-cedar 
seedlings and saplings by deer, elk, and rodents may 
be the most important problem in the establishment 
of young stands.  In near-coastal sites, western red-
cedar is more severely damaged by fire than any of 
its associates.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Chambers, K.L.  1993.  
Thuja.  Pp. 410-411, IN: 
Flora of North America, north of Mexico .  Vol. 2, 
Pteridophytes and gymnosperms .  Oxford Univ. 
Press, New York, New York.  
<http://hua.huh.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/Flora/flora.pl?FLORA_ID=12395> 
 
Gunther, E. 1945.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  Univ. Washington Publ. Anthropol. 
10(1):1-62.  
 
Minore, D.  1990.   Thuja plicata.  Pp. 590-600, IN: 
R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North 
America . Volume 1.   Conifers .  USDA, Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Stewart, H. 1984.   Cedar: Tree of life to the 
Northwest Coast Indians .  Douglas & McIntyre, 
Vancouver.  
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson

USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.