Plant Guide 
Plant Materials < http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page < http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html
> 
National Plant Data Center < http://npdc.usda.gov
> 
 
STRAWBERRY 
CLOVER 
Trifolium fragiferum  L.  
Plant Symbol = TRFR2  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 Strawberry Clover. FAO, Rome, Italy . Used with permission. 
 
Alternate Names  
Trifolium fragiferum  L. ssp. Bonannii  (C. Presl) 
Sojak.  TRFRB.  
 
Uses  
Strawberry clover is mainly used for pasture  and in 
mixtures with grass for hay and silage .  It has also 
been used to a limited extent as groundcover in 
orch ards and vineyards and for green manure  cover 
crop applications.   Forage and seeds of strawberry 
clover are also used by big and small game and 
upland birds (Stevens and Monsen, 2004).  
 
Status 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General : Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Strawberry clover 
is a n introduced  perennial low -gro wing plant  with 
creeping stems that root at the node (stolons)  to  spread and it 
also produces seed.  It is subglabrous 
with slender, pointed trifoliate leaves.  Leaf veins are 
distinctive with veins meeting edge of leaf at right 
angles.  Hairs are present on the petioles and 
underside of the leaflet.  Stipules are mostly 
conspicuous and become gradually narrowed to apex.  
Seedlings are initially tap -rooted and stolons that 
initiate from leaf axils form a prostrate plant  network.  
The  inflorescence  is globular and comp act, 10-12 
mm ( 0.03-0.04 in) diameter, with pink or purplish red 
florets.  When seed is ripe, the florets become reddish 
and resemble strawberries.   Flower heads enlarge to a 
fuzzy reddish ball approximately 2 cm (0.78 in) in 
diameter  when ripe.   The pubes cent fruiting calyces 
contain 1 -2  heart -shaped  seeds that are light brown in 
color with dark brown flecks.  Chromosome number 
is 2n=2x=16  and is cross-pollinated by bumble bees 
and honey bees  (Frame,  2005).  Plant height is 20 to 
35 cm ( 8-14 in ).  Strawber ry clover resembles white 
clover  in stature.  
 
 Strawberry clover leaf.  FAO, Rome, Italy. Used with 
permission . 
 
Distribution  
Strawberry clover is native to the eastern 
Mediterranean and southern Asia Minor Countries 
and has been intentionally and inadver tently spread 
by man to every continent on earth (Hollowell, 
1939).  It is grown to a limited degree as a pasture 
plant in moist alkaline and saline soils in the west ern 
and northern Great Plains  states  (McGregor, 1976) . 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Strawberry clover is noted for its ability to establish 
and persist on wet saline and  alkaline soils and is 
adapted to wet meadows, streams and seeps.  It is the

most saline tolerant clover commercially available.   
Strawberry clover  withstands flooding because the 
stolons have a tropic response that causes the tips to 
be elevated above the water level (Stevens and 
Monsen, 2004).  It is adapted to a wide range of soil 
textures from l oam to clay and tolerates soil pH of 
5.3 -8.2.  It is tolerant of flooding for up to 2 months, 
salinity  (up to 3  percent concentration ), and short -
term drought .  It needs at least 25 inches of annual 
precipitation to thrive but can  withstand mean annual 
pre cipitation as low as 17 inches  and can tolerate 
mean annual temperatures of 40 -50°F.  (UC SAREP 
Online).   Strawberry clover is more hardy and 
tolerant of harsh  environmental conditions than white 
clover.  
 
Establishment  
There are approximately 300, 000 seeds  per pound 
( PLANTS Database) and the seeding rate is 4 pounds 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  If used as a 
component of a seeding mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired.  For grazing situations, strawberry clover 
should be limited to 1 pound PLS per acre or  25 
percent  of the total seed mix (Ogle, et.al 2009).   
Strawberry clover seed  requires inoculation in order 
to fix nitrogen and also  requires the special strain of 
Rhizobia leguminosarum  trifolii (Miller, et. al, 2010), 
(UC SAREP Online).  Seedbed should be clean 
(weed -free)  and firm and seed may be drilled to  ⅛ - 
¼ inch depth and light but firm soil cover or 
broadcast  seeded  followed  by culti-packing or a light 
harrowing .  On saline soils, a cover crop of barley is 
recom mended to help establish strawberry clover  
(Frame, 2005) .  A cover crop to  help establish 
strawberry clover is  not recommended for non -saline 
sites.  
 
Planting  should  take place in late  fall (dormant) or in 
spring.  Late summer planting  can be successful if 
there is adequate moisture  (may require irrigation) 
and time for seedlings to establish before cold 
temperatures.  Seed may contain up to 70 percent 
hard seed, so if seeding during the growing season, 
seed should be scarified  prior to seeding .  Dormant 
fa ll planting  will allow natural seed scarification.   
Strawberry clover seedlings are easily established 
and grow rapidly  but do not compete well with weeds 
(Frame, 2005) .  Successful stands establish from 
seeding and natural spread and get better over time 
(Stevens and Monsen, 2004).    
 
Management  
Strawberry clover is tolerant of  grazing once the 
plants have developed strong stolons  or runners .  It is 
suited to either rotational or set- stocking and heavy 
grazing pressure.  McDonald, 2006)  recommend s that  a 2
-4 inch  stand be maintained  to reduce shading by 
grasses so that strawberry clover persists.   Close 
grazing (2 inch stubble height) favors clover  
persistence  and light grazing (grass taller than 4 
inches)  favors grass growth  (Ogle, et. al, 2008).   The 
recommended  minimum plant height to begin grazing 
or  haying for most clovers is 4 inches and the 
minimum stubble height to remain at end of grazing  
or  haying is 3 inches (Ogle, et. al, 2008).  
 
Strawberry clover can cause bloat in ruminants and 
increase  the incidence of urinary calculi in sheep.  
These problems can be managed by maintaining a 
significant component of grass in the pasture.  In 
waterlogged, mi ldly saline conditions, tall wheatgrass 
or ‘Newhy’ RS Hybrid wheatgrass are  good 
companion crops a nd for non-saline, waterlogged 
conditions, tall fescue, perennial ryegrass and 
paspalum are suitable companion crops (McDonald, 
2006).  
 
When seed is properly inoculated at time of planting, 
strawberry clover  will fix nitrogen from N
2 in the 
atmosphere, req uiring little or no additional nitrogen 
fertilizer.  However, legumes require relatively large 
amounts of phosphorus, potassium and sulphur, and 
will respond to additions  of  these nutrients as 
fertilizer when they are not adequately supplied by 
the soil.  In grass -legume mi xtures, it is not possible 
to supply the ideal combinations of elements for both 
grass and legume.  If nitrogen is applied, the grass 
will tend to increase at the expense of the legume 
(Ogle, et. al, 2008).  
 
Strawberry clover in mixture w ith grass is highly 
suitable for hay but care needs to be taken to avoid 
the loss of the nutritious leaf from the clover during 
the curing and ba iling process (Frame, 2005).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Strawberry clover is susceptible to clover rot 
( Scle rotinia trifoliorum ), clover rust (Uromyces  spp.) 
and root -knot nematodes ( Meloidogyne spp.) (Frame, 
2005), (UC SAREP Online).  Based on observations 
in California, strawberry clove r may  attract gophers 
(UC SAREP Online).  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Strawberry  clover spreads primarily  by stolons and to 
a lesser degree by seed and can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities under ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  
 
Contact your local extension specialist or county 
weed specialist to learn what works best in your area 
and how to use it safely.   Always read label and

safety instructions for each control method.  Trade 
names and control measures appear in this document 
only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS 
does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
Seed Production  
For seed production, plant strawberry clover seed at 1 
to 3 pounds PLS per  acre in 20 -24 inch rows.  To 
facilitate seed production and between -row weed 
control, it is desirable to plant strawberry clover in 
spaced rows instead of a  solid stand.  Seed yields in 
the United States range from 35 –  265 pounds per 
acre and average 90 pounds per acre (Frame, 2005).  
 
Common strawberry clover is  reported to be  self -
fertile but the variety ‘Salina’ is reported to be self -
sterile and needs cross pollination .  Self pollinated 
plants are less vigorous.  Placing colonies of honey 
bees near fields will help increase seed yields 
(Hollowell, 1939), (McGregor, 1976).  
 
Seed is usually harvested in July by swathing to 
allow the seed to complete maturity and dry followed 
by combining.  Fields should be swathed when most 
seed envelopes are light brown and slightly damp 
(from dew) to avoid seed loss due to shattering.  
Vacuum collection of seed has been reported to be 
possible but not common.  Processed seed may have 
40- 70 percent hard seed but under proper seed 
storage conditions, seed will remain viable for a long 
time (UC SAREP Online), (Frame, 2005).  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
‘Fresa’  strawberry clover was developed and 
released by the Department of Crop and Soil 
Sciences at New Mexico State University  in 1982.  
The original collection was from Turkey and was 
selected for its low growing habit in southern New 
Mexico.  It remains green throughout the year, but 
shows some dormancy with extremely high or low 
temperatures (Curtis and Curtis, Inc. ). 
 
‘Salina’  was released by the California Agricultural 
Experiment Station  in 1962.  It is palatable to all 
classes of livestock, can tolerate periods of winter 
flooding and is suitable for poorly drained soils in 
low -lying areas (Curtis  and Curtis, Inc. ). 
 
‘Palestine’, ‘Prins ep Park’, ‘O’ Connors’, 
‘Grasslands Onward’ and ‘Grasslands Upward ’ are 
strawberry clover releases developed and used in 
Australia and New Zealand  (McDonald, K. 2006) . 
  Acknowledgement
 
The authors acknowledge and thank the Food and 
Agriculture Organization  of the United Nations for 
use of the photographs in this plant guide.   
Photographs were obtained from the FAO Grassland 
Database:  
 
http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/gbase/Defaul  
t.htm  
 
R eferences  
Curtis and Curtis, Inc.  Strawberry  Clover.  [Online].  
Av ailable at 
http:www.curtisseed.com/index.cfm?show=10&
mid=11&pid=10 (accessed 23July2010).  
Frame, J. 2005.  Trif olium fragiferum  L.  [Online].  
Available at 
h ttp://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/gbase/da
ta/pf000500.htm (accessed 26July 2010).  
Hollowell, E.A. 1 939.  Strawberry Clover.  Leaflet 
No. 176.  United States Department of 
Agriculture. U. S. Government Printing Office. 
Washington, D.C.  
McDonald, K. 2006.  Strawberry Clover.  In:  Perennial pastures for Western Australia.  
Department of Agriculture and Foo d Western 
Australia, Bulletin4690, Perth.  
McGregor, S.E. 1976.  Chapter 3: Clover and Some  Relatives.  In: Insect pollination for Cultivated 
Crop Plants.  [Online].   Available at 
http://www.beeculture.com/content/pollination_h
andbook/strawberry.html (acces sed 20 July 
2010 ). 
Miller,  R., Kaiser, J., Ogle, D. 2010.  Legume 
Inoculation.  USDA -NRCS. IDTN26. Boise, ID  
Ogle, D., St. John, L., Stannard, M., Holzworth, L.  2009.  Grass, grass -like, forb, legume and woody 
species for the Intermountain West.  USDA -
NRCS . ID-TN24. Boise, ID  
Ogle, D., St. John, L.,  Cornwell, J., Stannard, M., 
Holzworth, L. 2008.   Pasture and Range 
Seedings: Planning –  Installation – Evaluation  – 
Management.  USDA -NRCS. ID -TN 10. Boise, 
ID  
P LANTS  Database.  Conservation Plant 
Characteristics for  Trifolium fragiferum .  
[Online]  Available at 
http://plants.usda.gov/java/charProfile?symbol=
TRFR2 (accessed 20 July 2010).  
Stevens, R. and S.B. Monsen. 2004.  Forbs for 
Seeding Range and Wildlife Habitats.  In: 
Restoring Western Ranges and Wildlands.  
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech Rep. RMRS -
GTR -136.  
UC SAREP Online Cover Crop Database.  [Online].   Available at Http://www.sarep.ucdavis.edu/cgi-

bin/CCrop.exe/show_crop_38 (accessed 20 July 
2010). 
 
Prepared By  
Loren St.  John, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, ID  
 
Daniel G. Ogle, USDA, NRCS, Boise, ID  
 
Derek Tilley, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation 
St. John, L., D.G. Ogle, D. Tilley. 2010.  Plant Guide 
for Strawberry Clover (Trifolium  fragiferum ).  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center.  
 
Edited:  28July2010 LS ; 10August  DGO; 28July2010 DT; 20August2010 
LS ; 5August2010 JB  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ >, and visit the PLANTS Web site 
< http://plants.usda.gov > or the Plant Materials P rogram Web site 
< http://Plant -Materials.nrcs.usda.gov > 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
prohibits discrimination in all its programs and 
activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital 
status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, 
reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual's 
income is derived from any public assistance 
program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who require 
alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 
720- 2600 (voice and TDD).   
To file a complaint of discrimination write to USDA, 
Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence 
Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410 or call 
(800) 795- 3272 (voice) or (202) 720- 6382 (TDD). 
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and 
employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.