Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BASSWOOD 
Tilia americana L. 
Plant Symbol = TIAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names  
Linn, American linden, white basswood (var. 
heterophylla), American basswood 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans and settlers used the 
fibrous inner bark ("bast") as a source of fiber for 
rope, mats, fish nets, and baskets.  Basswood is still 
valued for its soft, light, easily worked wood, 
especially for turned items and hand carving.  It once 
was the material of choice  for prosthetic limbs, but 
these are now made from synthetics.  Other uses have 
included boxes, toys, woodenware, drawing boards,  
veneer, venetian blinds,  excelsior, and pulp.    
  
Native Americans used fresh basswood sap, which 
contains moderate amounts of sugar, as a watery  drink or boiled it into syrup.  They also ate young 
basswood leaves and used the cambium for soups and 
breads.  Various medicinal uses were made of leaf 
and bark extracts, and Iroquois used freshly cut bark 
as an emergency bandage for wounds.   
 
Wildlife
: Basswood is good browse and buds are 
important for birds and deer in winter.  Fruits are 
eaten by birds and small mammals.  The wood 
decays easily and produces many cavities (especially 
in trees past 120 years of  age), which are used by 
cavity-nesting animals (w ood ducks, pileated 
woodpeckers, other birds, and small mammals).  
Basswood is a prolific nectar producer and 
pollination by honeybees results in a choice grade of 
honey.  
 ©  J.R. Manhart Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M University
 
Restoration: Basswood is planted as a shade tree or 
ornamental. For sites of smaller size or with 
compacted soils, other Tilia  species may be more 
suitable.  Basswood is said to be a soil-enriching 
species, bringing calcium and magnesium up from 
deep in the soil profile and depositing it in leaf litter 
on the surface.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Basswood family (Tiliaceae).  Native, large 
deciduous trees, the bark gray and furrowed with flat 
ridges.  Leaves deciduous, alternate, more or less 
unevenly heart-shaped or the base often nearly 
truncate, petiolate, the blades 5-12.5 cm wide, thick 
and slightly leathery, with shallowly toothed margins, 
glabrous on both sides or with some pubescence on 
the lower surface.  Flowers yellowish-white, 10-14 
mm broad, fragrant and nectar-bearing, in drooping, 
6-20-flowered clusters hanging on a stalk that 
diverges from near the cent er of an oblong, leaflike 
and strongly veined bract 5-10 cm long.  Fruits 
mostly globose, 8-10 mm broad, hard and dry, 
indehiscent.  The common name is from “bastwood,” 
referring to use of the inner bark, the “bast,” for rope, 
baskets, etc.   
 
Variation within the species :  
North American basswoods have been separated into 
many species (usually three or four) or treated as

several varieties within only a single species.  “Given 
the inconstancy of most vegetative and reproductive 
characters [of North American basswood], the 
ecophenic, ecotypic, and seasonal variation in 
vestiture, and also the probability of introgression,” 
trichome morphology provides the best evidence for 
recognizing the component taxa (see Hardin 1990).    
a. Tilia americana  var. americana  
          synonym:  Tilia neglecta Spach  
b. Tilia americana  var. heterophylla  (Vent.) Loud.    
          synonym:  Tilia heterophylla  Vent. 
          synonym: Tilia michauxii Nutt. 
c. Tilia americana  var. caroliniana  (P. Mill.) Castigl.   
          synonym:  Tilia caroliniana  P. Mill.   
          synonym: Tilia floridana Small  
 
The varieties of  Tilia americana intergrade, but in 
their typical forms are separated as follows:   
 
a. Leaves green beneath, sometimes glaucous, 
glabrous or sparsely hair y with simple trichomes, 
sometimes with a few stellate ones.    var. americana 
a. Leaves pale or whitish beneath from the close 
tomentum of dense, sessile-stellate trichomes, 
sometimes glabrate with age but remaining stellate-
pubescent at least along the major veins. (b)  
 
b. Young twigs tomentose or tomentose-hirsute; 
clusters of hairs on leaves more than 0.5 mm wide.   
 var. caroliniana 
b. Young twigs glabrous; clusters of hairs on leaves 
less than 0.5 mm wide.   var.  heterophylla 
 
Trees identified as  Tilia neglecta may be variants of 
var.  americana  or they have been suggested to  be 
introgressants between var.  americana and var. 
heterophylla .  Tilia floridana  is often recognized as 
separate entity.    
 
Distribution : Tilia americana  is native to the 
Northern Deciduous and Great Lakes - St. Lawrence 
forest regions of North America.  It also extends into 
grassland areas along river courses in Manitoba and 
the mid-western United States, where it forms a 
component of riverine gallery forests.  In Canada, it 
is found from western New Brunswick into southern 
and central Québec and Ontario, extending as far 
west as north-western Ontario (along the U.S. border) 
and southern Manitoba.  In the United States, the 
species occurs as far south as the mountainous 
regions of North Carolina, Tennessee, and northern 
Arkansas.  The western limit for the species is south-
central Manitoba and North Dakota, and along the 
Niobrara River in north-central Nebraska.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Basswood occurs on rich, mesic sites (coves, lower 
slopes, river bottoms), usually on deep, well-drained 
soils.  It rarely occurs in pure stands but is usually 
mixed with other forest species.  Var.  americana is 
codominant in the sugar maple-basswood cover type 
and all varieties are a common component of many 
other rich forests.  Basswood occurs up to 1500 
meters elevation in the southern Appalachian 
Mountains.  Flowering May-June (-July), usually 1-4 
weeks after the leaves appear  in mid-May.  Seeds are 
dispersed in October.     
 
Establishment 
Seed production begins in basswoods about 15 years 
old (or as early as 8 years) and continues until the 
trees reach at least 100 years.  Heavy seed crops are 
irregular but good quantities of seed are produced at 
1- to 3-year intervals.  Germination in the first year or 
two is often poor, apparently because of an 
impermeable testa, but seeds may remain dormant 
and viable in seed banks fo r up to three years.  Few 
established seedlings are found where the species 
forms a major component of the canopy, apparently 
because seedling loss from herbivory by rabbits and 
deer.    
 
Seedlings can establish in as little as 25% of full 
sunlight, but heavy shade limits subsequent growth 
and development.  Seedling growth begins slowly, 
but established young trees are fairly fast-growing.  
The typical life of a basswood is about 100 years but 
some are known to live 140-200 years.    
 
Basswood stump sprouts are often very common, and 
this may produce trees growing in close clusters.  
Stump sprouts arise from the main stem after its 
death, fire or logging injury, or aging, or even after 
disturbance of the surrounding stand.  Almost all 
basswoods 10 cm or less d.b.h. will sprout from the 
stump, and sprouts have been obtained from 
basswoods over 100 years old.    
 
Management 
Basswood stump sprouts can be managed for saw 
timber.  The number of spr outs declines with the age 
and size of the cut trees.  Si nce sprouts originating at 
or below the ground line are more resistant to butt 
rot, stumps should be cut very close to the ground or 
burned.  Early thinning of sprouts is needed to ensure 
good quality and rapid growth.   
 
Over-browsing by high densities of white-tailed deer 
can result in basswood seedling height growth 
reduction or even complete loss of basswood from

the stand.  Mice and voles on oldfield sites may often 
girdle the stems, and rabbits also feed heavily on 
seedlings and small saplings.  Seed predators include 
mice, squirrels, and chipmunks.  Basswood is easily 
decayed by fungi,  and butt rot is an important factor 
in loss of merchantable timber.  
 
Basswood is most common in forests with long fire-
free intervals, because the th in bark and shallow roots 
are easily damaged by fire and basal fire wounds 
increase susceptibility to butt ro t.  Prescribed fire is 
not recommended for established stands of 
hardwoods in which basswood occurs, as too-
frequent fire intervals eliminate basswood or restrict 
it to the most mesic sites.  In some places, however, 
these trees are encroaching onto former grasslands 
since fires have been suppressed.    
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Cultivars of  Tilia americana 
have been selected for matu re shape, fall leaf color, 
and rust resistance.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brizicky, G.K. 1965.   The genera of Tiliaceae and 
Elaeocarpaceae in the southeastern United States .  J. 
Arnold Arb. 46:286-307.   
 
Crow, T.R. 1990.   Tilia americana.  Pp. 784-791, IN: 
R.M. Burns and B.H. Honkala.   Silvics of North 
America . Volume 2.   Hardwoods .  USDA, Forest 
Service Agric. Handbook 654, Washington, D.C.  
<http://willow.ncfes.umn.edu/silvics_manual/Table_
of_contents.htm> 
 
Hardin, J.W. 1990.   Variation patterns and 
recognition of varieties of Tilia americana s.l .   Syst. 
Bot. 15:33-48.    
 
Hickok, L.G. & J.C. Anway 1972.   A morphological 
and chemical analysis of geographical variation in 
Tilia L. of eastern North America .  Brittonia 24:2-8.   
 
Jones, G.N. 1968.  Taxonomy of American species of 
lindens (Tilia).   Illinois Biol. Monogr. No. 39.  Univ. 
of Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois. 
 
Peasley, N. 1996.   Critical silvics: American 
basswood -- Tilia americana .  Stand Interventions 
WWW Page.  
<www.unb.ca/web/standint/for3005/tilame.htm> 
 
Sullivan, J. 1994.   Tilia americana.  IN: W.C. Fischer 
(compiler).  The fire effects information system  [Data 
base].  U.S. Dept. of Agric., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory. Missoula, Montana.   
<http://www.fs.fed.us/datab ase/feis/plants/tree/tilame
/> 
 
Texas A&M University 2000 .  Images of the 
Tiliaceae.  IN:  Vascular plant image gallery .  
Bioinformatics Working Group, College Station, 
Texas.  21SEP2000. 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/imaxxtil.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.