Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BROAD-LEAVED CATTAIL 
Typha latifolia  L. 
Plant Symbol = TYLA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Idaho Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Flags, rushes, bulrushes, cat o’nine tails, Cossack 
asparagus, reed mace, baco (cattail) 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: All parts of the cattail are edible when 
gathered at the appropriat e stage of growth.  The 
young shoots are cut from the rhizomes (underground 
stems) in the spring when they are about 4 to 16  inches long.  The raw young shoots taste like 
cucumber and can also be made into pickles.  When 
the young shoots are steamed they taste like cabbage.  
The base of the stem where 
it attaches to the rhizome 
can be boiled or roasted like potatoes.  The young 
flower stalks can be taken out of their sheaths and 
can be boiled or steamed just like corn (Roos-Collins 
1990; Clarke 1977).   
 
Cattail pollen is a fine substitute for flours.  It is a 
bright yellow or green color, and turns pancakes, 
cookies or biscuits a pretty yellow color (which 
children love).  The rhizomes (underground stems) 
and lower stems have a sweet  flavor and can be eaten 
raw, baked, roasted, or broiled.  Cattail rhizomes are 
fairly high in starch content; this is usually listed at 
about 30% to 46%.  The co re can be ground into 
flour.  One acre of cattails would yield about 6,475 
pounds of flour (Harrington 1972).  This flour would 
probably contain about 80 % carbohydrates and 
around 6% to 8% protein.  Since cattail occurs 
around the world, it is a potential source of food for 
the worlds' population. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s 
College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Newly emerging shoots of cattails are edible, with 
delicate flavor and crispy asparagus like texture 
(Glenn Keator, Linda Yamane, Ann Lewis 1995).  
The end of a new stem of cattail is popular for eating 
with Washoes (Murphy 1959).  When mixed with 
tallow, the brown fuzz ca n be chewed like gum. 
 
The Klamath and Modocs of northern California and 
southern Oregon make flexible baskets of twined tule 
or cattail.  Cattails or tules were also twined to form 
mats of varying sizes for sleeping, sitting, working, 
entertaining, covering doorways, for shade, and a 
myriad of other uses. 
 
The Cahuilla Indians used the stalks for matting, 
bedding material, and cere monial bundles (Barrows 
1967).  Some tribes used the leaves and sheath bases 
as caulking materials.  Apaches used the pollen in 
female puberty ceremonies.  After dipping the spike 
in coal oil, the stalk makes  a fine torch.  The fluff can 
also be used as tinder, insulation, or for lining baby 
cradleboards.  The down is used for baby beds 
(Murphey 1959). 
 
Lengths of cattail were plied into rope or other size 
cordage, and cattail rope was used in some areas to 
bind bundles of tule into tule boats.  Air pockets or

aerenchyma in the stems provide the buoyancy that 
makes tule good boat-building material.  
 
Other Uses : Wildlife, wetland rest oration, wastewater 
tertiary treatment, edible (young shoots, base of stem, 
flower stalks, pollen, rhizomes), and aesthetics.  The 
multitudes of tiny, wind-carried seeds are too small 
and too hairy to be attractive to birds (Hotchkiss and 
Dozier 1949).  In a few exceptions, the seeds are 
eaten by several duck species.  Cattail rootstocks are 
much more valuable as food for wildlife than are the 
seeds.  Geese and muskrats prefer the stems and 
roots.  Moose and elk eat fresh spring shoots.  Shelter 
and nesting cover are provided for long-billed marsh 
wrens, red-wing blackbirds, and yellow-headed 
blackbirds.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Cattail Family (Typhaceae).  Cattails are 
herbaceous, rhizomatous perennial plants with long, 
slender green stalks topped with brown, fluffy, 
sausage-shaped flowering heads.   Typha latifolia 
plants are 15-30 dm tall.  The spike-like, terminal, 
cylindric inflorescence has  staminate flowers above 
and pistillate flowers below with a naked axis 
between the staminate and pistillate flowers.  The 
spike is green when fresh, becoming brown as it 
matures.  The basal leaves are thin with parallel veins 
running the long, narrow length of the leaf.  These 
plants are rhizomatous and colonial. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Broad-leaved cattails are common throughout 
the United States and temperate and tropical places 
worldwide (Hickman 1993).   Typha latifolia occurs 
in coastal and valley marshes at elevations lower than 
2,000 m. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Typha latifolia  generally occurs in 
shallower water than  Typha angustifolia.  Compared 
to  T. angustifolia , T. latifolia is exploitative in its 
ability to clone rapidly and produce a large leaf 
surface area, which may contribute to its superior 
competitive ability (Grace and Wetzel 1982).   Typha 
latifolia  has been found to be tolerant of water level 
fluctuations and moderate soil salinity.  Cattail  spreads both vegetatively and by seed, particularly 
under drawdown (Shay et al. 1986)
. 
 
Cattails are always found in or near water, in 
marshes, ponds, lakes and depressions.  They are 
obligate wetland indicator plant species.  Cattails 
tolerate perennial flooding, reduced soil conditions 
and moderate salinity.  With influxes of nutrient or 
freshwater, cattails are aggressive invaders in both 
brackish salt marshes and freshwater wetlands.  
 
Cattails, like many emergent wetland species, tolerate 
flood drawdown cycles that
 occur to varying degrees 
in different wetland and riparian systems.  Flood and 
drought are disturbance factors that vary in 
frequency, magnitude, and predictability.  Frequency 
relates to the number of episodes per unit time while 
magnitude of flooding can be expressed in terms of 
water volume, velocity, gradient, depth, duration, and 
season of inundation.  When planting cattails, the 
flood-draw-down cycles must be taken into 
consideration for successful revegetation. 
 
Planting : Typha  species may be planted from bare 
rootstock or seedlings from container stalk or directly 
seeded into the soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are 
preferred revegetation methods where there is 
moving water.   Typha seeds germinate readily and 
are a cost-effective means  to propagate cattail on 
moist soils.  To ensure a long-term stable ecosystem, 
it is recommended that  Typha be just one of the 
species in the mix for wetland restoration. 
 
Seed Collections : Select seed collection sites where 
continuous stands with fe w intermixed species can 
easily be found.  At each  collection location, obtain 
permission for seed collection. 
•   Seed is harvested by either taking hand clippers 
and cutting the stem off below the seed heads or 
stripping the seed heads off the stalk. 
•  Collect and store seeds in brown paper bags or 
burlap bags.  Seeds are then dried in these bags. 
•  Seeds can be harvested when they are slightly 
immature.  It is important to harvest the 
staminate stalks before th ey dry and blow away.  
•  Seeds and seed heads need to be cleaned in a 
seed cleaner.  Plant cleaned seed in fall.  
•  Plant in clean, weed - free, moist seed bed.  
Flooded or ponded soils will significantly 
increase seedling mortality. 
•  Broadcast seed and roll in or rake 1/4" to 1/2" 
from the soil surface. 
•  Some seed may be lost due to scour or flooding.  
Recommended seed density is unknown at this 
time.

Seed germination in greenhouse: Clean seed - blow 
out light seed. 
•   To grow seeds, plant in greenhouse in 1" x 1" x 
2" pots, 1/4" under the soil surface.  Keep soil 
surface moist.  Greenhou se temperature should 
be 100 degrees F (plus or minus 5 degrees).  
Seeds begin to germinate  after a couple weeks in 
warm temperatures.   
•   Plants are ready in 100 - 120 days to come out as 
plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in soil by November.  These plants 
are very small; growing plants to a larger size 
will result in increased revegetation success.  
 
Live Plant Collections : No more than 1/4 of the 
plants in an area should be collected.  If no more than 
0.09 m
2 (1 ft2) should be removed from a 0.4 m2 (4 
ft2) area, the plants will grow back in the hole in one 
good growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficiently deep for digging plugs.  This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes  to grow back during the 
growing season.  Donor plants, which are drought-
stressed, tend to have higher revegetation success. 
 
Live transplants should be planted in moist (not 
flooded or anoxic) soils as soon as possible.  Plants 
should be transported and stored in a cool location 
prior to planting.  Plugs may be split into smaller 
units, generally no smaller than 6 x 6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 
in), with healthy rhizomes and tops.  The important 
factor in live plant collections is to be sure  to
 include
 
a growing bud in either plugs or rhizomes.  Weeds in 
the plugs should be removed by hand.  For ease in 
transport, soil may be washed  gently from roots.  The 
roots should always remain moist or in water until 
planted.  
 
Clip leaves and stems from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 in); 
this allows the plant to allocate more energy into root 
production.  Plant approx imately 1 meter apart.  
Plants should be planted closer together if the site has 
fine soils such as clay or silt, steep slopes, or 
prolonged inundation. 
 
Ideally, plants should be planted in moist soils in late 
fall just after the first rains (usually late October to 
November).  This enables plant root systems to 
become established before heavy flooding and winter 
dormancy occurs.  Survival  is highest when plants are 
dormant and soils are moist.  Fertilization is very 
helpful for plant growth and reproduction.  Many 
more seeds are produced with moderate fertilization. 
 
Management 
Heavy grazing will eliminate  Typha species as well 
as other native species from riparian corridors.  
However, cattails are fairly resistant to moderate 
grazing, providing wet soils are not compacted. 
 
Because cattails have relatively little value for ducks, 
they are often regarded  as undesirable weeds in 
places intended primarily for ducks.  It has been 
found that mowing cattails after the heads are well 
formed but not mature and then following up with 
another mowing about a month later, when new 
growth is two or three feet high, will kill at least 75% 
of the plants.  This will enable other emergent 
vegetation with more palatable and nutritious seeds to 
become established. 
 
Ecologically, cattails tend to invade native plant 
communities when hydrology, salinity, or fertility 
changes.  In this case  they out compete native 
species, often becoming monotypic stands of dense 
cattails.  Maintaining water flows into the wetland, 
reducing nutrient input and maintaining salinity in 
tidal marshes will help maintain desirable species 
composition.  If cattails begin to invade, physical 
removal may be necessary. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Local sources are recommended.  This species should 
be available from any local nursery specializing in 
aquatic plants. 
 
References 
Clarke, C.B. 1977.   Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press. 280 pp. 
 
Grace, J.B. 1985.   Juvenile vs. adult competitive 
abilities in plants: size-dependence in cattails 
(Typha) .  Ecology 66(5); 1630-1638. 
 
Grace, J.B. & R.G. Wetzel 1981.   Phenotypic and 
genotypic components of growth and reproduction in 
Typha latifolia: Experimental studies in marshes of 
differing successional maturity.  Ecology 62 (3): 699-
801. 
 
Grace, J.B. & R.G. Wetzel 1982.   Variations in 
growth and reproduction within populations of two 
rhizomatous plant species: Typha latifolia and Typha 
angustifolia.   Oecologia 53:258-263. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972.  Western edible wild plants .  
The University of New Mexico Press.  156 pp.

Hoag, J. C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.  Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands .  Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7. USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho, 6 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual. 
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press.  1399 pp. 
 
Hotchkiss, N. & H.L. Dozier 19??.   Taxonomy and 
distribution of North American cattails.   Am. Midl. 
Nat. 41: 237-253. 
 
Keator, G., L. Yamane, & A. Lewis  1995.  In full 
view.  Three ways of seeing California plants.   
Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  
 
Murphy, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Universit y of California Press. 
 
Roos-Collins, M. 1990.   The flavors of home. A guide 
to wild edible plants of the San Francisco Bay area .  
Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  224 pp. 
 
Shay, J.M. & C.T. Shay 1986.   Prairie marshes in 
western Canada, with specific reference to the 
ecology of five emergent macrophytes .  Can. J. Bot. 
64: 443-454. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Chris Hoag 
Interagency Riparian/Wetlands Project 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
Email: choag@id.nrcs.usda.gov 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 04dec00 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.