Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NARROWLEAF CATTAIL 
Typha angustifolia L.  
Plant Symbol = TYAN  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center & Idaho Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
flags, rushes, 
bulrushes, cat o’nine 
tails, Cossack 
asparagus, reed 
mace, baco 
 
Uses 
Caution: This 
species can be very 
invasive in disturbed 
wetlands.  Please 
read about the 
environmental 
concerns under 
Management. 
 
Ethnobotanic : All 
parts of the cattail 
are edible when 
gathered at the 
appropriate stage of 
growth.  The young 
shoots are cut from the rhizomes (underground 
stems) in the spring when they are about 4 to 16 
inches long.  The base of the stem where it attaches 
to the rhizome can be boiled or roasted like potatoes.  
The young flower stalks can be taken out of their 
sheaths and can be boiled or steamed just like corn.  
Cattail pollen is a fine substitute for flours.  It is a 
bright yellow or green color, and turns pancakes, 
cookies or biscuits a pretty yellow color (which 
children love).  The rhizomes and lower stems have a 
sweet flavor and can be eaten raw, baked, roasted, or 
broiled.  Cattail rhizomes are fairly high in starch 
content; this is usually listed at about 30% to 46%.  
The core can be ground into flour.  One acre of 
cattails would yield about 6,475 pounds of flour 
(Harrington 1972).  This flour would probably 
contain about 80 % carbohydr ates and around 6% to 
8% protein.  Since cattails occur around the world, it  is a potential source of food for the worlds' 
population. 
 
The Klamath and Modoc peoples of northern 
California and southern Oregon made flexible 
baskets of twined cattail.  Cattails were also twined to 
form mats of varying sizes for sleeping, sitting, 
working, entertaining, covering doorways, providing 
shade, and a myriad of other uses.  Lengths of cattail 
were plied into rope or other size cordage, and cattail 
rope was used in some areas to bind bundles of tule 
into tule boats.  Air pockets or aerenchyma in the 
stems provided the buoyancy for good boat-building 
material. 
Brother Alfred Brousseau © St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
The Cahuilla Indians used the stalks for matting, 
bedding material, and cere
monial bundles (Barrows 
1967).  Some tribes used the leaves and sheath bases 
as caulking materials.  Apaches used the pollen in 
female puberty ceremonies.  After dipping the spike 
in coal oil, the stalk makes  a fine torch.  The fluff can 
also be used as tinder, insulation, or for lining baby 
cradleboards.  The down is used for baby beds 
(Murphey 1959). 
 
Wildlife : The multitudes of tiny, wind-carried seeds 
are too small and too hairy to be attractive to birds 
(Hotchkiss and Dozier 1949).   In a few exceptions, 
the seeds are eaten by several duck species.  Cattail 
rootstocks are much more valuable as food for 
wildlife than are the seeds.  Geese and muskrats 
prefer the stems and roots.   Moose and elk eat fresh 
spring shoots.  Shelter and nesting cover are provided 
for long-billed marsh wrens, redwing blackbirds, and 
yellow-headed blackbirds. 
 
Conservation : This plant is used widely for wetland 
restoration and constructed wetlands for tertiary 
water treatment.   Typha species can become invasive 
in disturbed habitats. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Cattails are herbaceous, colonial, rhizomatous, 
perennial plants with long, slender, green stalks 
topped with brown, fluffy, sausage-shaped flowering 
heads.   Typha angustifolia  plants are 15-30 dm tall.

The spike-like, terminal, cylindric inflorescence has 
staminate flowers above and pistillate flowers below.  
The naked axis between the staminate and pistillate 
flowers is generally 1-8 cm.  The spike is medium to 
dark brown.  The basal leaves are thin with parallel 
veins running their long, narrow length.  The leaves 
are 4-12 mm wide when fresh, 3-8 mm wide when 
dry. 
 
Typha angustifolia  generally occurs in deeper water 
than  Typha latifolia .  Typha angustifolia  has fewer 
and larger rhizomes, resulting in a low rate of cloning 
but enabling it to grow in deeper water than  Typha 
latifolia .  Typha angustifolia  has a higher allocation 
to sexual reproduction.  Cattails
 spread both 
vegetatively and by seed, particularly under 
drawdown conditions. 
 
Distribution 
Cattails are always found in or near water, in 
marshes, ponds, lakes, and depressional areas.  They 
are obligate wetland indicator plant species.  Cattails 
tolerate perennial flooding, reduced soil conditions, 
and moderate salinity.  With influxes of nutrients or 
freshwater, cattails are aggressive invaders in both 
brackish salt marshes and freshwater wetlands.  
Narrow-leaved cattails are found in marshes at 
elevations <2000 m.  They grow throughout North 
America and Eurasia (Hickman 1993).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Typha  species may be planted from bare rootstock or 
seedlings from container stalk or directly seeded into 
the soil.  Bare rootstock or seedlings are preferred 
revegetation methods where there is moving water.  
Typha  seeds germinate readily and are a cost-
effective means to propagate cattail on moist soils.  
Typha  species can be invasive in disturbed wetland 
situations and become a monoculture. 
 
Seed Collections 
•   Select seed collection sites where continuous 
stands with few intermixed species can easily be 
found and obtain permission for seed collection. 
•  Seeds can be harvested when they are slightly 
immature.  It is important to harvest the 
staminate stalks before th ey dry and blow away.  
•  Harvest by using either hand clippers, cutting the 
stem off below the seed heads, or by stripping 
the seed heads off of the stalk.  Use a seed 
cleaner to process the seeds.  Dry and store the 
seeds in brown paper or burlap bags. 
•  Plant cleaned seed in fall.  Plant in clean, weed-
free, moist seedbed.  Flooded or ponded soils 
will significantly increase seedling mortality. 
•  Broadcast seed and roll in or rake 1/4" to 1/2" 
from the soil surface.  Some seed may be lost 
due to scour or flooding.  Recommended seed 
density is unknown at this time. 
 
Seed Germination in Greenhouse 
•  Plant in the greenhouse in 1" x 1" x 2" pots, 1/4" 
under the soil surface.  Keep soil surface moist.  
Greenhouse temperature should be 100° F (plus 
or minus 5° F).  Seeds will begin to germinate 
after a couple weeks in warm temperatures.   
•  Plants will be ready in 100-120 days to come out 
as plugs.  By planting seeds in August, plugs are 
ready to plant in the soil by November.  These 
plants are very small.  Growing plants to a larger 
size will result in increased revegetation success.  
 
Live Plant Collections 
•  No more than 1/4 of the plants in an area should 
be collected.  If no more  than 0.09 m² (1 ft²) is 
removed from a 0.4 m² (4 ft²) area, the plants 
will grow back into the hole in one good 
growing season.  A depth of 15 cm (6 in) is 
sufficient for digging plugs.  This will leave 
enough plants and rhizomes to grow back during 
the growing season.  
•   Donor plants that are drought-stressed tend to 
have higher revegetation success. 
•  Live transplants should be planted in moist (not 
flooded or anoxic) soils as soon as possible.  
Plants should be transported and stored in a cool 
location prior to planting.  Plugs may be split 
into smaller units, generally no smaller than 6 x 
6 cm (2.4 x 2.4 in), with healthy rhizomes and 
tops.  The important factor in live plant 
collections is to be sure
 to include a growing bud 
in either plugs or rhizomes.  Weeds in the plugs 
should be removed by hand.  For ease in 
transport, soil may be wash ed gently from roots.  
The roots should always remain moist or in 
water until planted.  
•   Clip leaves and stem from 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 
inches); this allows the plant to allocate more 
energy into root production.  Plant 
approximately 1 meter apart.  Plants should be 
planted closer together if the site has fine soils 
such as clay or silt, steep slopes, or prolonged 
inundation. 
•  Ideally, plants should be planted in moist soils in 
late fall just after the first rains (usually late 
October to November).  This enables plant root 
systems to become established before heavy

flooding and winter dormancy occurs.  Survival 
is highest when plants are dormant and soils are 
moist. 
•  Fertilization is very helpful for plant growth and 
reproduction.  Many more seeds are produced 
with moderate fertilization. 
 
Management 
Heavy grazing will eliminate  Typha species, as well 
as other native species, from riparian corridors.  
However, cattails are fairly resistant to moderate 
grazing, providing wet soils are not compacted. 
 
Because cattails have relatively little value for ducks, 
they are often regarded  as undesirable weeds in 
places intended primarily for ducks.  It has been 
found that mowing cattails after the heads are well–
formed, but not mature, then following up with 
another mowing about a month later (when new 
growth is two or three feet high) will kill at least 75% 
of the plants.  This will enable other emergent 
vegetation with more palatable and nutritious seeds to 
become established. 
 
Environmental Concerns : Ecologically, cattails tend 
to invade native plant communities when hydrology, 
salinity, or fertility change.  In this case, they out-
compete native species, of ten becoming monotypic 
stands of dense cattails.  Maintaining water flows into 
the wetland, reducing nutrient input, and maintaining 
salinity in tidal marshes will help maintain desirable 
species composition.  If cattails begin to invade, 
physical removal may be necessary. 
 
Over the past century, we have dramatically 
increased the range of this species and have brought 
T. angustifolia  and T. latifolia  together with the 
production of the hybrid T. glauca .  This taxon is 
extremely aggressive and will out-compete either 
parent.  The methods of control include clipping and 
floocing >12 inches, herbicides, and hydrology 
management (Melvin 2000).  Please contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.   USDA, NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally 
effective.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be 
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by  clicking on Plant Materials.  This species is readily 
available for native plant nurseries specializing in 
wetland plants. 
 
References 
CalPhotos 2000.  
Typha angustifolia .  
<http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi/img_query?seq_num
=11010&one=T>.  Version: 000321.  CalFlora, Inc., 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Clarke, C.B. 1977.   Edible and useful plants of 
California .  University of California Press.  280 pp. 
 
Grace, J.B. 1985.   Juvenile vs. adult competitive 
abilities in plants: size-dependence in cattails  
( Typha ). Ecology 66(5):1630-1638. 
 
Grace, J.B. & R.G. Wetzel 1982.   Variations in 
growth and reproduction within populations of two 
rhizomatous plant species: Typha latifolia and Typha 
angustifolia .  Oecologia 53:258-263. 
 
Grace, J.B. & R.G. Wetzel 1981.   Phenotypic and 
genotypic components of growth and reproduction in 
Typha latifolia: Experimental studies in marshes of 
differing successional maturity .  Ecology 62(3):699-
801. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972.   Western edible wild plants .  
The University of New Mexico Press.  156 pp. 
 
Hoag, J. C. & M.E. Sellers (April) 1995.   Use of 
greenhouse propagated wetland plants versus live 
transplants to vegetate constructed or created 
wetlands .  Riparian/Wetland Project Information 
Series No. 7. USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho.  6 pp. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.   The Jepson manual. Higher 
plants of California .  University of California Press.  
1399 pp. 
 
Hotchkiss, N. & H.L. Dozier.   Taxonomy and 
distribution of North American cat-tails .  Am. Midl. 
Nat. 41:237-253. 
 
Keator, G., L. Yamane, & A. Lewis 1995.   In full 
view. Three ways of seeing California plants .  
Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  
 
Melvin, N. 2000.   Personal communication .  USDA, 
NRCS, National Wetland Science Institute, Laurel, 
Maryland.

Roos-Collins, M. 1990.  The flavors of home. A guide 
to wild edible plants of the San Francisco bay area .  
Heyday Books, Berkeley, California.  224 pp. 
 
Shay, J.M. & C.T. Shay 19??.   Prairie marshes in 
western Canada, with specific reference to the 
ecology of five emergent macrophytes .  Can. J. Bot. 
64:443-454. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2000.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 000321.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Chris Hoag 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Department of Plant  Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Revised 04dec00 jsp;  04j un03 ahv; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.