Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE BRODIAEA 
Triteleia hyacinthina (Lindl.) 
Greene 
Plant Symbol = TRHY3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden 
 
Alternate Names 
White-flowered grassnut 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Corms were dug with a digging stick 
and eaten either raw, roasted, baked in an earth oven, 
or boiled by tribes in California including the 
Southern Maidu, Northern Maidu, Washoe, Pomo, 
Sierra Miwok, Atsugewi, and Northern Paiute. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  The white or 
bluish-white hyacinth-like flowers are in an umbel (in 
a head) of capitate clusters, each with 10 to 40 
flowers.  The flowers have green mid-veins.  The 
basal leaves are linear and  grasslike and wither with 
flowering.  The scape is 3-6 dm tall.  This perennial 
plant also vegetatively propagates from tan, fibrous-
coated corms. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  The plant is found in grasslands, close-cone 
pine forests, foothill woodland, and vernally wet 
meadows from zero to 2,000 m.  The plant is found in 
the Central Valley, central  western California, the 
Sierra Nevada, northwestern California, and the 
Cascade Range, up to Vancouver Island and east to 
Idaho. 
Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Establishment 
If possible, obtain the s eed and corms from local 
sources to maintain genetic diversity of white 
brodiaea and for the best adaptation to local 
conditions.  Some nurseries may label their corms 
and seeds according to geographic source.  If planting 
flowering-size corms, they can be directly planted 
outside.  Plant the corms in the fall in full sun.  The 
less crowded the more the corms will offset.  Plant 
them 2 to 4 inches apart and 4 inches deep.  A well-
drained soil that is light and loose will produce bigger 
corms.  Water and weed the patch regularly and 
protect it from small and la rge mammals, insects, and 
birds.  Keep the ground slightly damp.  If given too 
much water the corms will rot.  If it rains fairly 
regularly, don't water the area.  When the leaves on 
the plants have turned yellow and dried up, stop 
watering.  Allow the corms to summer bake.  The 
plants should be well established after one year.   
 
If planting seeds of white brodiaea, store the seeds in 
a paper bag until autumn.  Plant the seeds before 
October 1st in a container and care for them for two 
years before planting them outside in the ground.  
Plant the seeds in six-inch  (or bigger) pots because 
the corms will pull themselves down to the depth 
they require.  Plant about 100 seeds per pot.  Place 
them on top of the soil and sprinkle a little soil over 
them and put one-quarter inch gravel on top.  Set the 
pots in partial shade so they won't dry out so fast.  
They can be outside or in a hot house.  The seed does 
not need to be stratified.  Start watering the pots right 
away and keep them slightly damp.  Fertilize the pots 
in late winter and early spring and protect the plants 
from birds and other animals.  If the pots are outside, 
let the rains naturally water the pots and in a drought 
year, supplement with hand watering.  Stop watering 
as soon as the foliage of the plants turns yellow.  
Resume watering the next fall, if rains are 
insufficient.  After the second year, separate the

plants and transplant them two inches apart in the fall 
when the corms are dormant.  Then water them.  
Grow them for one more year or two more years to 
bloom, repeating this cy cle and then plant them 
outside in the ground in the autumn. 
Management 
The area of white brodiaea will require regular 
weeding and the use of a very weak solution of 
fertilizer twice only during the active growth in the 
spring.  The corms can be kept from overcrowding by 
thinning them every three years.  This involves 
picking off the cormlets and replanting them 
elsewhere in the garden.   
 
There are five major types of indigenous 
management activities conducted in California that 
were designed to ensure future corm production at 
traditional gathering sites: 1) conscious breaking off 
cormlets from the harvested parent corms and 
replanting them; 2) sparing whole plants; 3) 
harvesting the corms after plants have gone to seed 
and dumping the seeds on the ground; 4) burning 
areas; and 5) irrigation.  Periodic digging and 
thinning of the corms, and popping off the cormlets 
and replanting them may enhance grass nut numbers 
and densities.  Digging corms may in fact be a form 
of tillage, which will increase the size of the 
gathering tract, aerate the soil, lower weed 
competition, and prepare the seedbed to increase seed 
germination rates.  If grass nut populations require 
periodic disturbance to maintain and increase their 
populations, then indigenous harvesting regimes if 
reenacted, may help maintain populations.  
Populations becoming overcrowded or showing 
reduced vigor should be thinned. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is not readily available from commercial 
nurseries.  Contact your  local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. & D.L. Rowney 1998.   California 
geophytes:  their ecology, ethnobotany, and 
conservation .  Fremontia 26(1):12-18. 
 
Barrett, S.A. and E.W. Gifford. 1933.   Miwok 
material culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of 
the City of Milwau kee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Chestnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the United States National Herbarium, Government 
Printing Office 1900-1902.  Vol 7:295-422.  
Reprinted in 1974 by the Mendocino County 
Historical Society Inc.,  Fort Bragg, California. 
 
Fowler, C.S. 1986.  Subsistence.   pp. 64-97.  IN: 
Handbook of North American  Indians Vol. 11 Great 
Basin. Warren L. D'Azev edo [Ed.]. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C. 
 
Garth, T.R. 1953.   Atsugewi ethnography .  UCPAR 
14(2):129-212. 
 
Keator, G. 1993.   Triteleia.   pp. 1206-1208.  IN: The 
Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California. J.C. 
Hickman (ed.). University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Powers, S. 1976.   Tribes of California .  University of 
California Press. Berkeley , California.  480 pp. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.