Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GOLDEN BRODIAEA 
Triteleia ixioides (Ait. f.) 
Greene 
Plant Symbol = TRIX  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Yellow-blossom grassnut, pretty face 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The corms of this plant were dug with 
a digging stick and eaten by the Yokuts and Sierra 
Miwok in California. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This perennial 
herbaceous plant has straw-colored or golden-yellow 
flowers with a conspicuous black-purple vein on the 
outside running from the apex to the base of each 
petal.  The flowers are arranged in umbels and each 
umbel contains 16 to 40 flowers.  The stamens are  yellow, alternately long and short.  The scape is 2-4 
dm long.  The leaves are few in number and 
grasslike.  The fruit capsules contain black seeds, 
which are ridged longitudinally. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found in coastal coniferous and mixed 
forests from 0-3000 m.  The plant is found in the 
Sierra Nevada, central western California, Cascade 
Range foothills, Klamath Ranges, and up to 
southwestern Oregon. 
Gladys L. Smith ©  California Academy of Sciences 
@ CalPhotos 
 
Establishment 
If possible, obtain the s eed and corms from local 
sources near where they will  be planted, to maintain 
genetic diversity of golden  brodiaea and for the best 
adaptation to local conditions.  Some plant nurseries 
may label their corms and seeds according to 
geographic source.  If plan ting flowering-size corms, 
they can be directly planted outside.  Plant the corms 
in the fall in full sun.  The less crowded the more the 
corms will offset.  Plant them 2 to 4 inches apart and 
4 inches deep.  A well-drained soil that is light and 
loose will produce bigger corms.  Water and weed 
the patch regularly and protect it from small and large 
mammals, insects, and bi rds.  Keep the ground 
slightly damp.  If given too much water the corms 
will rot.  If it rains fairly regularly, don't water the 
area.  When the leaves on  the plants have turned 
yellow and dried up, stop watering.  Allow the corms 
to summer bake.  The plants should be well 
established after one year.   
 
If planting seeds of golden  brodiaea, store the seeds 
in a paper bag until autumn.  Plant the seeds before 
October 1st in a container and care for them for two 
years before planting them outside in the ground.  
Plant the seeds in six-inch  pots because the corms 
will pull themselves down to the depth they require. 
Plant about 100 seeds per pot.  Place them on top of 
the soil and sprinkle a little soil over them and put 
one-quarter inch gravel on top.  Set the pots in partial 
shade so they won't dry out so fast.  They can be 
outside or in a hot house.  The seed does not need to 
be stratified.  Start watering the pots right away and 
keep them slightly damp.  Fertilize the pots in late 
winter and early spring an d protect the plants from 
birds and other animals.  If the pots are outside, let 
the rains naturally water the pots and in a drought 
year, supplement with hand watering.  Stop watering

as soon as the foliage of the plants turns yellow.  
Resume watering the next fall, if rains are 
insufficient.  After the second year, separate the 
plants and transplant them two inches apart in the fall 
when the corms are dormant and water them.  Grow 
them for one more year or two more years to bloom, 
repeating this cycle and then plant them outside in the 
ground in the autumn. 
 
Management 
The area of golden brodiaea will require regular 
weeding and the use of a weak solution of fertilizer 
twice only during the active growth in the spring.  
The corms can be kept from overcrowding by 
thinning them every three years.  This involves 
picking off the cormlets and replanting them 
elsewhere in the garden.   
 
There are five major types of indigenous 
management activities conducted in California that 
were designed to ensure future corm production at 
traditional gathering sites: 1) conscious breaking off 
cormlets from the harvested parent corms and 
replanting them; 2) sparing whole plants; 3) 
harvesting the corms after plants have gone to seed 
and dumping the seeds on the ground; 4) burning 
areas; and 5) irrigation.  Periodic digging and 
thinning of the corms, and popping off the cormlets 
and replanting them may enhance grass nut numbers 
and densities.  Digging corms may in fact be a form 
of tillage, which will increase the size of the 
gathering tract, aerate the soil, lower weed 
competition, and prepare the seedbed to increase seed 
germination rates. If grass nut populations require 
periodic disturbance to maintain and increase their 
populations, then indigenous harvesting regimes if 
reenacted, may help maintain populations.  At the 
very least--populations that become overcrowded and 
show reduced vigor should be divided and separated. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is not readily available from commercial 
nurseries.  Contact your  local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. & D.L. Rowney 1998.   California 
geophytes:  their ecology, ethnobotany, and 
conservation .   Fremontia 26(1):12-18. 
 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.  Miwok material 
culture .  Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 2(4):117-376. 
 
Keator, G. 1993.   Triteleia.  pp. 1206-1208 IN: The 
Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California. J.C. 
Hickman (ed.). University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Latta, F.F. 1977.   Handbook of the Yokuts Indians .  
Kern County Museum. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 Edited: 17jan01 jsp;  04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.