Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VIRGINIA 
SPIDERWORT  
Tradescantia virginiana  L. 
Plant Symbol = TRVI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Common spiderwort, dayflower, flower-of-a-day, 
Job’s tears, snake-grass,  spider-lily, trinity, trinity-
lily, widow’s-tears 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Cherokee and other Native 
American tribes used Virginia spiderwort for various 
food and medicinal purposes.  The young leaves were 
eaten as salad greens or were mixed with other greens 
and then either fried or boiled until tender.  The plant 
was mashed and rubbed onto insect bites to relieve 
pain and itching.  A paste, made from the mashed 
roots, was used as a poultice to treat cancer.  A tea 
made from the plant was used as a laxative and to 
treat stomachaches associat ed with overeating.  
Virginia spiderwort was one of the seven ingredients 
in a tea used to treat “female ailments or rupture.”  It 
was also combined with several other ingredients in a 
medicine for kidney trouble.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Spiderwort Family  (Commelinaceae).  
Virginia spiderwort is a native, perennial forb.  This 
plant was probably named for the delicate spider 
web-like filaments that surr ound the anthers of the 
flower or the threadlike se cretion that emerges from 
the stem upon cutting.  The lightly fragrant flowers (2 
to 5.4 cm in diameter) grow in terminal clusters.  The 
flower’s three broadly ovate petals are generally 
bright blue but are sometimes purple, violet, rose, and 
rarely white.  Individual blossoms last for only one or 
two days, but new blossoms appear daily throughout 
the spring blooming period.  The plants grow in erect 
clumps that range from 30 to 60 cm in height.  The 
rounded stalks are either si ngle or branched at the 
base.  The roots are thick and fleshy.  The plant 
spreads through underground stems or stolons to 
form large colonies.  The smooth iris-like leaves are 
long (15 to 46 cm) and narrow (2.5 cm wide) with a 
prominent midrib.   
© George F. Russell Smithsonian Institution, Dept of Botany @ PLANTS 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Virginia spiderwort can be found in moist 
prairies, fertile woodlands, open woods, meadows, 
hillsides, stony bluffs, stream banks, and along 
roadsides.   
 
Establishment 
Virginia spiderwort is a vigorous plant that likes 
moist soils but will adapt to drier, average garden 
soils.  The plants are often seen in old-fashioned 
gardens and work well as part of a perennial border.  
They are recommended for bogs and naturally wet 
sites where the plants can form large clumps when 
grown in full sun.  The plants will flower in both sun 
and shade.  Plants may be propagated from seed but 
they are more easily started from cuttings or 
divisions.  For cuttings, take a single-node stem 
cutting late in the season, just as the plants begin to 
bolt.  Place the cutting in mois t soil up to the base of 
the leaf.  To propagate by division, divide the thick 
roots in the fall or early in the spring.  Be careful to 
divide the leaves so that each section includes its own 
roots.  Established plants will self-sow and stalks that 
lay on the ground will readily root from the nodes.   
 
Management 
The foliage may be partially clipped back after 
blooming to control the size and untidy appearance of

the plant.  The plants will flower a second time in the 
late summer or fall if the stems are removed soon 
after the first flowering period.  This vigorous grower 
can be somewhat controlled by dividing the plants 
every two to four years and by regularly removing 
the stalks that slump to the ground before they have 
the opportunity to take root.  Large clumps may be 
divided by first lifting the root mass from the soil 
with a shovel.  Then divide the clump into pieces that 
contain four to six shoots each with roots attached.  
Immediately plant and water the divisions.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Virginia spiderwort is relatively pest and disease free.  
Snails will eat the young shoots.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.   Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns . Second Edition. 
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Coffey, T. 1993.   The history & folklore of North 
American wildflowers.   Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 
MA.  356 pp.   
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers in the United States and Canada .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, New York.  
322 pp.  
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Missouri Botanical Garden 2000.   Tradenscantia 
virginiana.  Kemper Center for Home Gardening . 
http://www.mobot.org/hort/plantfinder/Code/M/M63.
htm.  (18 June 2001).   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(18 June 2001) 
 
Phillips, H.R. 1985.   Growing and propagating wild 
flowers.   University of North Carolina Press, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina.  331 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Smith, A.I. 1979.   A guide to wildflowers of the Mid-
south.  Memphis State University Press, Memphis, 
Tennessee.  281 pp 
 
Taylor, K.S. and S.F. Hamblin 1963.   Handbook of 
wild flower cultivation .  The Macmillan Company, 
New York, New York.  307 pp.   
 
Tenenbaum, F. 1973.  Gardening with wild flowers.  
Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, New York.  206 
pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political

beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.