Plant Guide       
 
ROSE CLOVER 
Trifolium hirtum A 
Plant Symbol = TRHI4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 Alternate Names 
Trebol rosa 
 
Uses 
Range Improvement: The principal use of rose clover 
in California is for dryland pasture seedings.  Low 
producing annual range ove rseeded with rose clover 
or other annual legumes improves the quantity and 
quality of low producing annual range sites and 
increases the protein content of harvested forage.  
Annual legumes also supply nitrogen to stimulate 
annual grasses.  The protein content of rose clover is 
equal to other annual legumes and is superior to non-
legume forage.  
 
Cover Crop : Rose clover is used in vineyards as a 
winter cover crop where a low-growing, low-volume, 
self-perpetuating legume is needed.  For this use, it is 
inferior to subclover. 
 
Wildlife : Upland game and deer use the nutritious 
rose clover forage in mid- winter and early spring.  
Various birds eat the seed.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS website. 
 @ Oklahoma Forages Oklahoma State University
 
Description 
Rose Family (Rosaceae).  Rose clover, a freely-
branching, introduced, winter growing annual legume 
is three to twenty-four inches tall.  The branches are 
covered with short, stiff hairs and the rest of the plant 
is less hairy.  The wedge-shaped leaflets are alternate, 
about ½ to ¾ inches long.  Petioles are 1 to 4 times as 
long as the leaflet.  Stipules are membraneous, ovate 
to lanceolate and terminate in a fine hair-like point.  
The globular, ¾ inch diameter flowers are stalkless 
and sheathed at the base by the two utmost leaves.  
There are 20-30 flowers in  each head.  Seeds are 
ovoid, yellow and weigh about 3.0 grams per one 
thousand.  Rose clover was introduced from Turkey 
in 1944.  
 
Distribution 
Rose clover is found in the California Floristic 
Province, but is also sporadically located in the 
eastern United States.  It is usually found in disturbed 
areas and roadsides.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
In California, rose clover is widely adapted to 
climates below 6000 feet elevation except the coastal 
fog belt and areas receiving less than 10 inches of 
rain.  It is adapted to well-drained soils.  It does well 
on strongly acidic to moderately alkaline soils, but 
does best if the pH ranges between 6 and 7.  It 
germinates as well as other legumes in the cold, fall 
weather, but not as well as annual grasses.  It 
performs best when fall rains occur while the weather 
is still relatively warm, enabling it to compete 
favorably with grasses.  It  is less tolerant to low pH, 
but tolerates drier conditions than subclover.  
 
Establishment 
Rose clover establishment is improved with some 
type of seedbed preparation.  Several methods have 
been used successfully.  The conventional system of 
plowing and disking in the spring prior to

establishment and before native annual species set 
seed is highly successful.  The site is then fallowed 
during the summer.  After the first effective fall rains 
when native vegetation is at least one-inch high, 
rework the site, prepare a firm seedbed and drill or 
broadcast pellet inoculated clover.  If broadcasting, 
cover the seed lightly.  Rose clover germinates best 
in warmer weather.  For this reason, it may be 
advisable to plant before fall rains, but weed 
problems may be more severe.  On many California 
foothill soils, a trashy seedbed helps prevent serious 
frost heaving damage.  Light summer disking of 
cereal hay or grain stubble makes an ideal seedbed 
with phosphate applied before disking.  Rose clover’s 
seed is broadcast just before the fall rains and 
covered with a ring roller or harrow. 
 
Management 
Range Improvement : In California, graze newly 
planted areas as soon as annual grasses and forbs are 
6 to 8 inches and graze to 3 inches for a one-month 
period.  Continue grazing, but remove stock before 
last spring rains to allow  for seed set.  Graze again 
before fall rains to trample seed into soil.  Long-term 
rotation grazing should be practiced and tailored to 
the range conditions.  Re-fertilize every two to three 
years with superphosphate and sulfur as needed. 
 
Cover Crop : Rose clover requires very little 
management in vineyards, except for infrequent 
mowing and additional fertilizer.  Usually one 
mowing in early spring is all that is needed.  In raisin 
vineyards, the cover is usually turned under after seed 
set.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
To prepare seedbeds in California, disk or chisel the 
site in the early fall and broadcast by mid-October 
without additional preparation.  Use 200-300 pounds 
per acre of superphosphate on most soils.  Tests have 
shown that most soils planted to rose clover benefit 
from an application of sulfur if the 12 percent in 
superphosphate is inadequate.  Additional gypsum 
will correct this deficiency.  Rose clover must be 
pellet inoculated with the improved strain of bacteria 
to ensure good germination.  Rose clover can be 
seeded alone at 8 pounds per acre, but is usually 
seeded at 3 pounds per acre in a mixture with 
subterranean clover ( Trifolium subterraneum ) at 4 
pounds per acre and crimson clover ( Trifolium 
incarnatum)  at 3 pounds per acre.  When used as a 
cover crop, broadcast seed rose clover at 8 pounds 
per acre and drill the seed at 5 pounds per acre with 
the recommended superphosphate application.  Sow 
on moist pre-irrigated seedbed or dry seedbed and 
irrigate for establishment.  Plant in the early fall.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Wilton’ Cultivar: In 1949, the University of 
California and the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service release Wilton, an upright variety with 
adaptation and good seed production.  Wilton is 
adapted to lower eleva tions below 3000 feet. 
 
‘Monte Frio’ Cultivar: This cultivar is comprised of 
equal composites of seed collected from naturalized 
stands of rose clover in Hornbrook, Siskiyou County; 
Covello, Mendocino County and Viola, Shasta 
County, California.  Each site is located at elevations 
of 3,000 to 6,500 feet and naturalized stands have 
persisted for a minimum of 10 years.  Selection has 
been made on the basis of survival, growth, and 
reproduction at six major trial sites in California.  It 
was compared to over 26 different commercial and 
experimental strains of s ubterranean clover, rose 
clover, barrel medic ( Medicago truncatula), cupped 
clover ( Trifolium cyathiferum), arrowleaf clover 
( Trifolium vesiculosum ), and ‘Spreader’ alfalfa 
( Medicago sativa ).  It proved superior in 
withstanding the cold and dry conditions and was 
more persistent than the subterranean clovers.  
 
‘Kondinin’ Cultivar: An early to mid-season 
maturing variety with a semi-erect growth.  
 
‘Hykon’ Cultivar: This cultivar has an early season 
maturity with vigorous spring growth, is well adapted 
to poor fertility and acidic soils, grows slowly in cold 
districts, but is tolerant to frosts, is always very 
palatable, and not suited to waterlogged soils.  This 
cultivar is a heavy re-seeder with slow establishment.  
Hykon is adapted to elevations below 3,000 feet. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual. Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press.  
Berkeley and Los Angeles.

PlantTech.com. 2005. Hykon. Accessed: August 22, 
2005. 
http://www.planttech.com.au/variety.php?id=55 
 
Stoverseed.com. 2005.  California guide to grasses . 
Accessed: August 22, 2005. 
http://www.stoverseed.com/guidesoil.html 
 
USDA NRCS. 1976.  Management and uses of rose 
clover. Davis, California.  
 
USDA NRCS. 1991.  Notice of release of ‘Monte 
Frio’ rose clover.  USDA NRCS Ecological Sciences 
Division, Washington D.C. and the California 
Agricutlural Experiment Station, University of 
California Davis, California. 
 
Oklahoma State University. 2005.  Oklahoma forages 
web site .  Stillwater, Oklahoma.  Accessed: 050927.  
http://forage.okstate.edu/images/cloverjpg's/rose/rose
clover.htm 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California. 
 Edited: 11Jul2005  ro; 23sep05 jsp 
 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.