Plant Guide
LAST CHANCE 
TOWNSENDIA 
Townsendia aprica  S.L. Welsh & 
Reveal 
Plant Symbol = TOAP  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 
Figure 1. Last Chance Townsendia ( Townsendia aprica). Photo by 
Megan Robinson.  Used with permission.  
Alternate Names 
Last Chance Townsend daisy  
 
Uses  
Last Chance Townsendia is a recently discovered forb of 
extremely limited distribution. It has no known human or 
wildlife associated uses.  
 
Status  
Last Chance Townsendia was listed as a threatened 
species on August 21, 1985 (US DI FWS  1985). It has 
been given a recovery priority of 5C indicating a high 
degree of threat and a low recovery potential  (US DI FWS 
1993) .  
 
C onsult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
t hreatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).    
Description
 
General : Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Las t Chance 
Townsendia is a small mound forming perennial forb. The 
plant arise s from an underground base and branch es to 
form a dense mat  from 5 to 10 cm (2 to 4 in) across  with 
the flowering heads formed tight against the leafy mound. 
The ray flowers (petal s) are yellow to golden on the upper 
surface and purplish and glandular below. The disk 
flowers are yellow. Achenes are small and hairy with a 
short pappus of barbed capillary bristles (Welsh et al. 
2003). The leaves are hairy, 7 to 13 mm (0.25 to 0.43 in)  
long and 1 to 3.5 mm (0.04 to 0.14 in) wide and broadest 
near the tip.   
 
Distribution : 
This species is endemic to a small band about 8 km (5 mi) 
wide and 48 km (30 mi) long in South C entral Utah. 
Populations are known from the western edge of the San 
Rafa el Swell, west to near Fremont Junction in extreme 
eastern Sevier county and south to Hartnet Draw in 
Wayne County. Small isolated populations are known 
outside  of this area of but in close proximity to the main 
population group. In 1993  there were 15 know n 
populations with an estimated 6,000 individual  plants  
(US DI FWS 1993). Clark and Groebner (2000) reported 
an additional 11 new populations with approximately 650 
total individuals. For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species  on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Habitat :  
Last Chance Townsendia is known to inhabit  saltbush and 
pinyon -juniper  plant communities  on clay or clay -silt 
exposures of the Mancos, Morrison, Summerville and 
Entrada F ormations ( USFWS 1993 ). Species known 
growing in association with Last Chance Townsendia 
include galleta  ( Hilaria jamesii) , blue grama ( Bouteloua 
gracillis ), black sagebrush  (Artemisia nova ), shadscale 
( Atriplex confertifolia ) and Indian ricegrass  ( Achnatherum 
hymenoides ).  Popul ations occur between 1,800  and 2,400 
m  ( 6,000  to 8,000 ft) in elevation (Clark and Groeb ner 
2000 ). 
 
Adaptation  
Last Chance Townsendia grows in soils derived from 
shale lens of the Mancos and other formation with a very 
fine silt texture that are highly saline or sodic . The unique 
soil characteristics create small islands of habitable space 
in vast areas of oth erwise uninhabitable soils. These soil 
conditions have  produced  habitat for several other 
endemic plant species growing in the same  range as Last 
Chance Townsendia including Pediocactus despainii, 
Sclerocactus wrightiae, Schoenocrambe barnebyi,