Plant Guide
 
MEDUSAHEAD 
Taeniatherum caput- medusae  
(L.) Nevski  
Plant symbol = TACA8  
 Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Washington & Idaho 
Plant Materials Program  
 Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
 
Alternate Names 
Medusahead wildrye, medusahead rye, rough 
medusahead.   
 
Uses   
Erosion Control: Medusahead is a winter annual grass 
with a shallow root system. It is a very poor erosion 
control plant.  
 
Livestock:  Medusahead has minimal value for livestock 
grazing (Sharp and Teasdale 1952, Turner 1965, Davies 
and Johnson 2008). Hironaka (1961) reported that grazing 
capacities were reduced as much as 80 percent when 
medusahead was present. Despite these facts, livest ock 
will graze medusahead when it is in a vegetative stage 
(Lusk et al. 1961, Horton 1991).   
 
The nutritive value of medusahead foliage is comparable 
to cheatgrass except medusahead has a high level of silica 
and the season of use is much shorter. Horton ( 1991) 
proposed that the high silica level deterred grazing. 
Grazing values diminish rapidly as the plants mature 
(Furbush 1953), and is due in part to the awned seeds. 
The awned seeds can cause injury to eyes, nose, and 
mouths of grazers (Rice 2005).  
Wild life:   Well-
established medusahead communities have low 
plant species diversity and have low value for wildlife 
habitat (Miller et al. 1999). Rabbits will graze 
medusahead (Sharp et al. 1957). Bodurtha et al. (1989) 
reported that mule deer will frequent medusahead mixed 
communities but they will not eat medusahead. Savage et 
al. (1969) reported that chucker partridge consumed 
medusahead seeds in a controlled feeding study but 
further reported that the birds lost weight.   
 
Status   
Consult the PLANTS Web site  and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness   
Medusahead originates from Eurasia and was first 
reported in North Am erica in the 1880s (Furbush 1953). 
By 2003, it occupied approximately 2.3 million acres in 
17 western states (Rice, 2005). Pellant and Hall (1994) 
suggest that 76 million acres of public land is susceptible 
to invasion by winter annuals including cheatgras s 
( Bromus tectorum ) and medusahead.  
 
Medusahead’s success is largely a result of it being native 
to a Eurasian region with similar temperature -moisture 
patterns as found in the Intermountain West and inland 
valleys of California. Summers are warm and dry ; fall, 
winter, and spring seasons are cool to cold and moist.  
 
Diverse native plant communities inhibit colonization of 
weedy species because these communities more fully 
exploit soil and moisture resources. Medusahead  typically 
colonizes sites where the existing perennial vegetation has 
been destroyed or weakened (Miller et al. 1999). 
However, they also reported that medusahead will 
colonize native communities but not overrun them until a 
disturbance frees up resources .  
 
Grazing practices can be tied to the success of 
medusahead. However, eliminating grazing will not 
eradicate medusahead if it is already present (Wagner et 
al. 2001). Sheley and Svejcar (2009) reported that even 
moderate defoliation of bluebunch wheatgr ass resulted in 
increased medusahead density. They suggested that 
disturbances, such as plant defoliation, limit soil resource 
capture, which creates an opportunity for exploitation by 
medusahead. Avoidance of medusahead by grazing 
animals allows medusahead populations to expand. This 
creates seed reserves that can infest adjoining areas and 
cause changes to the fire regime.  
Transition from a perennial rangeland community to a 
cheatgrass dominated community has greatly contributed