Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED CLOVER 
Trifolium pratense L. 
Plant Symbol = TRPR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Idaho Plant Materials 
 
Uses 
Red clover is the most widely grown of all the true 
clovers and is the most important legume hay crop in 
the northeastern United States.  Red clover is 
primarily used for hay, pasture, silage, and soil 
improvement.  It is a quick growing crop, easily 
established, and produces high quality forage.  Red 
clover is commonly planted with cool season grasses 
such as orchardgrass, tall fescue, brome grasses and 
timothy.  It can also be grown alone or with some 
warm season grasses such as dallisgrass and 
johnsongrass. 
 
Many wildlife species use  legumes and are attracted 
to the early green up to help them recover from the 
stress of winter.  Red clover is not particularly noted 
for providing wildlife cover or food.  Bumblebees are 
especially important in pollinating red clover but are 
sometimes inadequate to insure a good seed crop.  
Honey bees also pollinate red clover but tend to 
prefer sweetclover, white cl over and alsike clover if 
these species are in the vicinity. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
  Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace other vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service Office, 
or state natural resource or  agriculture department 
regarding its status and use.  Weed information is 
also available from the PLANTS web site at 
plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Trifolium pratense  L., red clover, is an introduced 
biennial or short-lived perennial that grows as one of 
two types: medium (double-cut) or mammoth  (single-
cut).  Red clover initiates growth from the plant 
crown.  Plants have hollow, hairy stems and 
branches.  Stem lengths of medium and mammoth 
types average 18 inches and 24-30 inches, 
respectively.  Medium types have about 4 branches 
per stem; mammoth types have 6 branches per stem.  
Each leaf consists of a slender stalk bearing 3 
leaflets.  The taproot of red clover normally 
disintegrates in the second year and plants that 
survive have developed secondary, extensively 
branched roots.  Flowers are borne in compact 
clusters at the tips of the branches and are usually 
rose-pink in color.  The flower shape is similar to pea 
flowers except is more elongated and much smaller.  
Flower heads usually consist of up to 125 flowers.  
Seed pods are small, short, and contain kidney-
shaped seeds that vary in color from yellow to deep 
violet.  Plants of the single-cut type form a leafy 
rosette growth in the first year and produce no 
flowering stems.  Double–cut types produce many 
flowering plants in the seedling year.  Mammoth 
(single-cut) red clover matures later than medium 
types; only one crop of mammoth red clover is 
harvested each season since recovery is slow. 
USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Red clover grows best on well-drained loamy soils, 
but it will also grow on soil that is not as well-
drained.  Medium and fine textured soils are 
preferred by the plant over sandy or gravelly soils.  It 
is best adapted to a pH of 6.0 or higher but will grow 
on moderately acid soils. It is important to note that 
Mammoth (single-cut) red clover is generally 
recommended for areas with  a short growing season. 
 
Red clover is distributed  throughout the United States 
and is best adapted wher e summer temperatures are 
moderately cool to warm and moisture is sufficient

throughout the growing season (mean annual 
precipitation 25 inches or more) or if site is irrigated.   
Data indicate that as much as 10 million acres of red 
clover were grown in the Northern states in the 
1940’s.  Its prominence has waned because it does 
not fit well into currently used crop rotations. Red 
Clover was grown extensively in the northeast and 
northwest U.S. and used as a winter annual in the 
southeastern U.S.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Red clover originated in Asia Minor and southeastern 
Europe and was introduced to the British Isles from 
Germany in the 1600’s.  English colonists brought 
red clover to North America. 
 
Establishment 
Red clover has approximately 275,000 seeds per 
pound.  The full seeding rate is 6 pounds PLS per 
acre for a solid stand.  The recommended seeding 
rate for a grass/legume pasture is approximately 25 
percent or 1.5 pounds PLS per acre.  For pasture 
establishment, seed should be drilled into a well-
prepared seedbed that has been plowed, harrowed, 
and compacted to produce a very firm seedbed.  The 
seed should be inoculated with the correct  Rhizobium 
before seeding.  Seeding depth should be 1/8 - 1/4 
inch deep.  Typically, in grass/legume mixtures, the 
grass is drill seeded in rows and red clover is over 
seeded to limit competition from grass.  For 
stabilization use, seed is broadcast on roadside cuts 
and fills by cyclone seeders,  hydroseeders, or blower-
type equipment. 
 
For solid stands for hay production, red clover is 
usually planted with a small grain companion crop 
such as oats, barley, flax , or winter wheat.  The 
recommended seeding rate for small grain companion 
crops are typically 50 to 75 % of normal.  Red clover 
has good shade tolerance (approximately 6% of 
daylight) which makes companion cropping with red 
clover fairly successful.  Its  tolerance to shade allows 
red clover to be used as a cover crop under corn for 
silage.     
The proper time of seeding  is determined by seasonal 
moisture conditions.  In most areas, this may vary 
from early April to mid May.  Late summer and fall 
seedings should only be  conducted when site is 
irrigated and when at least six weeks of growing 
season remain to assure establishment before freezing 
conditions. 
 
Management  
Graze or cut for hay when the red clover is ¼- ½ 
bloom.  A second cutting or successive grazing 
should occur when red clover is ¼ bloom.  Leave at 
least 2 inches of growth after each harvest.  
Mammoth red clover does not produce flowers the 
first year.  Typically, 2 hay harvests per year can be 
made after establishment and because red clover is 
short-lived will only be pr oductive for about 3 years.  
Red Clover can cause livestock to bloat, so care 
should be taken to reduce this condition.  Keep pH 
and fertility (especially phosphorus and potassium) at 
the proper levels.  Control insects and diseases. 
 
If planted with a small grai n as a companion crop, the 
small grain should be removed before it can smother 
the red clover. 
 
Red clover is normally us ed as a companion crop 
with forage grasses (smooth brome, meadow brome, 
timothy, ryegrass, tall fescue or orchardgrass) to 
provide a source of nitrogen while also providing 
high-yielding forage rich in protein. 
 
When seed is properly inoc ulated at time of planting, 
red clover can fix nitrogen from N
2 in the 
atmosphere, requiring little or no additional nitrogen 
fertilizer.  However, it responds to fertilizer and 
requires relatively large amounts of phosphorus, 
potassium, and sulphur in  some areas.  In grass-
legume mixtures, it is not possible to supply the ideal 
combinations of elements for both grass and legume.  
If nitrogen is applied to a grass-legume mixture, the 
grass will tend to increase at the expense of the 
legume.  Well-fertilized grass will outgrow clover in 
fall and winter and could smother the clover. 
 
Red clover cut for hay at 50% bloom stage usually 
exceeds 14-15 % protein.  Un favorable quality results 
when harvest is delayed and plants are allowed to 
mature. 
 
Management for forage is aimed at maintaining 40-
50% clover.  Close grazing (2 inch stubble height) 
favors clover, whereas light grazing favors grass.    
Red clover should be  rotationally grazed. 
 
Red clover has nearly the same potential to cause 
bloat as alfalfa when grazed.  It usually is 
recommended as a mixture with one or more grasses 
for pasture which will greatly reduce the hazard for 
bloat.  Livestock sometimes slobber excessively 
when feeding on second cutting red clover hay.  This 
is caused by a fungus, is harmless and rather rare.

There are also reports of reproductive problems in 
sheep which graze solid stands of red clover.  This is 
caused by the high levels of estrogen in the plant, 
occurs infrequently, and is rare with grass/red clover 
mixtures.   
Spring applications of nitrogen will stimulate grass 
and provide early feed, but excessive rates are 
detrimental to the clover stand.  Phosphate 
applications are broadcast in fall or spring according 
to soil tests.  Sulfur, boron, or magnesium may be 
needed for maximum production on some soils in the 
western part of red clover’s range. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Red Clover is subject to  many disease and insect 
problems.  Crown rot, root rot, anthracnose and 
powdery mildew may be problems in areas with high 
humidity and rainfall.  Viral diseases such as bean 
yellow mosaic virus, stem blackening diseases and 
black patch also occur.  Choose disease resistant 
cultivars to reduce the occurrence of these problems. 
 
Red clover is attacked by  many insects including the 
clover root borer, clover root curculio, clover seed 
chalcid, clover  weevils, aphids, midges, and leaf 
hoppers.  Unfortunately, th ere is no practical overall 
control of red clover insects especially in seed 
production fields because of pollination by 
bumblebees and honey bees.  Chemical control of 
insect pests would also destroy the pollinators. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Red clover may be spread by seed and may be 
considered weedy in some  locations.  It can spread 
into adjoining vegetativ e communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions. 
 
Seed Production 
Plant red clover at 3-4 pounds PLS per acre in 12 
inch rows.  Because seed production often follows 
production for hay, row culture is not as critical as 
with other plant materials grown for seed production. 
 
Average seed yields are about 350-500 pounds per 
acre but can easily be doubled by using best 
production practices.  Time and frequency of 
irrigation is critical as red clover lodges easily.  
Irrigation should be discontinued when the degree of 
bloom and seedhead maturity is maximized.  Highest 
yields result from second growth in two year old 
fields.  The first growth is  normally cut for hay.  
 
Pollination by bumblebees or honey bees is critical.  
Bumblebees are usually relied on for pollination but 
are often low in number.  Provide at least one honey  bee hive per two acres of 
red clover.  Place hives in 
the field when 5-10 percent of the crop is in bloom.  
If hives are placed too early, bees will tend to orient 
to other legume fields in the vicinity.  The lack of 
pollinating insects is often the biggest cause of low 
seed yields. 
 
Seed is harvested when the interior of the heads are 
brown, the stems show a yellowish tinge and the 
seeds show color ranging from yellow to purple.  
Harvesting seed before this stage results in light seed 
with low germination.  If harvest is delayed beyond 
this stage, heavy seed loss occurs from weathering 
and harvesting operations. 
 
To obtain highest seed yields, red clover is usually 
cut and windrowed for drying prior to combining.  
Occasionally seed is harvested by direct combining 
but yields and quality are usually low. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Some of the major cultivars for the western US are 
‘Pennscott’, ‘Chesapeake’, ‘Kenland’, ‘Cumberland’, 
‘Dollard’, ‘Midland’ and ‘Lakeland’.  ‘Altaswede’, 
‘Norlac’, and ‘Craig’ are ma mmoth red clovers.  In 
the eastern US, varieties selected should be resistant 
to anthracnose and powdery mildew.  Some cultivars 
commercially available that are moderate to highly 
resistant to anthracnose are ‘Acclaim’, ‘Rally’, 
‘Redland II’, and ‘Renegade’.  Those moderate to 
highly resistant to powdery mildew are ‘Arlington’, 
‘Rally’, ‘Rebel’, ‘Red Star’, and ‘Reddy’.  Most 
cultivars and varieties adapted to your area can be 
found through local seed suppliers. 
 
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to determine what works best 
for control in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
Jensen, Kevin et al. 2004 Intermountain Planting 
Guide.  81pp. 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth. 
2008. Grass, grass-like,  forb, legume and woody 
species for the Intermountain West. Natural 
Resources Conservation Servi ce. Boise, Idaho.  Idaho 
Plant Materials Technical Note 24. 43pp.

Ogle, D., L. St. John, J, Cornwell, M. Stannard, and 
L. Holzworth. 2008. Pasture and Range Seedings: 
Planning, Installation, Evaluation, Management. 
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, 
Idaho.  Idaho Plant Materials Technical Note 10. 
36pp. 
 
Oregon Clover Seed Production.  
http://oregonclover.org/seedproduction.html
 
[2008, November 25]. 
 
Shewmaker, Glenn. 2005. Idaho Forage Handbook. 
University of Idaho. 99pp. 
 
Steiner, J. and S. Alderman. 2003.  Red Clover Seed 
Production – Effect and Economics of Soil pH 
Adjusted by Lime Application.  Crop Science 
43:624-630.   [2008, December 4] 
http://crop.scijournals.org/cgi/content/full/43/2/624 
 
Taylor, N.L. 1985. Red Clover.  Chapter 12. In: 
Forages: The Science of Grassland Agriculture.  Iowa 
State University Press.  643pp. 
 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension.  
Components of a Backyard Wildlife Habitat.  
Bulleting #7137. 5pp. 
 
Wheaton, H.N. Red Clover.  University of Missouri 
Extension.  
http://extension.missouri.edu/explore/agguides/crops/
g04638.htm 
[Accessed 01December2008] 
 
Prepared By 
Loren St. John , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS Idaho  State Office, Boise 
ID 
 
Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 04Dec2008 LWS; 18Dec2008 DGO; 090105 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or  because all or a part of an indivi
dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.