Plant Guide
MULTIFLOWER 
FALSE RHODES  GRASS   
richloris pluriflora Fourn.   
Plant Symbol = TRPL3 
T
 
Figure 1. M ultiflower false Rhode s grass plants. Photo by Shelly 
Maher, STPMC, Kingsville, TX.  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
Alternate Names  
Chloris pluriflora  (Fourn.) W.D. Clayton,  four flower 
trichloris  
Uses  
Livestoc k: Multiflower  false Rhodes grass produces 
abundant forage on many range sites in south Texas .  
It  provides moderate to high quality forage for  all 
types of grazing livestock.   
 
Wildlife :  Multiflower  false Rhodes grass  provides 
fair  forage for wildlife.   It also provides good nesting 
cover for fawns and upland game birds.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
D

epartment of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Description
 
General :  Multiflower false Rhodes grass is a native, 
warm -season perennial bunchgrass.  It grows 4 to 5 
feet tall.   The leaf blade is wide and flat with a 
strong midrib.   It has a ligule that is prominently 
ciliate .  The seedhead has several spikes, 2 to 3 
inches long.  The spikelets are  usually  4-flowered .   
Distribution :  Its natural range is south of San 
Antonio, Texas in the eastern two -thirds of the Rio 
Grande Plain and continuing down into Mexico and 
Central America.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Multiflower false Rh odes grass grows best on sandy 
loam to clay loam soils.  It  is not cold tolerant and is 
unlikely to perform  well outside of the Rio  Grande 
P lain Ecoregion . 
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
or where there are few cool -season weeds, it can be 
planted in the fall.  Establish a clean, weed -free 
seedbed  by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to 
planting, the site should be firm and have 
accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Multiflower false Rhodes grass is best seeded using a 
native -grass drill with picker wheels to ensure a good 
planting of the fluffy seed.  B roadcast seeding may 
be used in areas not easily planted with a drill, but 
some type of additional coverage such as culti -
packing or light dragging will be beneficial to ensure 
good seed to soil contact.  Seed coatings (talc based) 
can also be used to incr ease the flowability of the 
fluffy  seed through standard seed drills.  Seed should 
be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to plant 
too shallow than too deep.    
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels o f nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be 
applied until  the stand is established.  If one to two  
plants per square foot have become established, then 
the planting has been successful.  
Management  
Multiflower false Rhodes grass should not  be grazed 
the first year  after planting.  After a stand is 
established, either continuous or rotational grazing

can be used.  It is recommended that a minimum 6 -
inch stubble height be maintained under continuous 
grazing.  For rotational grazing, forage height should 
be utilized between 4 to 10 inches.  Contact your 
local USDA -NRCS field office for assistance in 
planning and applying prescribed grazing.  P lants 
should be allowed to produce seed annually to insure 
stand health.  Multiflower false Rhodes gra ss is a 
long -lived perennial that is extremely drought and 
fire tolerant once established.   
Pests and Potential Problems  
No severe insect or disease problems have been 
observed in multiflower  false Rhodes grass.  
However, it is not cold tolerant which may cause 
survival issues if Hidalgo Germplasm is moved 
outside its intended area of use.    
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with multiflower false Rho des grass.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed increase plots have been planted on 36” bedded 
rows, however flat plantings may be possible with 
frequent weeding.  Multiflower false Rhodes grass 
can also be established with vegetative transplants.  
Rapid spread and growth has been observed in 
transplant established stands providing seed harvests 
within the first year.  Furthermore transplants stands 
facilitate better weed contr ol in the seed production 
fields.  Deep soil tillage or frequent close cultivation 
is recommend ed to promote seed production.  
Herbicides containing 2, 4-D, Pendamethelin, 
Atrazine, and Halosulfuron -methyl are safe for  weed 
control once plants are beyond th e seedling growth 
stage.    
 
Multiflower f alse Rhodes  grass produces seed usually 
twice a year, once  in the early summer and again in 
the late fall.  Seed is harvested with a Flail Vac or 
similar brush -type harvester.  The use of slow travel 
and RPM speeds  while harvesting results in relatively 
clean seed, needing little cleaning or processing. 
Debearding of the seed has been accomplished 
through the use of a Westrup brush machine.  
However, do not  aggressively debeard the seed such 
that it removes the caryop sis from the glumes as seed 
damage or reductions in seed life have been 
observed.   To clean stems and chaff from harvests, a 
C lipper seed cleaner has been used  following the 
debearding treatment.   
  Well managed seed fields have produced from 15
-85 
bulk pounds of clean seed.  Purity of the seed is 
usually around 88% and germination rates range from 
30 to 60%.  Adequately stored seed in humidity and 
temperature controlled facilities can be expected to 
stay viable for over 10 years.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Se lected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Hidalgo Germplasm multiflower  false Rhodes grass 
was released by the E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center in 2011.  It was selected for its 
survivability, plant vigor, forage production and seed 
production characteristics.  It is predominantly 
adapted to clay loam, bottomland,  and tight sandy 
loam range sites in south Texas.  For calibration 
purposes, Hidalgo Germplasm multiflower false 
Rhodes grass contains approximately 2,146,000 
uncoated seeds per bulk pound.  A seeding rate of 
half a pound of pure live seed (PLS) per acre i s 
recommended.  In planting mixtures reduce the rate 
according to the percent of multiflower false Rhodes 
grass in the mixture.  Breeder seed is maintained by 
USDA -NRCS , E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center .   
References  
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grass es of Texas.  Texas 
A&M University Press. College Station, Texas.  
 
Prepared By :   
John Lloyd -Reilley , Manager  
USDA -NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  
Citation 
Lloyd -Reilley, J.  2011.  Plant  guide for multiflower 
false Rh odes grass ( Trichloris pluriflora ). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” 
de la Garza Plant Materials Center.  Kingsville, 
Texas 78363.    
Published  August 2011 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER