Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN 
GAMAGRASS 
Tripsacum  dactyloides  (L.) L. 
Plant Symbol = TRDA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center and New Mexico Plant Materials Center 
 
 Eastern gamagrass spike with male flowers on top with anthers 
extruded, and cupulate fruit-cases on bottom. Courtesy of Missouri 
State University Herbarium.  
 
Alternate Names 
Tripsacum dactyloides (L.) L. var. occidentale Cutler 
& Anders., Coix dactyloides  L., bullgrass, capim 
gigante, eastern mock gama, fakahatchee grass, 
Gamagras, herbe grama, maicillo oriental, pasto 
Guatemala, wild corn, zacate maicero 
 
Uses 
Forage:  The major use of eastern gamagrass is as a 
forage crop. It is highly productive as intensively 
managed pasture, hay and silage. Eastern gamagrass 
can be developed into an important component of 
forage for beef and dairy production systems 
(Dewald et al., 2006).  Since eastern gamagrass is a 
warm-season grass, the distribution of yield 
throughout the summer makes it a useful source of 
forage when cool-season grasses such as tall fescue 
( Schedonorus phoenix ) are relatively unproductive or 
dormant (Roberts & Kallenbach, 2006).   
  Forage quality
: Researchers have evaluated eastern 
gamagrass forage quality across many locations, soil 
fertility levels and genotypes (Coblentz et al., 1999; 
Douglas et al., 2000a; Edwards et al., 2000; Salon et 
al., 2000). The crude  protein percentage 
measurements on gamagrass forage at the boot 
growth stage average about 12.5. The boot stage is 
when the inflorescence is enclosed in the sheath of 
the uppermost leaf. The  in vitro digestibility 
percentage measurements on gamagrass forage 
average about 70. 
 
Forage yield and animal performance : The average 
daily gains of steers grazing continuously on eastern 
gamagrass across several studies conducted in the 
middle south ranged between 1.1 to 2.2 lb per day 
(Aiken, 1997; Burns et al., 1992). In North Carolina 
steers continuously grazing either ‘Pete’ eastern 
gamagrass, ‘Carostan’ flaccidgrass ( Pennisetum 
flaccidum ) or ‘Coastal’ bermudagrass ( Cynodon 
dactylon ) exhibited average daily gains of 1.8, 1.5 
and 0.7 lb, respectively (Burns & Fisher, 2000). A 
series of studies conducted in North Carolina show 
that across the total grazing  season the average daily 
gain of steers grazing eith er Pete eastern gamagrass 
or ‘Kanlow’ switchgrass ( Panicum virgatum ) was 
about 2 lb. In contrast, the average daily gain for 
steers grazing the widely used tall fescue-
bermudagrass system was about 1.6 lb during the 
same period. During a dry year in North Carolina 
(rainfall during the pasture season about 10 inches 
below the average), ‘Alamo’ switchgrass was the 
most productive forage as defined by steer gain per 
acre; but ‘Iuka IV’ eastern gamagrass was more 
productive than ‘Rountree’ big bluestem 
( Andropogon gerardii ), Caucasian bluestem, and 
bermudagrass.  
 
In western Kentucky, cow- calf pairs were grazed on 
either eastern gamagrass or Caucasian bluestem 
( Bothriochloa  bladhii) and bermudagrass during June 
though early September (Pingel, 1999). The data 
from this study was not statistically analyzed. But, 
the author observed that eastern gamagrass 
maintained more consistent forage production across 
the grazing season than either Caucasian bluestem or 
bermudagrass. Gamagrass forage production did not 
decrease as rapidly as that of Caucasian bluestem and 
bermudagrass across an August-September low 
rainfall period. Gamagrass provided fewer grazing 
days than either Caucasian bluestem or bermudagrass

because of gamagrass’ requirement for a long rest 
period between grazing cycles.   
 
Filter strip, Vegetative barrier, Nutrient 
management : In studies conducted in Arkansas and 
Maryland, the harvest of eastern gamagrass 
aboveground tissue removed more nitrogen from soil 
that was fertilized with high levels of poultry litter 
than the harvest of yellow bluestem ( Bothriochloa 
ischaemum  var. ischaemum ), but less than the harvest 
of switchgrass (Staver, 2000; Tharel, 2000).  Only 
about 12% of the phosphorous applied in the poultry 
litter was accounted for in aboveground tissue. 
Therefore, using poultry litter to supply the nitrogen 
requirements of either gamagrass or switchgrass 
would result in a rapid increase in soil phosphorous 
levels. 
 
McLaughlin et al. (2004), in a study conducted in 
east-central Mississippi, compared 6 grasses: 
common and Coastal bermudagrass, Pete eastern 
gamagrass, ‘Lometa’ Indiangrass ( Sorghastrum 
nutans ), Johnsongrass ( Sorghum halepense ) and 
Alamo switchgrass for the upt ake of both macro and 
micronutrients. Swine effluent spray was applied to 
the soil for 8 years prior to the initiation of the 
experiment and during the first 2 years of the 3 year 
study. Bermudagrass, both Coastal and common, 
accumulated more nitrogen and phosphorous per acre 
into above-ground herbage than the other grasses 
(P<0.05). The N/P uptake ratios ranged from 4.7 for 
Costal bermudagrass to 9.3 for eastern gamagrass. 
When the objective of a swine waste nutrient 
management hay system is to provide nitrogen for 
optimum forage production while avoiding 
accumulation of excess phosphorous in the soil, 
forages with N/P ratios less than 10 are expected to 
satisfy the objective, but forages with ratios greater 
than 10 are not. The N/P uptake ratios of all 6 grasses 
were less than 10.0, with common bermudagrass and 
Indiangrass displaying the lowest ratios, and eastern 
gamagrass the highest. In summary, the performance 
of the bermudagrass exceeded those of the other 4 
grasses 83% of the time for dry matter yield and 76% 
of the time for nutrient uptake. The authors conclude 
“among the 6 grasses tested, common bermudagrass 
is the best choice for replacing Johnsongrass as a 
warm-season perennial grass hay crop for nutrient 
management in this swine effluent spray field.” But, 
the native species, eastern gamagrass and switchgrass 
could be used in the current nutrient management 
system.  
 
In Mississippi, eastern gamagrass, giant reed ( Arundo 
donax ), big bluestem, Alamo switchgrass, and tall 
fescue established in filter strips adjacent to cotton  fields were equally effective in reducing sediment 
runoff. Consequently, the grasses were equally 
effective in trapping soil applied herbicides that were 
either attached or adsorbed to the soil (Rankins, 
1998).  
 
Eastern gamagrass, when 
compared to tall fescue, 
increased the infiltration of water and improved soil 
physical and hydraulic properties (Perrygo et al. 
2001). The authors recommend planting eastern 
gamagrass as filter strips along the edges of 
agricultural fields to enhance infiltration and reduce 
surface runoff.  
 
Eastern gamagrass has received considerable 
attention for use in vegetative barriers for soil erosion 
control because the crown has the capacity to elevate 
coarse aerial foliage above sediment deposition and 
to anchor the plant with stout brace roots. 
Researchers in northern Mississippi compared 
vegetative barriers composed of 1, 2, 3 or 4 rows of 
either eastern gamagrass or switchgrass (Becker, 
2001; Dewald et al., 1996). One and two-row barriers 
were as resistant as three and four-row barriers to 
overtopping by flowing water that contained 
sediment. Switchgrass remained more erect and held 
back more water and sediment than eastern 
gamagrass.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae), tribe 
Andropogoneae, and subtribe Tripsacinae. It shares 
the same subtribe as corn ( Zea mays). Eastern 
gamagrass is a native, perennial, bunchgrass and is a 
distant relative of corn. It is a long-lived (to 50 
years), warm-season species native to most of the 
eastern half of the United States. It ranges in height 
from 4 to 8 feet. The leaf bl ades are flat, long (12 to 
30 inches) and wide (0.4 to 1.2 inches), with a well-
defined midrib. It reproduces vegetatively from thick, 
knotty rhizome like structures called proaxes. The 
inflorescences have 1 to 3 racemes. The spikes are 6 
to 10 inches long. Similar to corn, eastern gamagrass 
has separate male and female flowers (monoecious). 
But unlike corn, each gamagrass spike contains both 
male and female flowers. Male flowers occupy the 
top ¾ of the spike and female flowers the bottom ¼. 
 
Terminal inflorescences occur on the top of the stem, 
and lateral inflorescences occur at the leaf axil, which

is the angle between the leaf and stem. Seed is 
produced from June to September resulting in uneven 
maturation. The spike ripens from the top down and 
is susceptible to shattering. The seed yield of 
gamagrass seed is low, and it does not reseed 
adequately from established stands. Eastern 
gamagrass occurs predominately at the diploid (2n = 
2x = 36) and tetraploid (2n = 4x = 72) levels although 
triploids (2n = 3x = 54), pentaploids (2n = 5x = 90), 
and hexaploids (2n = 6x = 108) have been reported 
(Farquharson, 1995). Only the diploid plants are 
sexual and cross-pollinated. The tetraploids and the 
rest of the polyploids are apomictic (Burson et al., 
1990). They produce seed asexually that is 
genetically identical to the mother plant.  
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
The indigenous U.S. range of eastern gamagrass 
extends from central Texas to southeastern Nebraska 
and central Iowa and east to the Atlantic Ocean 
(Rechenthin, 1951). Eastern gamagrass’ range 
extends to Central and South America and the 
Caribbean (Tropical Forages, 2006). Gamagrass 
flourishes under dryland conditions where annual 
precipitation exceeds 35 inch es (Dewald et al., 2006). 
Respectable forage production can be achieved on 
good soils in regions with 25 inches of annual 
precipitation. It can be grown in areas with less 
annual precipitation on irrigated and sub-irrigated 
land.  
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivars Pete and Iuka IV 
exhibited yellow leaves when grown at Los Lunas, 
New Mexico on a Belen loam (J. Henson, personal 
communication, 2001). A pH range of 7.9 to 9.0 
characterizes the Belen lo am. Presumably, the yellow 
leaves are the result of ir on deficiency due to the 
inability of gamagrass to take-up iron from the high 
pH soil. A suggested minimum soil pH for eastern 
gamagrass is 5.1 (Foy et al.1999) and the maximum 
is 7.5 (Sharp Brothers Seed Company, 1999). 
Another estimate of the optimum pH range is 5.4 to 
6.0 (Roberts & Kallenbach, 2006). Gamagrass is 
intolerant of saline soils. Eastern gamagrass culm 
height was reduced when grown in a soil with an 
electrical conductivity of 0.72 dS/m in New Mexico 
(Henson, 1993). In Kansas, Iuka IV was established 
on a commercial seed production field, with a soil pH 
range from 6.9 to 8.0. A good stand exists across the 
whole field, but both seed and forage production 
were less in the area of the field where the soil pH is 
8.0 than where the soil pH is less than 8.0.    
In the Northeast, gamagrass is susceptible to frost 
heaving on poorly drained soils. In some years this 
may also occur on sites with moderately well drained 
soils during the spring following establishment.   
 
Clay pan soils and other soils with high mechanical 
impedance, low pH, and frequent waterlogged 
conditions cover extensive 
areas of the Midwest, 
Northeast and Southeast. Clay pans are usually hard 
when dry, and plastic and sticky when wet. Clay pan 
layers hinder root growth in to the soil, are acidic (pH 
<5.0), and may contain toxic levels of aluminum. 
 
In a study conducted in Missouri, roots of native 
eastern gamagrass stands effectively penetrated clay 
pan layers with clay contents of 30-50% clay (Clark 
et al., 1998). Eastern gama grass formed extensive 
root channels in the clay  pan layer especially where 
the gamagrass had been growing for more than 50 
years. In a series of experiments conducted in 
greenhouses, eastern gamagrass exhibited tolerance 
to low soil pH, high soil aluminum concentrations 
and high soil strength (Foy, 1997; Gilker et al., 
2002).Root growth of eastern gamagrass, in contrast 
to Sudangrass (Sorghum bicolor  ssp. drummondii ) 
was not inhibited by either acid or aluminum-toxic 
soil conditions. Neither low pH nor high soil strength 
adversely affected gamagrass root growth. The 
authors conclude, “The characteristics of tolerance to 
acid and aluminum and to high soil strength 
conditions make eastern gamagrass valuable in 
establishing grassed buffers, vegetative conservation 
barriers, and pastures.”  
 
Foy et al. (1999) determined  the effect of liming a 
compact, acid, high aluminum soil in Maryland on 
the forage yield of Pete eastern gamagrass. The limed 
and non-limed soils had a pH of 5.8 and 5.1, 
respectively. The gamagrass annual forage yield 
averaged 3.25 tons/acre across two years. There was 
no difference between the limed and non-limed soil 
for forage yield. The high tolerance of eastern 
gamagrass to low soil pH and aluminum toxicity is in 
contrast to most crop plants. Krizek et al. (2003) 
conducted a 4 year (1997-2000) study in Maryland to 
determine the forage yield of Pete eastern gamagrass, 
when grown on an acid, compact soil. Gamagrass 
annual forage yield remained relatively high, 
averaging 2 tons/acre, during 1997 to 2000 despite 
moisture deficits during each of these years, and a 
severe moisture deficit during 1999. In contrast, 
adjacent plots of corn and soybean ( Glycine max) 
exhibited severe stunting and reduced or zero grain 
yields during this period. Observations of gamagrass 
roots from pits dug adjacent  to the plots indicate that

gamagrass roots can penetrate acid, compact clay 
pans to a depth of 3 to 6.5 feet. The authors state, 
“The fact that eastern gamagrass can withstand 
periods of moisture deficits may be related to its 
ability to send its roots deep into the soil early in the 
spring when the water table is frequently perched (as 
at our site), thereby enabling it to tap this reservoir of 
water when surface moisture is limiting. . .  When 
properly fertilized, eastern  gamagrass is ideally suited 
for reclamation of acid an d compact soils and for 
production of high biomass of high quality forage.” 
 
Establishment 
Since eastern gamagrass is very palatable to livestock 
it is one of the first grasses that is eliminated from 
mixed stands by grazing. Due to its high palatability 
in grazing systems, it is best to establish and utilize 
gamagrass in pure stands. However, John Dickerson, 
NRCS plant materials speci alist, states, “Other 
species, particularly other native grasses, are 
compatible with eastern gamagrass in forage 
production fields if grazing and hay management is 
focused on the gamagrass. Also, a mixture of grasses 
may exclude weeds more effectively than a solid 
stand of gamagrass.”  
 
Seed dormancy : The caryopsis of eastern gamagrass 
is surrounded by a hard  fruit-case. The botanical 
name for this fruitcase is cupule. Henceforth an 
eastern gamagrass caryopsis and the surrounding 
cupulate fruitcase is referred to as a seed unit  
(Galinat, 1956). Eastern gamagrass establishment is 
hindered by seed unit dormancy (Ahring & Frank, 
1968). A cold moist stratification, which softens the 
cupule is the most practical method to reduce the 
percentage of dormant seed units (Anderson, 1985). 
 
Winter planting of dormant seed units:  One 
alternative is to plant non-stratified seed units during 
autumn or winter when the soil temperature in below 
50 °F, and rely on the cold, moist conditions of 
winter to stratify the seed (Graves et al., 1997; 
Gamagrass Growers Guide,  2005). If the seed units 
are planted too early in autumn, germination may 
occur during winter, whic h will increase the potential 
for winter injury. The recommended autumn/winter 
planting windows for several regions are available 
(USDA-NRCS-NPDC, 2007). 
 
Spring planting of artificially stratified seed units: An 
artificial stratification of seed units in a cold cabinet 
will break gamagrass seed dormancy. The seed units 
must be stratified (exposed to cold, wet conditions) 
for 3 to 10 weeks prior to spring sowing (Row, 1998; 
Springer et al., 2001). A  frequently used technique 
for artificial stratification (Graves et al. 1997; J.  Grabowski, personal communication, 2005) is the 
following: 
  
Fill a burlap bag about ½ full with eastern 
gamagrass seed units. Soak the bag containing 
the seed units in a 1% solution of a fungicide 
such as Thiram
1™ for 10 to 12 hours. Check 
the label for clearance before using any 
fungicide. Drain the burlap bag that contains 
the seed units. Seal the burlap bag and then 
seal the burlap bag in a plastic bag. Store the 
treated seed units for 6 to 10 weeks at 35-45 
°F. Do not freeze. When the seed units are 
removed from the cold cabinet, they should 
not be allowed to dry before planting. 
 
The soil must remain moist after planting artificially 
stratified seed until the seed germinates. Graves et al. 
(1997) recommends planting into a moist seed bed 
because if the seed dries  out before germination the 
stand will be dramatically reduced. Some commercial 
seed producers sell pre-stratified seed units. These 
seed units are h ydrated when purchased. A farmer 
must either plant pre-stratified seed units within 24 
hours after receiving them or store the seed units in a 
moist-cold environment, otherwise the seed units will 
sprout prior to planting.  
 
A commercial seed company, Gamagrass Seed 
Company (Falls City, NE) has developed a 
proprietary process (Germtec II
1 TM), which is a 
priming process for eastern gamagrass seed units. 
The advantage of primed seed over pre-stratified seed 
units is that primed seed units are stable during 
shipping without moist-cold storage and immediate 
planting is not required. However, the germination 
percentage of primed seed units declines slowly 
across time (Krizek et al., 2000).  
 
The recommended date for spring planting of eastern 
gamagrass stratified seed units is similar to that for 
corn (Graves et al., 1997). Roberts and Kallenbackn 
(2006) recommend planting stratified seed units in 
Missouri when soil temperat ures reach 65 °F. Janet 
Grabowski recommends planting stratified 
‘Highlander’ eastern gamagrass in Mississippi when 
soil temperatures are about  85 °F (J. Grabowski, 
personal communication, 2005).  
 
Planting techniques : Good stands of the cultivars 
Pete and Iuka IV eastern gamagrass have been 
obtained using 8 to 10 lb of high quality seed units 
per acre [about 45,000 to  56,250 pure live seeds 
(PLS) per acre] (Dewald et al., 2006). Good quality 
seed of the cultivars Pete and Iuka IV, which are 
composed of Great Plains ecotypes, usually have

5000 to 7000 seed units per lb. Higher seeding 
densities (12-15 lb seed units/acre) of these cultivars 
should be used if the number of seed units per pound 
is less than 6000. In general, tetraploid ecotypes with 
Southeast origins have larger seed units and fewer 
seed units per pound than  ecotypes from the Great 
Plains. The weight per seed unit of the cultivar 
‘Jackson’, which is a tetrap loid ecotype of southeast 
Texas origin, is larger than that of both Pete and Iuka 
IV. Therefore, Jackson s hould be planted at a 
minimum of 10 lb of seed units per acre (J. Alderson, 
personal communication, 2001). The cultivar 
Highlander, a tetraploid  ecotype with a northeast 
Tennessee origin, has about 2800 seed units per lb of 
high quality seed (J. Douglas, personal 
communication, 2001). Suggested seeding densities 
for Highlander are; 13 to 27 lb seed units per acre 
with a minimum row width of 24 inches when the 
planting will be used for forage, and 9 to 19 lb seed 
units per acre with a minimum row width of 36 
inches when the planting will be used for seed 
production (J. Grabowski, personal communication, 
2005).  
 
Row planters (corn, cotton,  peanut, etc.) are easily 
adjusted to plant gamagrass seed units in rows 
(Dewald et al, 2006). Row plantings can be cultivated 
in the early stages for weed control. Since gamagrass 
is a bunchgrass, established plants can have 
substantial bases. These can be rough to drive over 
with equipment. If haying is likely, consider planting 
in rows wide enough to minimize traffic over plants. 
Gamagrass stores an essential portion of its food 
reserves in the aboveground portion of the plant base. 
Reducing traffic on the pl ant crowns will result in 
less plant damage and faster re-growth. 
 
Seed units should be planted 1 to 1.5 inches deep in 
medium textured soil or a little deeper in light 
textured soil because the soil may dry out faster 
(Dewald, 1993). A firm seedbed is desirable for 
planting eastern gamagrass. Planting site preparation 
should be the same as for corn planting. Early corn 
planting season is the preferred planting time for 
spring plantings of gamagrass.  
 
Weed control for establishment : The time during 
establishment is the most critical period for weed 
control. Annual grasses, particularly, can cause 
problems in the establishment year. It is best to delay 
fertilization with nitrogen until the stand is 
established. If gamagrass is planted in rows, 
cultivation can be used to control weeds in the early 
years of establishment. Few herbicides are labeled for 
eastern gamagrass, although several are in 
development. In various studies, gamagrass has  shown excellent tolerance to carryover from some of 
today’s commonly used corn herbicides.  Some 
current information on herbicides is available 
(Roberts & Kallenbach, 1999).   
 
Weed Control After the Establishment Year
: In 
Missouri, after the establishment year, eastern 
gamagrass will compete effectively with most weeds 
without any weed control other than proper grazing 
management and spring burning (Roberts & 
Kallenbach, 2006). Fields may be burned to control 
woody plants, reduce leaf diseases, improve grazing 
distribution, and stimulate new growth. The optimum 
time to burn is in the spring when the new gamagrass 
green-growth is about 1 inch long. 
 
Paul Salon, NRCS agronomist, states, “In the 
Northeast grazing management and burning alone 
will not provide adequate we ed control.”  Herbicides 
containing glyphosate can be applied in early spring 
before desirable perennial grasses break dormancy 
and initiate green growth. Late fall application can be 
made after desirable perennial grasses have reached 
dormancy. For broadleaf weed control, 2,4-D and 
dicamba containing herbicides are options; follow 
manufacturers label for pasture and hayland. 
 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective
. 
 
Management  
Forage / Grazing & Hay : Experience by livestock 
grazers over the past 150 years has shown that 
eastern gamagrass will be eradicated from pastures 
unless careful controlled grazing practices are 
followed (Dewald et al.,  2006). Gamagrass is so 
palatable to livestock that it is one of the first grasses 
to be eliminated under continuous grazing. 
Gamagrass re-growth has been measured at a rate of 
2 inches per day. This new re-growth is tender, 
nutritious and greatly preferred by livestock 
compared to older forage. This leads to spot grazing 
with the same plants being defoliated almost daily, 
resulting in reduced plant vigor and eventual death. 
Eastern gamagrass stores its carbohydrates and 
nitrogen for re-growth in the above ground base of its 
stems. Therefore, grazing must be controlled so as to 
maintain a minimum 6 to 8 inch stubble height for all 
plants. But under actual gr azing, the average stubble

height must be considerably higher than 6 to 8 inches 
in order to maintain a minimum stubble height of 6 to 
8 inches on most plants in the pasture. Closer grazing 
or clipping will reduce plant vigor and eventually 
reduce the stand. Short duration, high intensity 
rotation grazing programs that limit the cattle to 4 to 
6 days per pasture with at least 8 pastures will give 
each pasture a 28 to 42 day rest period to recuperate. 
Rest periods of 40 to 45 days appear optimize the 
combination of stand maintenance, plant vigor, 
forage yield and quality. A 45-day rest period prior to 
killing frost is recommended for gamagrass in order 
to maintain stand health.   
 
Clipping gamagrass to a height of less than 6 to 8 
inches will deplete the stores for re-growth and 
damage the stand (Gillen et al., 2006). Information 
from several studies indicate that clipping intervals of 
40 to 45 days, beginning either at 40 to 45 days after 
spring green-up or at the boot stage, will optimize 
hay yield and quality, stand vigor and longevity. 
After gamagrass reaches the boot stage, forage and 
hay quality decreases rapidly as the plant matures. 
Eastern gamagrass hay production in high rainfall 
climates requires skillful management because hay 
quality is very dependent on the cutting time.  
 
Fertilization : A reliable, general guideline for eastern 
gamagrass fertilization is to follow the 
recommendations for the fertilization of corn for 
silage (Roberts & Kallenbach, 2006). This is 
particularly true for lime, phosphorous and 
potassium. Applications of these amendments should 
be made according to soil test recommendations. Soil 
should be tested before planting and both 
phosphorous and potassium applied at planting to 
reach a medium test level for corn. The optimum soil 
pH range for gamagrass is probably from 5.4 to 6.0. 
Another estimate of the soil pH range is a minimum 
of 5.1 (Foy, 1999) and a maximum of 7.5 (Sharp 
Brothers Seed Company, 1999).   
 
Nitrogen is more efficient when the total seasonal 
application is split across the hay and grazing season. 
For example, the initial nitrogen application is made 
at gamagrass green-up and additional nitrogen 
applied following each cu tting or grazing period. 
Studies suggest that the optimum level for nitrogen 
fertilizer is between 200 and 300 lb N per acre per 
year, and a lower level may be optimum in regions 
with less than 35 inches of annual precipitation and in 
northern regions (Brakie, 1998; Brejda et al., 1996; 
Brejda et al., 1997; Douglas et al., 2002). Growers 
should monitor the N, P and K requirements of 
irrigated eastern gamagrass and apply nutrients to 
meet the need of each harvest.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
A Missouri farmer sent photographs of eastern 
gamagrass to the Plant Diagnostic Clinic of the 
University of Missouri. These photographs depicted 
plants with dead and diseas
ed leaves and crowns that 
appeared dead or rotted. Barb Corwin, diagnostic 
clinic director, concluded that the disease was “take-
all” (Gaeumannomyces graminis ) (Clubine, 2001). 
The take-all fungus persists in soil and crop residues. 
The fungus is usually more severe under high 
moisture conditions, high soil pH, and low soil 
nitrogen. The soil pH level in the field with the take-
all infected plants was 6.5. 
 
Two years before the take-all fungus was identified 
on eastern gamagrass, a commercial seed producer in 
Clifton Hill, Missouri, noticed take-all like symptoms 
on gamagrass. The producer contacted Chet Dewald, 
researcher at the USDA-ARS  Southern Plains Range 
Research Station in Woodward, Oklahoma. While 
not acknowledging a name for the disease, Chet 
Dewald suggested burning the gamagrass residue in 
the spring and applying nitrogen fertilizer. The 
producer followed these suggestions and the disease 
symptoms disappeared. The suggested management 
practices to control take-all in eastern gamagrass are 
to apply adequate nitrogen fertility, leave good height 
residuals 45 days before frost, and burn the 
gamagrass residue every second or third spring.  
 
Two viruses, “sugarcane mosaic virus strain maize 
dwarf mosaic virus B” and “maize dwarf mosaic 
virus” can infect eastern gamagrass (Seifers et al., 
1993). Both viruses are transmitted by aphids. These 
viruses can infect, and then  over-winter on eastern 
gamagrass. Piper et al. (1996) describes the disease 
symptoms, “The disease symptoms caused by these 
viruses vary from a general mosaic to oblong 
chlorotic and necrotic spots throughout the leaf. The 
mosaic symptoms can vary from a pale green, very 
mild mosaic to a very distinct, bright mosaic on the 
entire plant, and are most apparent in early to mid-
season as the plants emerge from dormancy.” Severe 
levels of the diseases caused by these viruses can 
reduce gamagrass growth and yield. 
 
Larva of the southern corn stalk borer [ Diatraea 
crambidoides  (Grote)] has been identified in the 
crown tissue of eastern ga magrass (Krizek et al., 
2002b). The authors state, “This pest occurs from 
Delaware/Maryland to Florida and the inland states 
(KS, OH, OK, MS, and AZ). This pest feeds upon 
corn, grain sorghum, and Johnsongrass and attacks 
eastern gamagrass. The best strategy for avoiding 
damage to eastern gamagrass from the southern corn

stalk borer is to remove thatch from the crop before 
winter. Farmers should be alert for this pest because 
it is highly destructive and can result in severe losses 
in yield of eastern gamagrass. Through rigorous 
management practices to  prevent accumulation of 
thatch on the fields, it is possible to minimize the pest 
problem.” 
 
Eastern gamagrass plants infested with the maize 
billbug [ Sphenophorus maidis  (Chittenden)] were 
found in a germplasm nursery at Woodward, OK and 
in a 12-year-old grazed, ga magrass pasture at Fort 
Supply, OK (Maas et al., 20 03). The authors state, 
“Damage infected during the life cycle of the pest 
will have a negative impact on seed production from 
the loss of reproductive tillers. Maize billbug damage 
may also contribute to the ra te of center “die-out” of 
the crowns of eastern gamagrass. The control 
measures used in corn production may not be 
effective for eastern gamagr ass. Research is needed 
to characterize the life cycle of maize billbug in 
eastern gamagrass and to determine effective 
methods of control.” 
 
Springer et al. (2004) estimated the potential loss in 
eastern gamagrass forage yield due to the combined 
infestation of both the southern corn stalk borer and 
maize billbug. The estimate of economic loss in 
eastern gamagrass hay production was from about 
$3.00 to $23.00, with an average of $11.00 per acre. 
These estimates are based on  a $40.00 per ton price 
for gamagrass hay. The authors state, “Unless the 
damage to eastern gamagrass plants was severe the 
cost of chemical control would be greater than the 
return from the forage and it is not known if chemical 
control would be effective…. An integrated approach 
to their control is likely the best. The first step is to 
develop eastern gamagrass cultivars with resistance 
to these pests…. Management strategies might 
include using trap crops, changing harvest dates to 
remove forage before insects bore into culms, or late 
fall burning or grazing to kill some larva and remove 
thatch from plants which makes insects more 
vulnerable to freezing.” 
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivars Highlander, Jackson, 
and Pete were compared in  replicated entry trials for 
either one or two years (2001 -2002) at three locations 
(Coffeeville, Prairie and Raymond, MS) (Grabowski 
et al., 2003). None of the plants of Jackson survived 
after 2001 at Coffeeville. These plants showed signs 
of damage from disease symptoms caused by 
Pythium  species and  Rhizoctonia species.  
 
Ergot was observed on spikes of Highlander eastern 
gamagrass in Mississippi (J. Grabowski, personal  communication, 2005). Although it has not been 
positively identified, this ergot is believed to be 
Claviceps tripsaci
, which has previously been 
reported on eastern gamagrass seedheads (Hardison, 
1953). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Researchers at the USDA-ARS Southern Plains 
Range Research Station in Woodward, Oklahoma 
recommend planting gamagrass for seed production 
in rows 40 to 48 inches wide, with 4 to 6 seed units 
planted per foot (Dewald et al., 2006).  
 
The affect of several agronomic parameters on 
eastern gamagrass seed unit production was 
examined in a study conducted in central Iowa 
(Lemke et al., 2003). The parameters were cultivar, 
Pete and Iuka IV, applied nitrogen (0, 50, 100, 200 lb 
nitrogen per acre), seed  unit harvest time, and 
defoliation, which was designed to stimulate grazing. 
The application of 50 lb nitrogen per acre 
significantly increased the  number of seed units in 
the second year of the study (P<0.05). However, the 
number of seed units did not increase at nitrogen 
amounts above this level. In fact, an increase in 
nitrogen from 100 to 200 lb per acre decreased seed 
unit numbers. The harvest time that optimized the 
number of seed units collected was approximately 2 
weeks after the terminal spikes began shattering. The 
authors state, “If seed an d livestock producers with 
eastern gamagrass stands are willing to accept 
moderate seed yield reductions, they have the option 
of managing stands for both forage and seed 
production.”  
 
A suggested seeding density for the cultivar 
Highlander is 9 to 19 lb seed units/acre with a 
minimum row width of 36 inches when the planting 
will be used for seed production (J. Grabowski, 
personal communication, 2005). Nitrogen had a 
minimal effect on seed yield, grain weight, percent 
seed fill and seed germination. Results of this study 
suggest that seed producer s of Highlander eastern 
gamagrass in the upper southeastern states should 
apply nitrogen fertilizer in a single application of 50 
to 75 lb/acre when spring re-growth reaches 10 
inches. Environmental influences and timing of 
harvest were critical factors impacting seed yield and 
quality of Highlander. 
 
Eastern gamagrass terminal spikes occur on the top 
of the stem, and lateral spikes occur at the leaf axil, 
which is the angle between the leaf and stem. Seed 
units on the terminal spikes mature earlier than seed 
units on the lateral spikes. Field observations suggest 
that a good indictor of the optimum harvest time for

Highlander eastern gamagrass is when the anthers of 
approximately 75% of the flowers on the lateral 
spikes have shed their pollen (Grabowski, personal 
communication, 2005). 
 
An increase in the percentage of gamagrass seed 
units that contained a caryopsis was obtained by 
partitioning seed units using either an air 
fractionating aspirator (Carter-Day, Model No. GF 
21, Minneapolis, MN) or a gravity separator (Oliver 
MFG, Rocky Ford, CO) following the cleaning of 
gamagrass seed units with an air seed cleaner 
(Clipper M2B. A.T. Ferrell and Co., Saginaw, MI) 
(Douglas et al., 2000b). Kriz ek et al., (2000) showed 
that 21 days at a constant  temperature of 86 ºF is 
sufficient time for conducting eastern gamagrass 
germination tests.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Pete was developed at 
the USDA, NRCS Plant Materials Center in 
Manhattan, Kansas (Fine et al.,1990; USDA-NRCSa, 
2006). Pete closely resembles the wild strains of 
eastern gamagrass in Kansas and Oklahoma. It is 
non-uniform and widely adapted. The expected area 
of use of Pete includes th e eastern third of Nebraska, 
the eastern halves of Kans as and Oklahoma, and the 
adjacent areas of Arkansas, Iowa, and Missouri. It 
can be grown farther west on irrigated and sub-
irrigated sites. Pete has be en established successfully 
in southern New York. Pete  is marginally adapted to 
selected sites in southeastern South Dakota and 
southern Minnesota (USDA Hardiness Zone 4b).  
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Iuka IV was 
developed by the USDA, ARS Southern Plains 
Range Research Station in Woodward, Oklahoma 
(Dewald et. al., 2006). Farmers and ranchers have 
established Iuka IV in the Great Plains from southern 
Texas (30th parallel north) to southern Nebraska and 
eastern New Mexico. Also, farmers and ranchers 
have established Iuka IV in the region from Iowa to 
Maryland and southward to Louisiana.  
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Jackson was 
developed by the USDA, NRCS Plant Materials 
Center in Nacogdoches, Texas (USDA-NRCSb, 
2006). Seed of Jackson was collected in 1986 from a 
native stand in Jackson County, Texas. Little 
variation from seed is anticipated because Jackson is 
an apomictic tetraploid and is therefore genetically 
stable. The expected area  of use of Jackson extends 
from the eastern half of Texas though the 
southeastern states excluding Florida.  
  The eastern gamagrass selected class of natural 
germplasm San Marcos was developed by the USDA, 
NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ Smith Plant Materials Center 
in Knox City, Texas (USDA-NRCSc, 2006). Seed of 
the San Marcos germplasm  was originally collected 
from plants located in Hays County, Texas, near the 
town of San Marcos. Average annual precipitation 
for the collection area is about 33 inches. San Marcos 
may be used in monocultures for pasture and hay or 
as a component in seed mixtures for range plantings.  
It is anticipated that San Marcos will be adapted to 
the following NRCS Majo
r Land Resources Areas 
(MLRA) in central Texas and southern Oklahoma: 
78B, 78C, 78D, 80A, 80B, 81B, 81C, 82, 83A, 84B, 
84C, 85, 86A, 86B, 87A, and 87B. Sam Marcos is 
adapted to a wide range of soil types, but will 
perform best on sandy loams,  clay loams and clays. It 
is well adapted to low, moist sub-irrigated sites. It is 
productive in areas with annual precipitation less than 
28 inches only if supplied with supplemental 
irrigation.  
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Highlander was 
developed jointly by the USDA, NRCS Jamie L. 
Whitten Plant Materials Center in Coffeeville, 
Mississippi, the USDA, NRCS Jimmy Carter Plant 
Materials Center in Americus, Georgia and the 
Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Experiment 
Station, Mississippi State, Mississippi (Grabowski et 
al., 2005). Highlander was collected in 1990 in 
Montgomery Country, Tennessee (MLRA 122); 
average annual precipitation for this location is 1016 
millimeters (40 inches). Little variation from seed is 
anticipated because the Highlander is an apomictic 
tetraploid and is therefore genetically stable. 
Highlander is recommended for hay production. It is 
best used as a hay crop;  however it can be grazed if 
managed to prevent damage to the plant stand (i.e. 
rotational grazing). Highlander is well adapted for 
use in the eastern portions  of USDA Hardiness Zones 
6b to 8a, using Interstate 35 as its western limit.   
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Medina was 
developed by the USDA, NRCS Plant Materials 
Center in Nacogdoches, Texas (USDA-NRCSb, 
2006). Medina seed was or iginally collected in1986 
from a native stand in the Hondo Creek bottom of 
Median County, Texas. Medina is a versatile cultivar 
with potential for forage uses that include pasture, 
hay, green chop, and silage. Medina, without 
irrigation, is adapted to areas  that receive 25 or more 
inches of annual rainfall throughout USDA Hardiness 
Zones 8 to 9 (excluding Florida). Medina is adapted 
to many soil types, but deep sandy soils are not 
suitable.

The eastern gamagrass cultivar Bumpers was 
developed by the USDA, NRCS Plant Materials 
Center in Booneville, Arkansas (USDA-NRCSe, 
2006). The original seed of Bumpers was collected 
from a native roadside stand in Yell County, 
Arkansas (MLRA 118). Bumpers is useful for 
livestock grazing. Other forage options are for 
perennial hay, silage, and green chop. Bumpers is 
well adapted for use in the mid-south portions of 
USDA Hardiness Zones 6a through 8a and for 
rainfall areas of 40 to 60  inches. This cultivar is 
recommended for western Arkansas, southern 
Missouri and eastern Oklahoma..   
 
The eastern gamagrass selected class of natural 
germplasm St Lucia, and se lected class of natural 
germplasm Martin were developed by the USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center in Brooksville Florida 
(USDA-NRCSd, 2006). The original germplasm of  
St. Lucia was vegetatively collected from St. Lucia 
County, Florida. The original germplasm of Martin 
was vegetatively collected from Martin County, 
Florida. Both St. Lucia and  Martin were selected for 
use as an ornamental landscape plant in xeriscape and 
for use in buffer strips. Both St. Lucia and Martin are 
diploid (2n = 2x = 36) and will outcross, producing 
progeny with varying  color characteristics. 
Vegetative propagation is necessary to maintain the 
blue foliage characteristic of both St. Lucia and 
Martin. Both St. Lucia and Martin are adapted to 
USDA Hardiness Zones 8 to 10, but they will not 
survive temperatures below 0 °F for extended periods 
of time.    
 
The eastern gamagrass cultivar Verl was released in 
2005 by the USDA, ARS, in cooperation with the 
Oklahoma Agricultural Experiment Station and the 
USDA, NRCS, (Springer et al., 2006). Verl is a 
fertile triploid (2n = 3x = 54) that reproduces 
predominately by apomixis. Verl is recommended for 
pasture and hay in eastern and southern United 
States. Verl has excellent seed production. At 
Woodward, OK, Verl produced an equivalent seed 
yield of 152 lb/acre. Verl is susceptible to feeding 
damage from the maize billbug and the southern 
cornstalk borer. Infestation by these insects reduces 
seed production of eastern gamagrass. Verl may be 
susceptible to  Rhizoctonia, Pythium, and Bipolaris  
species.  
 
Cultivars comprised of northern ecotypes, such a Pete 
and Iuka IV, initiate growth earlier in the spring than 
cultivars comprised of ecotypes from the southern 
portion of the range such as Jackson and Highlander.  
Malcome Kirkland NRCS agronomist, suggests that 
farmers can lengthen the gamagrass grazing season,  in the southern region of the gamagrass range, by 
utilizing both northern and southern ecotype 
cultivars. The northern ecotype cultivars will provide 
more forage early in the spring and the southern 
ecotype cultivars more forage during middle and late 
summer. According to N
RCS agronomist Sharon 
Pfaff, native Florida ecotyp es are not dormant during 
winter. Therefore, this strategy would be ineffective 
in Florida. This strategy may also prove ineffective in 
the northern portion  of the gamagrass range because 
many southern ecotypes are not winter hardy in this 
region. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
A comprehensive treatment of eastern gamagrass that 
includes cultivar forage yield information is available 
from: Eastern Gamagrass ( Tripsacum dactyloides ): 
A Plant for Forage, Conservation and Bioenergy.   
URL:  http://npdc.usda.gov/publications/index.html
 
 
References 
Aiken, G. 1997. Temporal effects on steer   
performance and nutritive values for eastern 
gamagrass grazed continuously for different 
durations. J. Anim. Sci. 75: 803-808. URL: 
http://jas.fass.org/ 
 
Ahring, R. M. & Frank, H. 1968. Establishment of 
eastern gamagrass from seed and vegetative 
propagation.  J. Range Manage . 21: 27-30 
 
Anderson, R. C. 1985. Aspects of the germination 
ecology and biomass proportion of eastern gamagrass 
( Tripsacum dactyloides  L.). Bot. Gaz. 146: 353-364. 
 
Brakie, M. R. 1998.  Yield and quality of eastern 
gamagrass selections as affected by clipping interval 
and N rates . M.S. Thesis, Stephen F. Austin State 
University, Nacogdoches.  
 
Brejda, J. J., Brown, J. R., Lorenz, T. E. & Henry, J. 
1996. Eastern gamagrass responses to different 
harvest intervals and nitrogen rates in northern 
Missouri.  J. Prod. Agric.  9: 130-135. 
 
Brejda, J. J., Brown, J. R., Lorenz, T. E., Henry, J. & 
Lowry, S. R. 1997. Variation in eastern gamagrass 
forage yield with environments, harvests, and 
nitrogen levels.  Agron. J. 89: 702-706.

Burns, J. C., Fisher, D. S., Pond, K. R. & Timothy, 
D. H. 1992. Diet characteristics, digesta kinetics, and 
dry matter intake of steers grazing eastern gamagrass. 
J. Anim. Sci . 70: 1251-1261. URL: http://jas.fass.org/  
 
Burns, J. C. & Fisher, D. S. 2000. Forge potential of 
switchgrass and eastern gamagrass in the eastern 
Piedmont. Pp. 95-102 in: Dickerson, J. A, Ritchie, C. 
A. Ritchie, J. C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern Native 
Grass Symposium , Baltimore. 
 
Clark, R. B., Alberts, E. E., Zobel, R. W., Sinclair, T. 
R., Miller, M. S., Kemper, W.  D. & Foy, C. D. 1998. 
Eastern gamagrass ( Tripsacum dactyloides ) root 
penetration into and chemi cal properties of claypan 
soils.  Plant and Soil 200:  33-45. 
 
Coblentz, W. K., Coffey, K. P. & Turner, J. E. 1999. 
Review: Quality characteristics of eastern gamagrass 
forages.  The Professional Animal Scientist  15: 211-
223. 
 
Dewald, C. L. 1993. Discussion - seed treatment and 
stand establishment. Pp.35 in: Dickerson, J. A., 
Jacobson, E. T. & Wynia, R. L. (eds.),  Eastern 
Gamagrass Workshop, Manhattan.  
 
Dewald, C. L., Berg, W. A., Sims, P. L. & Gillen, R. 
L. 2006.  Eastern gamagrass . USDA, ARS, Southern 
Plains Range Research Station. URL: 
http://www.sprrs .usda.gov/eastern.htm; accessed 
22FEB2006 
 
Dewald, C. L., Henry, J., Bruckerhoff, S., Ritchie, J., 
Dabney, S., Shepard, D., Douglas, J. & Wolf, D. 
1996. Guidelines for establishing warm season grass 
hedges for erosion control.  Journal of Soil and Water 
Conservation  51: 16-20.  
 
Douglas, J., Edwards S. D. & Lang, D. L. 2000a. 
Estimating digestibility in eastern gamagrass. Pp. 
113-116 in: Dickerson, J. A,  Ritchie, C. A. Ritchie, J. 
C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern Native Grass 
Symposium , Baltimore.  
 
Douglas, J., Grabowski J. M. & Keith, B. C. 2000b. 
A comparison of seed  cleaning techniques for 
improving quality of eastern gamagrass seed. Pp. 
117-120 in: Dickerson, J. A,  Ritchie, C. A. Ritchie, J. 
C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern Native Grass 
Symposium , Baltimore. 
 
Douglas, J., Edwards S. D. & Lang, D. L., Elmore, R. 
L., Ivy, R. L. & Howell, J. L. 2002. Eastern 
gamagrass response to nitrogen fertilization in 
Northeast Mississippi. Pp. 24 0-247 in: Burns, J. C. &  Randall, J. (eds.) 
Proc. 3rd Eastern Native Grass 
Symposium,  Chapel Hill.  
 
Edwards, S., Douglas J. & Bloodworth, H. 2000. 
Clipping effects on yield and quality of eastern 
gamagrass, switchgrass, and bermudagrass. Pp. 
121-126 in: Dickerson, J. A, Ritchie, C. A. 
Ritchie, J. C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern Native 
Grass Symposium , Baltimore.
 
 
Farquharson, L. I. 1995. Apoximis and 
polyembryony in  Tripsacum dactyloides . Am. J. Bot 
42: 737-743. 
 
Fine, G. L., Barnett, F. L., Anderson, K. L., Lippert, 
R. D. & Jacobson, E. T. 1990. Registration of ‘Pete’ 
eastern gamagrass.  Crop. Sci. 30: 741-742.  
 
Foy, C. D., Sadegi A. M., Ritchie, J. C., Krizek, D. T. 
& Kemper, W. D. 1999. Aluminum toxicity and high 
bulk density: role in limiting shoot and root growth of 
selected aluminum indicat or plants and eastern 
gamagrass in an acid soil.  J. Plant Nutrition 22: 
1151-1556. 
 
Galinat, W. C. 1956. Evolution leading to the 
formation of the  cupulate fruitcase in the American 
Maydeae.  Bot. Mus. Leafl. Harvard University  17: 
217-239.   
 
Gamagrass Seed Company. 2005.  Gamagrass 
Growers Guide.  URL: http://www.gamagrass.com/; 
accessed 22FEB06.   
 
Grabowski, J., Douglas, J., Lang, D. 2003.  Notice of 
release of ‘Highlander’ eastern gamagrass.  USDA-
NRCS Plant Materials Centers, Coffeeville, MS and 
Americus, GA and Mississippi Agricultural and 
Forestry Experiment Station, Mississippi State. URL: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/  
 
Grabowski, J. M., Douglas, J. L., Lang, D. J., and 
Edwards S. D. 2005. Registration of ‘Highlander’ 
eastern gamagrass.  Crop Sci. 45: 412-413. 
 
Graves, C. R., Ellis, F. L. & Bates, G. E. 1997. 
Growing eastern gamagrass.  Tennessee Agric. Sci. 
181: 11-13. 
 
Hardison, J.R. 1953. Seed disorders of forage plants. 
Pp. 272-276. in: Stefferud, A. (ed.) Plant Diseases 
the Year book of Agriculture. U.S. Gov. Printing 
Office, Washington.

Henson, J. H. 1993. Effect of a soil saline gradient on 
eastern gamagrass. Pp. 32 in: Dickerson, J. A., 
Jacobson, E. T. & Wynia, R. L. (eds.),  Eastern 
Gamagrass Workshop, Manhattan. 
 
Krizek, D. T., Camp M. J., Maxon S. B., Meyer G. 
C., Ritchie J. C., Davis  K. M. & McCloud M. L. 
2000. Comparative germination of 1998 and 1999 
lots of Germtec IITM treated eastern gamagrass seed 
after 28 days. Pp. 182-193 in: Dickerson, J. A, 
Ritchie, C. A. Ritchie, J. C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern 
Native Grass Symposium, Baltimore. 
 
Krizek, D. T., Solis M. A., Touhey, P. A., Miller, P. 
A. & Ritchie, J. C. 2002b. Rediscovery of southern 
corn stalk borer: A potentially serious pest of eastern 
gamagrass and strategies for mitigation. Pp. 277-282 
in: Burns, J. C. & Randall, J. (eds.)  Proc. 3rd Eastern 
Native Grass Symposium, Chapel Hill. 
 
Krizek, D. T., Ritchie, J. C., Sadeghi, A. M., Foy, C. 
D., Rhoden, E. G., Davis, J. R. & Camp, M. J. 2003. 
A four-year study of biomass production of eastern 
gamagrass grown on an acid compact soil. 
Communications in Plant and Soil Analysis  34:  457-
480.  
 
Lemke, B. M., Gibson, L. R., Knapp, A. D., Dixon, 
P. M., Moore, K. J. & Hintz, R. 2003. Maximizing 
seed production in eastern gamagrass.  Agron. J. 95: 
863-869. URL: 
http://agron.scijournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/4/
863 
 
Maas, D. L., Springer T. L. & Arnold D. C. 2003. 
Occurrence of the maize billbug, Sphenophorus 
maidis  in eastern gamagrass.  Southwestern 
Entomologist  20: 151-152.  
 
McLaughlin, M. R., Fairbrother, T. E. & Rowe, D. E. 
2004. Nutrient uptake by warm-season perennial 
grasses in swine effluent spray field.  Agron. J. 96: 
484-493. URL:  
http://agron.scijournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/96/2/
484 
 
Perrygo1, C. L., Shirmohammadi A., Ritchie J. C. & 
Rawls, W. J. 2001. Effect of eastern gamagrass on 
infiltration rate and soil physical and hydraulic 
properties. Pp. 265-268 in: David Bosch & Kevin 
King (eds.),  Preferential Flow Water: Movement and 
Chemical Transport in the Environment, Proc. 2nd 
Intl. Symp.  (3-5 January 2001, Honolulu, Hawaii, 
USA), St. Joseph, Michigan: ASAE. 701P0006. 
URL:  http://asae.frymulti.com/re
quest.asp?JID=1&AID=21
23&CID=pf2001&T=2 
 
Pingel, D. 1999.  Evaluating Caucasian bluestem, 
hardy bermudagrass, and eastern gamagrass using 
cow-calf pairs.  M.S. Thesis, Murray State University, 
Murray.  
 
Piper, J. K., Handley M. K. & Kulakow P. A. 1996. 
Incidence and severity of viral disease symptoms on 
eastern gamagrass within monocultures and 
polycultures. Agriculture, Ecosystems and 
Environment  59: 139-147. 
 
Rankins, A. Jr. 1998. Effectiveness of perennial 
grasses for reducing herbicide and sediment losses in 
surface runoff.  Proc. S. Weed Sci. Soc ., Birmingham.  
 
Roberts, C. & Kallenbach, R. 2006.  Eastern 
gamagrass.  Agricultural Publication G4671. Dept. of 
Agronomy, University of Missouri-Columbia. URL:  
http://muextension.missouri.edu/explore/agguides/cro
ps/; accessed 22FEB2006. 
 
Row, J. M. 1998.  Establishment of eastern 
gamagrass with pre-germination seed treatments.  
M.S. thesis. Kansas State University, Manhattan.  
 
Salon, P. R. & Cherney, D. J. R. 2000. Eastern 
gamagrass forage quality as influenced by harvest 
management. Pp. 298-304 in: Dickerson, J. A, 
Ritchie, C. A. Ritchie, J. C. (eds.),  Proc. 2nd Eastern 
Native Grass Symposium, Baltimore. URL: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/nypmc/ 
 
Seifers, D. L., Handley, M. H. & Bowden, R. L. 
1993. Sugarcane mosaic virus strain maize d warf 
virus B as a pathogen of eastern gamagrass. Plant 
Disease  77: 335-339. 
 
Sharp Brothers Seed Company. 1999.  Eastern 
Gamagrass / Sharps Brothers Seed Company. URL: 
http://www.sharpbro.com/clip005.html
;accessed 
22FEB2006. 
 
Springer, T. L., Dewald, C. L. & Aiken, G. E. 2001. 
Seed germination and dormancy in eastern 
gamagrass. Crop Sci.  41: 1906-1910. URL: 
http://agron.scijournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/92/6/
1184 
 
Springer, T. L., Dewald C. L., Sims P. L. Gillen R. 
L., Louthan, V.H., Cooper, W.J., Taliaferro, C.M, 
Maura, Jr., C., Pfafe, S., Wynia, R.L., Henry, J., 
Bruckerhoff, S.B., Van de Grinten, M., Salon, P,R., 
Houck, Jr., M. & Esquivel. 2006. Registration of

‘Verl’ eastern gamagrass. Crop Sci. 46: 477-478.  
URL: 
http://crop.scijournals.org/content/vol46/issue1/ 
 
Springer, T. L., Sims, P. L. & Gillen, R. L. 2004. 
Estimates of forage yield loss in eastern gamagrass 
due to shoot boring insects.  Proc. American. Forage 
and Grassland Council: 333-336. 
 
Staver, K. W. 2000. Production and nutrient uptake 
by native warm-season grasses. Pp. 314-317 in: 
Dickerson, J. A, Ritchie, C. A. Ritchie, J. C. (eds.), 
Proc. 2nd Eastern Native Grass Symposium , 
Baltimore.  
 
Tharel, L. M. 2000. Nutrient utilization and dry 
matter production of eastern gamagrass, switchgrass 
and Old World bluestem. Pp. 29-31 in:  Eastern 
Gamagrass Technology Update . USDA-NRCS Plant 
Materials Program.  
 
USDA-NRCSa, 2006. Plant Materials Center at 
Manhattan, KS. URL: http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/ 
 
USDA-NRCSb, 2006. Plant  Materials Center at 
Nacogdoches, TX. URL: http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/ 
 
USDA-NRCSc, 2006. Plant Materials Center at Knox 
City, TX. URL: http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/ 
 
USDA-NRCSd, 2006. Plant  Materials Center at 
Brooksville, FL. URL:  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/ 
 
USDA-NRCSe, 2006. Plant Materials Center at 
Booneville, AR. URL: http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/centers/ 
 
USDA-NRCS-NPDC.  2007. Eastern gamagrass 
( Tripsacum  dactyloides ): A plant for forage, 
conservation and bioenergy.  URL: 
http://npdc.usda.gov/publications/index.html
; 
accessed 13AUG07. 
 
Prepared By 
James F. Henson  Agronomist, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA   
 
Greg A. Fenchel  Manager, USDA NRCS Los Lunas 
Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, NM  
  Species Coordinator 
James F. Henson
 Agronomist. USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA   
 
Edited: 070813 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.