Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
HEMLOCK  
Tsuga heterophylla  (Raf.) 
Sarg. 
Plant Symbol = TSHE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
West coast hemlock, pacific hemlock, coast hemlock 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Western hemlock bark has high tannin 
content and was used as a tanning agent, pigment and 
cleansing solution (Pojar  & MacKinnon 1994).  
Some Coast Salish people used a red dye made from 
hemlock bark to color mountain goat wool and basket 
materials and as a facial  cosmetic and hair remover 
(Ibid.).  The wood was heavy, durable, and fairly 
easy to carve.  Implements  such as children’s bows, 
spoons, combs, roasting pits, dip-net poles, and edges 
were carved from hemlock wood.  The Mainland 
Comox threaded oolichan and herring boughs for 
drying, and used for drying, and used the boughs for 
lining steaming pits (Ibid.).  Kwakwaka’wakw 
dancers wore headdresses, and head-bands of 
hemlock boughs, and young women lived in 
hemlock-bough huts for four days after their first 
menstruation (Ibid.). 
 
Pitch obtained from crevices in the bark, has been 
chewed as a gum (Ibid.).  Western hemlock leaves 
and shoot tips were used to make an herbal tea.  The  leaves and young shoots have been chewed as an 
emergency food to keep one alive when lost in the 
woods (Ibid.). 
 
Medicinal
: Western hemlock was commonly 
employed medicinally by several native North 
American Indian tribes who used it to treat a variety 
of complaints (Moerman 1998).  Hemlock pitch was 
applied for a variety of purposes, including poultices 
or poultice coverings, linam ents rubbed on the chest 
for colds and when mixed with deer tallow as a salve 
to prevent sunburn (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  A 
decoction of the pounded bark has been used in the 
treatment of hemorrhages, diaphoretic, and diuretic 
(Moerman 1998).  The powdered bark can be put in 
shoes for foot odor. 
 Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Tsuga heterophylla  is 
occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in 
northern states and in Western Europe (Sargent 
1961).  Western hemlock stands provide cover and 
habitat for many wildlife species and small 
mammals.  It is also used for nest trees by cavity 
nesting birds.  This species is browsed by elk and 
deer.  The seedlings are eaten by snowshoe hares and 
rabbits. 
 
Agroforestry : Western hemlock is used in forested 
riparian buffers to help reduce stream bank erosion, 
protect aquatic environments, enhance wildlife, and 
increase biodiversity.  
 
Economic : It is one of the best pulpwood for paper 
and paperboard products.  The wood is used in house 
construction for external walls, structural support and 
is suited for interior finish, kitchen cabinets, flooring, 
and ceiling. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Western hemlock ( Tsuga heterophylla) is a 
large evergreen tree growing from ninety to two-
hundred feet high.  The needles are short stalked, flat, 
finely toothed, irregularly spare, and of unequal 
length (five to twenty millimeters long).  The seed 
cones are ovoid, short-stalked, brown, with many thin 
papery scales, stalkless, and hanging down at the end

of the twigs.  The bark is smooth when young, 
reddish-brown, becoming darker, and deeply 
furrowed with flat-topped scaly ridges (Farrar 1995). 
 
Distribution: Western hemlock is native in 
northwestern California, Oregon, Washington, British 
Columbia, Alaska, Idaho, and Montana (McMinn & 
Maino 1963).  In California, western hemlock occurs 
near the coast in scattered localities from Del Norte 
County southward to the vicinity of Elk Creek, 
Mendocino County (Ibid.).  In Oregon and 
Washington, it inhibits the Coast Ranges and 
Olympic Mountains, extending eastward to the 
Cascades (Ibid.).  For current distribution, please 
consult the PLANT Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation 
Western hemlock occurs on a variety of soil types.  
This species is well adapted to grow on humus and 
decaying wood, and is also found on mineral soil 
(Pojar & MacKinnon 1994).  This species is very 
shade tolerant and thrives in full sun and regenerates 
well under a closed canopy.  Western hemlock grows 
in pure stands or mixed at lower levels with Douglas-
fir, silver and grand firs, giant arborvitae, redwood, 
and hardwood and at higher elevations with noble fir, 
Alaska cedar, mountain hemlock, western, white, and 
lodgepole pines (Preston 1989). 
 
Establishment 
Propagation from Seed : Seed is best sown in a cold 
frame in the autumn or late winter.  Dormancy is 
variable with some seed lots requiring cold 
stratification (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  Stratification 
accelerates and improves total germination and, 
unless seeds are known not to require pretreatment, 
cold stratification at 41ºF from three weeks to three 
months is recommended (Ibid.).  Young seedlings 
should be placed in individual pots, once they are 
large enough to handle, and allowed to grow in a cold 
frame.  During early summer the following year, out 
plant seedlings to their permanent locations. 
 
Management 
Seedling transplant well when they are 8 to 36 inches 
tall.  However, the best survival rate can be achieved 
if seedling are transplanted between 8 and 20 inches, 
this is usually when they are about five to eight years 
old (Huxley 1992).  Transplanting larger seedlings 
will check badly and hardly put on any growth for 
several years.  This slow  growth predisposes the 
seedling to pest, poor root development and wind 
throws, and related damage. (Ibid.). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Readily available from your local nursery.  Contact 
your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees .  Henry 
Holt & Company, New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & M.W. Heuser 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation .  Varsity Press, 
Athens. Georgia. 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.   Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Huxley, A. 1992.   The new RAS dictionary of 
gardening.  MacMillan Press, New York, New York 
 
Lauriault, J. 1989.   Identification guide to the trees of 
Canada .  Fitzhenry & Whiteside, Ontario, Canada. 
 
MacKinnon, A., J. Pojar, & R. Coupe´ 1992.   Plants 
of the northern British Columbia.  Lone Pine 
Publishing, Canada. 
 
McMinn, H.E. & E. Maino 1963.   An illustrated 
manual of Pacific Coast trees .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley, California. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Pojar, J & A. MacKinnon 1994.   Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia, and Alaska .  Lone Pine Publishing, 
Redmond, Washington. 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.   North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.   Manual of the trees of North 
America .  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 
 
Viereck, L.A. & E.L. Little, Jr. 1972.  A laska trees 
and shrubs .  United States Department of 
Agriculture.  Agriculture Handbook No. 410. 
Washington, D.C.

Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.