Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ITHURIEL’S SPEAR 
Triteleia laxa Benth. 
Plant Symbol = TRLA16  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & East Bay Regional Parks Botanic Garden 
 
Alternate Names 
Grass nuts, Indian potato, deer potato, highland 
potato 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The corms were gathered with a 
digging stick and eaten by the Karuk, Pomo, Yuki, 
Wailaki, Coast Miwok, Maidu, and many other tribes 
in California.  The Maidu, Karuk, and other tribes 
cooked the corms in an earth oven.  The Karuk dug a 
pit, lined it with rocks, and built a fire in it.  As soon 
as the fire had gone out, the ashes were removed and 
the cleaned corms were put on a mat of fresh maple 
leaves and covered with another mat.  Madrone 
leaves were laid over this, then hot rocks.  The hot 
rocks were covered with earth and on this a fire was 
built.  The bulbs were eaten the next day when the pit 
was opened.  The corms are still gathered today by 
the Kashaya Pomo and individuals of other ethnic 
affiliations.  The Kashaya boil the "potatoes" and eat 
them.  The flowers are showy and have become 
valued by some horticulturists and gardeners.  The 
plant is propagated for  cut flowers and bulbs in 
Holland.  Both small and large mammals including 
black bears, mule deer, exotic wild pigs, and pocket  gophers eat the corms.  
The Karuk call this plant 
"deer potato" because deer eat the blossoms. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
 Alfred Brousseau ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalP hotos 
Description 
General : Lily Family (Liliaceae).  This perennial 
herb has flowers that appear in open, large umbels 
with 8 to 48 flowers per umbel.  The funnel form-
shaped flowers are narrow at the base and have six 
petal-like lobes and range in color from blue to blue-
purple to white.  Six stam ens are attached to the 
perianth wall at two different levels.  The ovary is on 
a long slender stipe.  The plants reproduce both 
through black seeds and fibr ous-coated corms.  The 
tan corms have cormlets tightly attached (sessile).  
The fruit is a capsule.  The two or three basal grass-
like leaves generally whither at flowering. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  The plants are found in open 
forest, woodland, and grassland in clay soil in a wide 
elevational range from 0 to  1500 m.  Ithuriel's spears 
are distributed from southwestern Oregon, the 
Cascade Range, northwestern California, central 
western California, the Sierra Nevada, and the 
Transverse Ranges. 
 
Establishment 
If possible, obtain the s eed and corms from local 
sources near where they will  be planted, to maintain 
genetic diversity of Ithuriel's spears and for the best 
adaptation to local conditions.  Some plant nurseries 
may label their corms and seeds according to 
geographic source.  If plan ting flowering-size corms, 
they can be directly planted outside.  Plant the corms 
in the fall in full sun or partial shade.  The less 
crowded the more the corms will offset.  Plant them 2 
to 4 inches apart and 4 inches deep.  A well-drained 
soil that is light and loose will produce bigger corms.  
Water and weed the patch regularly and protect it 
from small and large mammals, insects, and birds.  
Keep the ground slightly damp.  If given too much 
water the corms will rot.  If it rains fairly regularly, 
don't water the area.  When the leaves on the plants 
have turned yellow and dried up, stop watering.

Allow the corms to summer bake.  The plants should 
be well established after one year.   
 
If planting seeds of grass nuts, store the seeds in a 
paper sack until autumn.  Plant the seeds before 
October 1st in a container and care for them for two 
years before out-planting.  Plant the seeds in six-inch 
pots because the corms will pull themselves down to 
the depth they require. Plant about 100 seeds per pot.  
Place them on top of the soil  and sprinkle a little soil 
over them and put one-quarter inch gravel on top.  
Set the pots in partial shade so they won't dry out so 
fast.  They can be outside or in a hot house.  The seed 
does not need to be stratified.  Start watering the pots 
right away and keep them slightly damp.  Fertilize 
the pots in late winter and  early spring and protect the 
plants from birds and other animals.  If the pots are 
outside, let the rains naturally water the pots and in a 
drought year, supplement with hand watering.  Stop 
watering as soon as the foliage of the plants turns 
yellow.  Resume watering the next fall, if rains are 
insufficient.  After the second year, separate the 
plants and transplant them two inches apart in the fall 
when the corms are dormant.  Than water them.  
Grow them for one more y ear or two more years to 
bloom, repeating this cycle and then out-plant them 
in the autumn. 
 
Management 
The grass nut area will require regular weeding and 
the use of a very weak solution of fertilizer twice 
only during the active growth in the spring.  The 
corms can be kept from overcrowding by thinning 
them every three years.  Th is involves picking off the 
cormlets and replanting them elsewhere in the 
garden.   
 
There are five major types of indigenous 
management activities conducted in California that 
were designed to ensure future corm production at 
traditional gathering sites: 1) conscious breaking off 
cormlets from the harvested parent corms and 
replanting them; 2) sparing whole plants; 3) 
harvesting the corms after plants have gone to seed 
and dumping the seeds in the hole; 4) burning areas; 
and 5) irrigation.  Periodic digging and thinning of 
the corms, and popping off the cormlets and 
replanting them may enhance grass nut numbers and 
densities.  Digging corms may in fact be a form of 
tillage, which will increase the size of the gathering 
tract, aerate the soil, lower weed competition, and 
prepare the seedbed to increase seed germination 
rates.  If grass nut populations require periodic 
disturbance to maintain and increase their 
populations, then indigenous harvesting regimes if 
reenacted, may help maintain populations.  At the  very least--populations that become overcrowded and 
show reduced vigor should be divided and separated. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available 
from selected native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Anderson, M.K. 1997.   From tillage to table: the 
indigenous cultivation of geophytes for food in 
California .  Journal of Ethnobiology 17(2):149-169. 
 
Anderson, M.K. & D.L. Rowney 1998 .  California 
geophytes:  their ecology, ethnobotany, and 
conservation .  Fremontia 26(1):12-18. 
 
Chestnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the United States National Herbarium, Government 
Printing Office 1900-1902.  Vol 7:295-422.  
Reprinted in 1974 by the Mendocino County 
Historical Society Inc.  Fort Bragg, California. 
 
Collier, M.E.T. & S.B. Thalman (editors) 1991.  
Interviews with Tom Smith and Maria Copa:  Isabel 
Kelly's ethnographic notes on the Coast Miwok 
Indians of Marin and Southern Sonoma Counties, 
California.  Miwok Archeological Preserve of Marin 
Occasional Papers Number 6. 
 
Duncan, J.W. 1961.   Maidu ethnobotany.  
Unpublished Master's thesis.  Anthropology 
Department.  California State University, 
Sacramento, California. 
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson, & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo plants .  American Indian Monograph 
Series Number II.  Ameri can Indian Studies Center, 
University of California,  Los Angeles, California. 
 
Keator, G. 1993.  Triteleia.  pp. 1206-1208 IN: The 
Jepson Manual:  Higher Plants of California. J.C. 
Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Schenck, S.M. & E.W. Gifford 1952.   Karok 
ethnobotany .  Anthropological Records 13(6):377-
391.

USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database .  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  
<http://plants.usda.gov>  Version: 990405. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.