Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VINEGARWEED 
Trichostema lanceolatum  
Benth. 
Plant Symbol = TRLA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Blue-curls, camphor weed, romero, yerba del aigre, 
stink weed, turpentine weed, wild rosemary 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Vinegarweed is a medicinal herb that 
was highly valued by the Salinan, Ohlone, Miwok, 
and many other California Indian tribes who continue 
to use it today.  In the past, the herb was so important 
that the Salinan used vinegarweed as “money” in 
trade with the Yokuts an d other California tribes 
(Heinsen 1972).   
 
The strongly aromatic leav es and flowers were used 
fresh or dried to make infusions of varying strengths 
to treat a myriad of mala dies.  A decoction or tea 
made from the leaves and flowers was taken to treat 
colds, stomachaches, headaches, ague, bladder 
problems, and malaria.  Vinegarweed tea was gargled  to treat inflammation of the throat.  The steam from 
hot infusions was sniffed into the nasal passages to 
treat colds, coughs, headaches, and nose bleeds.  
Sitting over a steaming decoction of the leaves 
treated uterine trouble.   
 
The raw or boiled leaves were crushed into a poultice 
to treat wounds.  Ground leaves were rubbed on the 
face and chest of persons with colds or any place on 
the skin where there was pa
in (Bocek 1984).  Leaf 
decoctions were applied to  infected sores, smallpox 
lesions, and other skin eruptions.  Vinegarweed was 
steeped in water and used as a bath to prevent 
smallpox and ague.  Chewed leaves were stuffed in 
or around an aching tooth.   
©William R. Hewlett California Academy of Sciences @ Calflora 
 
The Kawaiisu tribe made a nonmedicinal drink from 
the leaves (Zigmond 1981).  The aromatic leaves and 
stems were crushed and placed in bedding to repel 
fleas.   
 
The Salinan was among those California tribes that 
used vinegarweed to aid in catching fish.  The 
fisherman would strategically build dams in rivers 
and streams to trap the fish within small ponds.  
Then, mashed or powdered  plants were thrown into 
the water with the fish.  After the plants were added, 
the fish would become sluggish and easier to catch in 
the fishermen’s nets or sieves made of willow.  
Numerous reasons have been offered for this reaction 
including that the fish were either poisoned 
(Moerman 1998), their gills clogged (Murphey 
1959), or that the plants  affected the oxygen in the 
water (Heinzen 1972).   
 
Wildlife:  Vinegarweed is an important bee plant 
(Jepson 1911).   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Mint family (Lamiaceae).  Vinegarweed is 
an annual forb or herb native to California and 
Oregon.  Vinegarweed is named for its pungent 
medicinal odor that can be detected over long 
distances.

The plants range from 1 to 10 dm with branches 
arising from the base.  The thin, lance-shaped leaves 
are 2 to 7 cm long.  The leaves are dotted with glands 
that produce the strong somewhat sour odor.  The 
pale blue to lavender flowers grow from the leaf axils 
along one side of the top of the unbranched stems.  
The flowers are slender tubes,  5 to 10 mm long, with 
five lobes and long arched stamens (13 to 20 mm) 
that protrude out of the flower.  The seeds are four 
tiny nutlets that are joined  at the base.  The seeds 
germinate with the rains, but begin to grow in earnest 
only after the rainy season has ended.  The plants 
bloom from late June or July until November.   
 
Distribution : Vinegarweed occurs from northern 
Oregon to the northern Ba ja along the Pacific Coast 
Ranges.  It grows in dry, open fields and roadsides 
below 1000 meters.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Vinegarweed is found in dry, open areas and 
disturbed habitats.  Vinegarweed is an early seral 
component of coastal sage scrub, chaparral, and oak 
woodland communities.   
 
Adaptation 
Vinegarweed is xerophytic and adapted to the dry, 
rainless summers of California’s Mediterranean 
climate.   
 
Establishment 
The seeds ripen in the late fall and collected seeds 
can be planted immediately or stored.  Be sure to 
thoroughly dry the seeds before storing.  Placing 
them in a sunny well-ventilated place can dry the 
seeds.  To store, place the seeds into an airtight 
container and store them in a cool, dark place.   
 
Sow the seeds in the late fall or early spring.  Prepare 
a seedbed that receives full sun and in an area that is 
well drained.  Broadcast the seeds and lightly rake 
them into the soil.  Tamp the soil snuggly over the 
seeds.  If planting the seeds in the spring, gently 
sprinkle the sown bed with water and keep it lightly 
moist until the seedlings are established.  Once 
established, vinegarweed is very drought resistant 
and will not tolerate frequent watering.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Salinan and other California tribes used the 
closely related perennial shrub,  Trichostema lanatum 
(wooly blue curls or California rosemary) for many 
of the same purposes as vinegarweed.   T. lanatum 
resembles rosemary (Rosmarinus  spp.) and is a lovely addition to the garden.  There are two cultivars 
of 
T. lanatum  (“Lion Den” and Salmon Creek”) that 
have been developed by the UC Santa Cruz 
Arboretum (Rogers 2001).  Both cultivars are from 
cuttings taken in the Santa Lucia Mountains.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.  
Yosemite Association,  Yosemite National Park, 
California.  388 pp. 
 
Bocek, B.R. 1984.   Ethnobotany of Costanoan 
Indians, California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany, Vol. 38, No. 2.  Pp. 
240-255.   
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   Mission San Antonio de Padua 
Herbs: Medicinal herbs of early days .  Third edition. 
Lockwood, California.  142pp. 
 
Heizer, R.F. & A.B. Elsasser 1980.   The natural 
world of the California Indians .  University of 
California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 
California.  271 pp.   
 
Hewlett, W.R. 1999.   Trichostema lanceolatum.  
California Academy of Sciences.  Digital Library 
Project, University of California, Berkeley. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.calfl ora.org.  Accessed [15 
December 2001]. 
 
Jepson, W. L. 1911.   A flora of western middle 
California .  Second Edition.  Cunningham, Curtiss & 
Welch, San Francisco, Califorina.  515 pp. 
 
Lewis, H. 1993.   Trichostema, Blue Curls.  In:  J.D. 
Hickman, Editor.   The Jepson manual: Higher plants 
of California.   University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California.  Pp.  732-733.   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:

http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
[6January2002]. 
 
Munz, P.A. & D.D. Keck 1963.  A California flora.  
University of California  Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles, California.  1681 pp. 
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Mendocino County Historical Society, Fort Bragg, 
California.  81 pp. 
 
Rogers, D. 2001.   Romero or wooly blue curls.   The 
Double Cone Quarterly.  Vol. IV, No. 2 [Online].  
Available:  
http://www.ventanawild.org /news/ss01/romero.html 
[15December2001].   
 
Wallace, W.J. 1978.   Southern ValleyYokuts  in 
Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 8, 
California , R.F. Heizer, Ed.  Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, D.C.  Pp448-461. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah.  102 
pp.   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Plant Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California  
 Edited: 29jan03 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.