Plant Guide
LONGSPIKE TRIDENS 
Tridens strictus (Nutt.) Nash  
Plant Symbol = TRST2  
Contributed by:  U SDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Longspike tridens plant 
Photo:  R. Alan Shadow 
 
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  Long -spike tridens  (Diggs, 
2006 ). 
 
Uses  
Landscaping:  Longspike tridens shows excellent potential 
as a pioneer species for soil stabilization in disturbed 
areas due to its ability to tolerate wide ranges of 
environmental conditions  inclu ding low fertility and 
salinity  (Smith, 1996) , excellent germination, and good 
seedling vigor.  
 
Forage:  Longspike tridens  has moderate palatability and 
is  grazed to some extent by  livestock (USDA NRCS, 
2013) . Longspike tridens may provide forage in marginal 
areas where more desirable species have difficulty 
surviving.  
 
  Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threaten ed or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Longspike tridens is a short lived, warm season, 
perennial, bunchgrass. As its name suggests, it produces a 
compact seed head on a long, “spike” like stalk . The seed 
heads are 4 -12 inches in length and a half inch in width 
(Gould, 1975).  Mature plants are between 2 and 5 feet in 
height, and produce smooth flat blades up to 20 inches 
long. Small hairs, or pubescence, are located on the upper 
surface of the leaves, near the base  of the stem. The seed 
head, or panicle, may also have a hint of purple 
coloration.  
Distribution :  Longspike tridens is widely distributed 
throughout the southeastern United States. It can be found 
as far north as Illinois and Pennsylvania and westward 
across Texas  (Gould, 1975) .  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  This species will tolerate a wide range of soil 
conditions, however, it favors coarse to medium textured 
soils. It is commonly associated with upland areas, but is 
also a component of coastal grasslands  (Smith, 1996) . 
This species will tolerate moist areas as long as the soil 
does not stay inundated with water.  
Adaptation  
It is often present in dis turbed areas such as road side 
ditches and rights - of - way, and can tolerate soil pH 
conditions between 3.5 to 7  (USDA NRCS , 2013). 
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting. Establish a clean, weed free seedbed  via  
mowing,  tillage, burning, broad spectrum herbicides, or a 
combination of these practices . It should be noted that 
tillage can greatly increase competition from annual, 
warm season weeds , reduces soil moisture, decreases 
organic matter, and hinders  water in filtration properties of 
the soil.   A preferred method of establishment is to no -till 
the  seed into  a stale seedbed that  has been treated with a 
broad spectrum herbicide, mowed, and /or burned  prior to 
planting.   If tillage is  performed in  the spring , allow rains 
to create an initial flush of weeds .  T reat  germinated weed 
seedlings with  a broad spectrum herbicide  then plant the 
seed no -till  into the chemically treated seedbed . The goal 
is to reduce weed competition and lessen soil disturbance 
prior to the ta rget planting date.

Apply P and K fertilizer based on soil test 
recommendations. Avoid nitrogen  fertilizer until the 
second growing season  or until a stand is evident. 
Applying nitrogen during the establishment  year will 
increase competition from undes ired warm season 
annuals.   
 
Seed may be broadcast or drilled into a well prepared, 
firm seed bed in spring at a rate of 0.71  PLS/acre.   
Planting depth should not exceed ¼ inch. The seed of this 
species is very small, having approximately  2,138,000  
seeds p er pound ( USDA NRCS , 2013). Due to the size of 
the seed, it should be handled in a similar manner as small 
seeded legumes such as clovers.  When broadcast seeding, 
it may be necessary to mix the seed with a spreading 
agent such as sand to help evenly distribute the seed, and 
a light drag or cultipacker should be used to cover the 
seed.   
Management  
Longspike tridens is moderately tolerant of burning. 
Depending on the intensity of the fire, the seed spike may 
or may not be removed. Clipping in the fall is sometimes 
helpful to remove the long seed spike.     Longspike 
tridens grows on low fertility moist soils (Smith, 1996 and 
Kansas State University, 2013),  making this a hearty and 
persistent  species once established. The seed requires no 
stratification process before planting, and shows excellent 
seedling vigor. It is capable of reseeding itself under ideal 
conditions  (Missouri Botanical Garden , 2013). 
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known significant pests or disease problems 
for this species.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with longspike tridens.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Longspike tridens is planted on  40” rows for seed 
production at the USDA -NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center . Cultivation or herbicides are 
recommended to control weeds in established stands .  
Consult your local extension weed  specialist for 
recommended herbicides.   
Longspike  tridens  flowers from July to  November and 
produces seed in fall  (Gould, 1975) . Seed is harvested 
with a Native Seedster® or conventional  combine. When 
harvesting with a Native Seedster® set the brush speed  to 
~ 112 RPM and comb speed to ~ 80 RPM. Use slow 
travel (<5 MPH) and approximately 850 RPM , when 
harvesting  with a conventional combine. Air dry the 
harvested material before  further processing.  Once the 
seed is dried, it is roughly cleaned  with  a 2 scr een  scalper 
to separate stems and chaff.  After the material is 
separated, a 3 screen laboratory seed cleaner is used for 
the final cleaning.   
 
Seed  harvests vary  from 23 to 58  lb. /acre of cleaned seed. 
Germination tests  (settings at 68
0F/860F and 8 hrs.  light) 
have  showed this species to have excellent germination. 
Tests on seed lots from 2003 and 2005 produced 71 and 
90% germination respectively.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known improved cultivars for this species at 
this time.  
References  
Diggs, G.M., B. Lipscomb, M. Reed, and R. O’Kennon. 
2006. Illustrated Flora of East Texas Vol.1 Botanical 
Research Institute of Texas. Fort Worth, TX.  
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M  University Press.  College Station, TX.  
Kansas State University. 2013. Grass key for Tridens  strictus [Online]. Available at 
http://spuds.agron ksu.edu/ksgrasskey/images/Triden
sstrictus html (accessed 27 June 2013). Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, KS.  
Missouri Botanical  Garden. 2013. Information sheet -
Tridens strictus [Online]. Available at 
www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/gardens -
gardening/your -garden/plant -finder/plant -
detainls/kc/g790/tridens -strictus.aspx (accessed 17 
June2013) Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, 
MO . 
Smith, L. 1996. The Rare and Sensitive Natural Wetland  Plant Communities of Interior
 Louisiana. Louisiana 
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. Baton Rouge, 
LA.  
USDA NRCS Plants Database. 2013. Tridens strictus  Plant Characteristics. Greensboro, NC.  
 
Prepared By : R. Alan Shadow and Melinda Brakie, East 
Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, TX 
Citation 
Shadow, R ., 2013.  Plant Guide for Longspike tridens  
( Tridens strictus ). USDA -Natural Resources C onservation 
Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center. Nacogdoches, 
TX 75964 . 
Published  August, 2013  
Longspike tridens seed 
 Photo - M. Brakie

Edited:  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER 
AND EMPLOYER