Plant Guide
FRISCO CLOVER 
Trifolium friscanum  ( S.L. Welsh ) 
S.L. Welsh  
Plant Symbol = TRFR4  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials  
Program  
 
Frisco clover. Daniela Roth, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service  
Status 
In 2007 the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) was 
petitioned to list Frisco clover  as either endangered or 
threatened. In 2011 FWS announced a determination that 
listing was warranted; however listing of  Frisco clover  
was  precluded by higher priority actions ( USDI-FWS 
2011).  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values). 
Description  
General :  Legume family (Fabaceae).  Frisco  clover is a 
caespitose, matforming forb with a branched woody 
taproot. Mature plants reach a height of 3 cm (in). The 
leaves have a short petiole, 0.3 to 1 cm (in) long. The 
le aves are divided into three oblanceolate to obovate 
leaflets with entire to toothed margins. Each leaflet is 3 to 
8 mm (in) long and 1.5 to 3.4 mm (in) wide. The flower 
heads bear 4 to 9 red -purple to pinkish 8 to 9 mm (in) 
long flowers (Welsh et al. 2008) . Flowering occurs from 
late May to June (USDI -FWS 2011).  
Distribution :  Frisco clover  is endemic to the Great Basin. 
It is known from five  populations  containing nine sites in 
Beaver  and Millard Counties , Utah. The five populations  occur on the San Francisco Mountains, Beaver Lake 
Mountains, and Wah Wah Mountains in Beaver County, 
and on the Tunnel Springs Mountains in Millard County
. 
 
Population estimates vary widely. The mound -forming 
nature of the plants makes it difficult to make accurate 
plant e stimates where each mound could be counted as 
one or several plants.  Additionally, several of the known 
populations exist on privately owned lands where access 
is restricted. In 2011, FWS estimated the total number of 
plants at 13,000 with four of the nine  sites containing 500 
or fewer plants. For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.  
Habitat :  Frisco clover  is found only on soils derived from 
volcanic gravels,  Ordovician limestone , and dolomite 
outcrops . These rare soils are home to other rare plant 
species including Frisco buckwheat  ( Eriogonum 
soredium ) and  Ostler’s pepperweed  ( Lepidium ostleri). 
Frisco clover  is found  on  sparsely populated slopes in 
pinion -juniper and sagebrush communities fro m 1,720 to 
2, 570  m ( 5,600 to 8,400  ft). Other associated species 
include Mormon tea ( Ephedra sp.), snakeweed 
( Gutierrezia sarothrae ), dwarf mountain mahogany 
( Cercocarpus intricatus ), and rock goldenrod (Petradoria 
pumila ) (USDI -FWS 2011) .  
Adaptation  
Frisco clover  is adapted to white limestone outcrops in 
areas receiving 200 to 300  mm (8 to 12 in) mean annual 
precipitation.  Frisco clover populations cover a very small 
percentage  of suitable habitat. It is unknown if there are 
other factors limiting Ost ler’s pepperweed distribution 
(USDI FWS 2011).    
Establishment  
There is no known seed establishment information for 
Frisco clover . 
Management  
Much  of the known habitat for Frisco clover  occurs on 
private mining claims. There are no laws protecting 
endanger ed plant species on private, State or Tribal lands 
in Utah. However, m ining operations must prepare State 
environmental impact assessments and address the 
potential effects on State and federally listed species for 
operations that create 5 acres or more su rface disturbance.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
The greatest threat to Frisco clover  comes from mining 
operations in close proximity to Frisco clover  populations. 
The area has historically been mined for precious metals, 
and is currently  mined for gravel  and crushed limestone.

These operations are expected to increase in the future 
due to increased demand (USDI -FWS 2011).   
Environmental Concerns  
There are a number of environmental factors which may 
affect  Frisco clover . Prolonged  drought due to climate 
change has the potential to eliminate the small 
populations of Frisco clover . Additionally, i nvasion of 
cheatgrass ( Bromus tectorum ) has the potential to greatly 
increase the fire return interval in the Great Basin 
(Whisenant 1990).  Frisco clover  is adapted to sparsely 
covered plant communities and is likely not adapted to 
frequent fires (USDI- FWS 2011.  
Seeds and Plant Production  
There is no known plant propagation information for 
Frisco clover . 
References  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Ser vice. 2011. Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants; 12 -month finding on a 
petition to list Astragalus hamiltonii , Penstemon 
flowersii,  Eriogonum soredium , Lepidium ostleri, and 
Trifolium friscanum  as endangered or threatened. 
Federal Register. 76 (3 6): 10166-10199. 
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. Higgins  [eds]. 2008. A Utah flora, fourth edition, revised. 
Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University. 1019 pp.   
Whisenant, S. G. 1990. Changing fire frequencies on  Idaho's Snake River plains: ec ological and 
management implications. In: Proceeding -Symposium on cheatgrass invasion, shrub die
-off, 
and other aspects of shrub biology and management, 
(Eds., E. D. McArthur, E. M. Romney, S. D. Smith, 
and P. T. Tueller), USDA Forest Service 
Intermountain  Research Station General Technical 
Report INT -276:4- 10. 
 
Prepared By :   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D . 2012.  Plant Guide for Frisco clover  ( Trifolium 
friscanum ). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center. 83210 -
0296.  
Published  November 2012  
Edited:  16oct2012djt;  17oct2012ls ; 01Nov2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program  Web site  
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER