Plant Guide
SPINELESS 
HORSEBRUSH  
Tetradymia canescens DC.  
Plant Symbol = TECA2 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Spineless horsebrush.  J.S. Peterson @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
Alternate Names  
Common Alternate Names:  gray horsebrush , grey 
horsebrush  
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  Tetradymia canescens DC . 
v ar.  inermis  (Rydb.) Payson  Uses
 
Spineless horsebrush is generally considered worthless for 
livestock browse and provides  poor to fair cover for 
wildlife.   Feral horses  and cattle  utilize it to some extent 
during winter  after other winter feed is unavailable  (Krysl 
et al. , 1984).   Palatability is rated  low; however mule deer 
browse it moderately in winter and lightly in spring.  
Pronghorn  antelope browse the shrub sparingly.  
Palatability  of the plant incre ases during the bud stage in 
spring  when young plant tissues are frequently browsed 
by sheep,  domestic goats, pronghorn  antelope , and cattle  
(Scher, 2001) .  It is toxic to sheep especially during the 
bud stage (Panter  et al. , 2011) .  Spineles s horsebrush has 
been considered for dry landscaping because the  spring 
flower bloom is attractive  (Machado  et al.,  2006).   M oths, 
bees, flies, beetles and other insects  visit spineless 
horsebrush when it is flowering.  F lowering occurs early 
in the growing season  compared to other plants found 
growing in associat ion with spineless horsebrush  (Scher, 
2 001).  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Spineless horsebrush is tolerant to fire and can invade 
recently burned rangeland.  Resprouting and seedling 
establishment of spineless horsebrush after fire should be 
considered when planning prescribed fires on sagebrush 
dominated landscapes (Scher, 2001 ). 
 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state  agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/
.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Pro file for this species for further 
information.  
Ethnobotany  
The Hopi of Northern Arizona used a decoction of the 
leaf and root of spineless horsebrush as a gynecological 
aid to shrink the uterus and stop discharge after birth and 
as a n herbal  tonic.  The Nava jo used the plant to cause 
onset of menstruation , as a analgesic for various aches 
and pains, a  cold remedy to treat coughs and fever , an 
herbal steam  in sweat bath medicine , to relieve  stomach

ache, as a yellow dye for wool and in various religious 
ceremonies  (Native American Ethnobotany Database).  
 
Description  
General :  Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Spineless 
horsebrush is a native,  deciduous,  taprooted,  much-
branched shrub, 2 -8 dm (7.9 -31.5 in) tall and usually as 
wide as it is tall.  Leaves and flower bracts are white -
tomentose (dense, white wooliness) and the plants have a 
gray- white color .  Leaves are linear or oblanceolate 1 -3 
cm  (0.39- 1.17 in) long and 1 -4mm  (0.04- 0.16 in)  wide 
with a prominent midrib.  Flowers are in terminal clusters 
and are yellow to cream -colored.  The flower heads 
usually have 4 bracts.  Stems are short, stout and silvery 
canescent until maturity then become glabrous.  Achenes  
are  3-4 mm (0.12- 0.16 in) long,  usually densely silky with 
a well developed pappus.  Chromosome number is 2n = 
60, seldom 90.  (Whitson et al.  1996;  Cronquist  et al.  
1994).  Spineless horsebrush is commonly confused with 
various sagebrush  and rabbitbrush species before 
flowering.  
Distribution :  Spineless horsebrush is found from 
Montana south into New Mexico and west  to the Pacific 
coast  and north  into British Columbia, Canada  (PLANTS 
Database) .  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Spineless horsebrush begins growth in mid- April, flower 
buds form in early to mid- June and begins flowering in 
mid -July in the Upper Snake River Plains of Idaho.  Seeds 
are ripe in mid -August and leaf drop occurs in early 
October.  Blooming occurs in late July or early August in 
southern California and northern Arizona (Scher, 2001).  
Habitat :  Spineless horsebrush is found in sagebrush 
( Artemisia ), pinyon- juniper (Pinus-Juniperus  spp.), 
ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa), mountain brush, 
mixed conifer, and quaking aspen ( Populus tremuloides) 
plant communities ( Scher, 2001).  In Idaho, Utah, 
Montana and Nevada it is commonly associated with 
green rabbitbrush ( Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus ) and big 
sagebrush ( A. tridentata).  Threetip sagebrush ( A 
tripartita ), rubber rabbitbrush (Chrysothamnus nauseous ) 
and Idaho fe scue (Festuca idahoensis ) are also associated 
with spineless horsebrush in Idaho and Montana.  
Needleandthread ( Hesperostipa comata) and indian 
ricegrass ( Achnatherum hymenoides ) are associated 
species in Montana and Nevada).  Other common 
associates inclu de antelope bitterbrush ( Purshia 
tridentata ), mountain snowberry ( Symphoricarpos 
oreophilus ), black sagebrush ( A. nova), bluebunch 
wheatgrass  (Pseudoroegneria spicata), bottlebrush 
squirreltail ( Elymus elymoides ), desert peach (Prunus 
andersonii ), Mormon  tea ( Eph edr a viridis ) and Thurber 
needlegrass ( Achnatherum thurberianum ).  Spineless  horsebrush 
is considered primarily a weedy, early seral 
species  (Scher, 2001).  
 
Adaptation  
Spineless horsebrush is adapted to dry, open places on 
plains, ridges and hills  ranging in elevation from 1,300 -
9,700 feet  (396- 2956m) .  In the southern part of its range, 
it is found at higher elevations and in the northern areas at 
lower elevations.  It is adapted to medium to coarse 
textured soils with a pH of 7 to 8 and found  most 
common ly in gravelly or sandy loam soils with 5 -12 
inches  (127-305mm)  annual precipitation (Scher, 2001).   
It is not tolerant of saline conditions (PLANTS database).  
Establishment  
Information on the establishment of horsebrush in 
scientific literature is  limited .  The  PLANTS database 
reports there are 120,000 seeds per pound.  Some 
germination will occur without pretreatment but 
germination is greatly enhanced by pre -chilling for 4 to 6 
weeks (Young and Young, 1992).  Attempts using plant 
tissue culture t o develop plants for hard- rock mine land 
reclamation ha ve been unsuccessful (King  et al., 2009).  It 
is a fire resistant shrub.  After a fire, the plant responds by 
rapid sprouting from adventitious buds on the root crown.  
It also reproduces abundantly fr om seed following fire.  
These responses following fire often result in dense stands 
of spineless horsebrush, and can result in its dominance of 
sagebrush -grass plant communities that are burned with a 
frequency of 20 to 25 years (Scher, 2001).  
Management  
All species of Tetradymia  should be considered toxic.  
Sheep that feed on spineless horsebrush following or in 
conjunction with consumption of black sagebrush ( A. 
nova) and then exposed to bright sunlight may develop a 
cha racteristic swelling of the lips, ears, and face, 
commonly referred to as “bighead”.  Sheep grazing 
spineless horsebrush  in the absence of black sagebrush  
may  still die without developing bighead  but suffer from 
swollen , engorged liver  with severe fatty changes  and low 
grade nephritis  (inf lammation of nephrons)  of the kidney 
along with hemorrhaging  of the sub-skin and organ 
linings.  Sheep may also experience abortions  from 
consuming spineless horsebrush  (Panter  et al. , 2011).  
 
Most sheep losses occur during stormy periods when 
sheep change  their grazing habits as they are trailed 
through areas with heavy infestations of spineless 
horsebrush  and desirable forage is lacking .  
H ungry/thirsty  sheep may also eat toxic amounts of 
spineless horsebrush after they are watered.  The plant is 
especial ly dangerous during the bud stage  (Panter  et al. , 
2011).   Poisoning has resulted in losses of as many as 
1,000 sheep at a time (Scher, 20010).   The best 
management advice is to avoid these conditions or 
situations  as much as possible .

Fire exclusion on desert rangelands has tended to favor 
sagebrush over fire-tolerant shrubs such as spineless 
horsebrush.  Increased wildfire frequencies due to 
invasion of annual grasses may favor spineless 
horsebrush.  If management objectives are to reduce 
spineless horseb rush, fire treatment is not generally 
recommended as it may result in the species becoming 
dominant (Scher, 2001).  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests of spineless horsebrush.  
Environmental Concerns  
Spineless horsebrush is a native species that can increase 
on areas subject to frequent wildfire.  An economical 
method for the control of spineless horsebrush has not 
been developed (Panter  et al. , 2011; Evans and Young, 
1978) . 
Control  
Mechanical treatments must kill  roots 4-6 inches deep  for 
effective control .  2,4-D LV ester is recommended only 
for spot treatment to control spineless horsebrush.  The 
recommended rate is 2.5 lb acid equivalent per acre, 
applied early in spring when plants are actively growing .  
Chemical  re-treatment  each  year may be  necessary to 
control this plant (Pacific Northwest Weed Management 
Handbook).  Be sure to read and follow herbicide label 
directions.  
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works bes t in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Seed and Plant Production  
Information on the successful  establishment of spineless 
horsebrush is  not available.  P oor value for grazing, the 
potential  for spread following fire, and its toxic properties 
to sheep  make it undesirable  in the plant production 
industry . 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are currently no commercial releases of spineless 
horsebrush.   Wildland collections are typically n ot 
available from commercial sources. Contract collection 
for small quantities is possible with costs exceeding $100 
per pound.  
 
References  
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A. Holmgren N., Reveal, J., 
Holmgren, P.  Asterales.  Intermountain Flora.  
Vascular Plants  of the Intermountain West , U.S.A. Volume Five. The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York.  496 p.
 
Evans, R., and Young, J. 1978.  Effectiveness of  Rehabilitation Practices Following Wildfire in a 
Degraded Big Sagebrush -Downy Brome Community.  
Journal  of Range Management.  31(3).  p185- 188. 
King, S., King, M., Jennings, S., Neuman, D. 2009.   Using Plant Tissue Culture to Develop Plants with 
Acid Soil, H eavy Metal Tolerance, Potentially Useful 
for Hard -Rock Mine Land Reclamation.  Paper 
presented at the  2009 National Meeting of the 
American Society of Mining and Reclamation, 
Billings, MT, Revitalizing  the Environment: Proven 
Solutions and Innovative Approaches May 30 –  June 
5, 2009.  R.I. Barnhisel (Ed.) Published by AMSR, 
Lexington, KY. p 673- 688 
Krysl , L., Hubbert, M., Sowell, B., Plumb, G., Jewett, M., 
Smith, M., and Waggoner, J. 1984.  Horses and 
Cattle Grazing in the Wyoming Red Desert, I. Food 
Habits and Dietary Overlap.  Journal of Range 
Management 37 (1). P 72 -76.  
Machado, S., Tuck, B., McNab, S., Maley, J , and. Igo, J. 
2006.  Alternative Crops for the Columbia Basin.  
Oregon State University Extension Service.  EM 
8914. 25 p.  
Native American Ethnobotany.  A Database of Foods,  Drugs, Dyes and Fibers of Native American Peoples 
Derived from Plants.  University of Michigan, 
College of Arts, Sciences, and Letters 
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  (Accessed March 27, 
2012)  
Pacific Northwest  Weed Management Handbook. 
Horsebrush, gray or Spineless ( Tetradymia 
canescens ).  http://pnwhandbooks.org   (Accessed 
March 28, 2012)  
Panter, K., Ralphs, M., Pfister, J., Gardner, D.,  Stegelmeier, B., Lee, S., Welch, K., Green, B., Davis, 
T., Cook, D. 2011.   Plants Poisonous to Livestock in 
the Western States. United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 
Agriculture Information Bulletin Number 415. 120 p.  
PLANTS Database. Tetradymia canescens .  [Online].  
http://plants.usda.gov . U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(Accessed March 26, 2012).  
Scher, J. 2001.  Tetradymia canescens . In: Fired Effects 
Information System [Online]. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture,  Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research  Station, Fir e Sciences Laboratory.   
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis  (Accessed March 
26, 2012)  
Young, J. and Young C. 1992.  Seeds of Woody Plants in  North America.  Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon.  
407 p.  
Whitson, T., Burrill, L., Dewey, S., Cudney, D., Nelson,  B., Lee, R., Parker, R. 1996.  Weeds of the West, 5th 
Edition.  The Western Society of Weed Science in 
cooperation with the Western United States Land

Grant Universities Cooperative Extension Services.  
630 p.  
  
Prepared By : 
Loren St. Joh n, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
 
Aberdeen, ID  
   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
 
Citation   
St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012.  Plant Guide for spineless 
horsebrush ( Tetradymia canescens ). USDA -Natural 
 
Resources Conservation Serv ice, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
 
Published  April 2012  
 
Edited: 
04Apr2012ls;04Apr2012djt;16Apr2012jab;24Apr2012gm  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please   
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
 and visit the 
 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site  http://plant -
 
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
   
   
   
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER