Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPRINGBANK CLOVER  
Trifolium wormskioldii  Lehm. 
Plant Symbol = TRWO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
William & Wilma Follette USDA NRCS Western Wetland Flora (1992) 
 
Alternate Names 
Cows clover, marsh clover, perennial clover 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotany . The long, fleshy, white rhizomes of 
springbank clover were an  important food to coastal 
peoples of British Columbia, including the Haida, the 
Kwakwaka’wakw, the Nuu-chah-nulth (including 
Ditidaht), Nuxalk (Bella Coola), the Comox, the 
Sechelt, and the Straits Salish, as well as the Makah 
of Washington.  Springbank clover rhizomes were 
commonly harvested and prepared together tith the 
long, brown roots of Pacific silverweed ( Potentilla 
anserinas  ssp. pacifica ).  Both plants were usually 
dug in the fall, after the leaves had started to die back 
for the winter.  The rhizomes were pried out with 
long, pointed wooden digging sticks.  They were 
cleaned and tied in fist-sized bundles using one of the 
rhizomes as a tie.  Occasionally, they were eaten raw, 
but typically, they were co oked in an underground 
pit.  The rhizomes were often dried for winter use.  
Springbank clover rhizomes  are seldom eaten today. 
 
Other Uses.  The stoloniferous growth form aids in 
substrate stabilization and  erosion control.  Ducks  and geese are known to be fond of the rhizomes, 
which were sometimes used as bait for hunting these 
birds.  Wild animals, like domestic livestock, relish 
the foliage of clovers.  The small, hard seeds of 
western clovers are important to quail, but other 
upland game birds limit their use of clovers almost 
entirely to the foliage.  Small quantities of clover 
seeds are eaten by many species of songbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Legume Family (Fabaceae).  Clovers are 
perennial herbs that have palmately compound, bright 
green leaves with three l eaflets (trifoliate).  All 
species have the distinc tive, round flower heads 
composed of many, small, pea-like flowers.  
Springbank clover is a native coastal herbaceous 
perennial often growing in dense patches from long, 
slender white rhizomes, with fibrous roots arising 
from their nodes.  The stems, up to 80 cm, are erect 
to creeping.  The reddish purple or magenta flowers 
are usually white-tipped, 12-16 mm long, with 2-5 
flowers per stalk.  The flower heads are 2-3 cm in 
diameter, and are held in a saucer-shaped involuvre 
with 8-12 bracts.  The fruits are tiny pea-like pods 
containing 2-6 seeds. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  It is found from British 
Columbia, north as far as the Queen Charlotte Islands 
(possibly to the southern Alaska panhandle), south to 
California and Mexico, and east to the Rocky 
Mountains. 
 
Habitat: Springbank clover is found in wet and 
periodically inundated places , such as high salt and 
brackish marshes, coastal dunes, wet meadows, and 
stream banks.  It is commonly associated with Pacific 
silverweed.  It occurs from beaches to mountain 
meadows, ridges, generally open, moist, or marchy 
places as elevations below 3200 m. 
 
Establishment 
Springbank clover spreads vigorously from rhizomes.  
Plants can easily be divided and replanted.

-  In greenhouse conditions, it is best to dig up and 
separate plants in the late fall or winter.  This is 
the “quiescent” period that follows seed 
maturation and leaves are senescent. 
-  Split the plant clump into pieces by hand, then 
cut the rhizomes into s ections, each with one or 
more buds. 
-   For dividing the whole plant, gently loosen the 
soil around the plant, taking care to not damage 
the roots, then lift the plant gently with a 
pitchfork.  Shake off as much soil from the roots, 
as possible. 
-  Divide the plant into smaller pieces by hand, 
retaining only healthy, vigorous sections, each 
with new shoots and rhizome buds. 
-  Replant the divisions as soon as possible.  It is 
important that the plants don’t dry out, so if 
replanting is delayed a couple of hours, dip the 
plants briefly in water and keep them in a sealed 
plastic bag in a cool, shady place until you are 
ready to plant them. 
-  Cut back the old top-growth and replant the 
divided plant sections to the same depth as 
before. 
-  When replanting, ensure that the roots are well 
spread out in the planting hole and the individual 
is firmly planted.  Water newly planted divisions 
thoroughly, taking care not to expose the roots 
by washing away soil. 
-  Springbank clover plants should be planted in 
the full sun in a light, loose soil.  Plants should 
be planted on 12-18” centers.  They will fill in 
and make solid stands of clover in one year. 
-  Plants need to be kept moist and need frequent 
watering.  Lightly fertilize the plants during the 
growing season. 
-  Springbank clover tolerates brackish conditions, 
so it can be used to restore salt marshes and 
wetlands. 
-  Plants may need to be pr otected from herbivores, 
such as rabbits or gophers. 
-   Wild harvesting should be restricted to salvage 
sites with appropriate approvals or permits.  Due 
to the loss of wetland and salt marsh habitat 
throughout the U.S., it is rarely appropriate to 
harvest witl plants. 
-  There is no available information about 
propagation of this species from seed. 
 
Management  
It is necessary to divide the springbank clover patch 
every 3 to 4 years, starting a new patch and 
increasing plant vigor.  Younger plants are more 
vigorous and procude more flowers and seeds. 
 
Turner and Deur (1999) include the following for 
traditional resource management: 
-  Ownership of individual patches and their output 
by Chief’s, ensuring  long-term care and 
enhancement of plant production; 
-   Root feasts as a means of redistributing plant 
wealth and meeting ceremonial obligations; 
-  Specialized digging sticks as a harvesting tool to 
cultivate and turn over the soil; 
-  Assumed large concentratio ns/patches of clover; 
-  Groups of woman harvesting simultaneously; 
-  Harvesting at a set time of year (late summer and 
fall); 
-  Regular use of same sites over time/generations; 
-  Care and assiduity in harvest; 
-  Turning of the soil or sod; 
-  Extending periods of harvest time; 
-  Replanting and leaving behind portions of clover 
roots to re-grow the following year; 
-  Weeding root patches; and 
-  Individual patches and landscapes were burned 
regularly. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brickell, C. & E. McDonald (eds.), 1993.  The 
American Hortic ultural Society encyclopedia of 
gardening. The definitive practical guide to 
gardening techniques, planning, and maintenance . 
Darling Kindersten. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon . Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society. 414p. 
 
Edwards, G.T. 1979.  Indian spaghetti. The Beaver 
(Autumn):4-11. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973 . Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington . University of Washington Publ. in 
Anthropology 10(1). University of Washington Press, 
Seattle. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, F.T. Davies, Jr. 1990. 
Plant propagation principles and practices . Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 647p.

Hickman, J.C. 1993. The Jepson manual: Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 1399p. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist (eds.). 1973.  Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest. An illustrated manual . 
University of Washington Press, Seattle. 730p. 
 
Hutchens, A.R. 1991.  Indian herbalogy of North 
America . Shambhala, Boston & London. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner. 1991.  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples. Nutrition, 
botany and use . Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology, Volume 8. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 632p. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publication, Inc., New York. 500p. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.  Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west . Museum of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 
200p. 
 
Strike, S.S. 1994.  Ethnobotany of the California 
Indians. Volume 2. Aboriginal uses of California’s 
indigenous plants . Koeltz Scientific Books, 
USA/Germany. 156p. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part I. Coastal peoples . B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part II. Interior peoples. B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria. 
 
Turner, N.J. & M.A.M. Bell. 1983.  The ethnobotany 
of the Southern Kwakiutl Indians of British 
Columbia . Econ. Bot. 27:257-310. 
 
Turner, N.J. & D.E. Deur. 1999.  Cultivating the 
clover: Managing plant resources on the Northwest 
Coast . Presentation at Soci ety of Ethnobiology 
annual meeting, Oaxaca, Mexico. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat. 1982 . Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island . B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2. 
Victoria. 99p. 
 
Turner, & H.V. Kuhnlein. 1983.  Camas (Camassia 
ssp.) and riceroot (Fritillaria ssp.): Two Liliaceous 
“root” foods of the Northwest Coast Indians . 
Ecology of Food and Nutrition 13:199-219. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson, & R.T. 
Ogilvie. 1983.  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island . B.C. Provincial Museum 
Occasional Paper  No. 24. 165p. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson, & 
A.Z. York. 1990. Thompson Ethnobotany: 
Knowledge and usage of plants by the Thompson 
Indians of British Columbia . Royal British Columbia 
Museum Memoirs No. 2, Victoria, B.C. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan, & S 
Hashisaki. 1994.  A citizen’s guide to wetland 
restoration . USEPA Region 10. 71p. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens, former ly USDA NRCS National 
Plant Data Center, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Davis, California 
 Edited: 070122 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.