Plant Guide  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
 
ALSIKE CLOVER 
Trifolium hybridum L. 
Plant Symbol = TRHY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
 
Uses 
Alsike clover is used for hay, pasture, and soil 
improvement, and is preferred where very wet or acid 
soils are encountered.  It is generally out produced by 
other clover species for partic ular uses.  Alsike clover 
is seldom grown by itself as it grows well in mixtures 
with grasses.  Grass/alsike clover mixtures are easier 
to harvest for hay because  the grass holds the clover 
more upright.  Normally only one cutting can be 
harvested for hay in a season. 
 
Many wildlife species use  legumes and are attracted 
to the early green up to help them recover from the 
stress of winter.  Alsike clover is not particularly 
noted for providing wildlife cover or food.  The 
flowers are especially attractive to bees, especially 
honey bees for the nectar and pollen. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Alsike clover may become weedy or invasive in 
some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Consult your 
local NRCS Field Office,  Cooperative Extension  Service office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site at plants.usda.gov.
 
 
Description 
Alsike clover is a true species in spite of its specific 
name which originally implied that it was a hybrid of 
red clover ( T. pretense) and white clover ( T. repens).  
It is an introduced, short-lived, non-creeping 
perennial with a growth habit similar to red clover.  It 
can be distinguished from red clover by the absence 
of crescent-shaped marks on each leaflet and more 
conspicuously toothed leaves.  Tillers grow profusely 
from the crown.  Leaves are glabrous (smooth) and 
stipules are long with a tapering point.  Stems are 
semi-erect, long, thin, smooth and usually hollow 
with very short, almost spherical axillary racemes 
about 2-3.5 cm (0.75-1.4 in ches) in diameter.  Each 
raceme has about 30-50 white or pale pink flowers.  
Individual flowers are about 6-11mm long.  Flowers 
bend downwards after pollination and turn brown at 
maturity.  Each seed pod is about 1 cm (0.4 inches) 
long and contains 3-5 seeds and vary in color from 
dull green to nearly black.  Alsike clover has a 
branched tap root.  Small lateral outgrowths 
(nodules) are usually present on the root.  Alsike 
clover reaches a height of 2-4 feet.  This introduced 
plant tends to recline or lodge unless companion 
plants help hold the stem upright. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Alsike clover is adapted to a wide range of soil types 
and grows well in northern latitudes and at high 
elevations.  It survives severe winters and performs 
best where summers are cool.  It grows well on soils 
that are too acidic for red clover (pH < 6.0) and can 
tolerate more alkalinity than most clovers.  It will 
tolerate wetter soils better than other clovers.  It 
prefers silty clay loams where moisture is sufficient 
throughout the growing season (mean annual 
precipitation 18 inches or more) or can be supplied 
by irrigation.  Alsike clover does not tolerate 
droughty sites but will tolerate soils that are 
completely waterlogged and will withstand spring 
flooding up to 6 weeks.  It is not shade tolerant. 
 
Cultivars of alsike clover are either diploid (2n = 16) 
or tetraploid (2n = 36).  The cultivars used in North 
America are diploid.  Most European cultivars are 
tetraploid and are taller, have larger leaves and 
flowers and are later maturing.

Alsike clover is distributed throughout the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Alsike clover is believed to have originated from near 
the village of Alsike in central Sweden.  It has been 
grown extensively in Europe since the early 1800’s 
and was introduced to Nort h America around 1840. 
 
Establishment 
Alsike clover has approximately 680,000 seeds per 
pound.  The full seeding rate is 3 pounds PLS per 
acre for a solid stand.  The recommended rate for a 
grass/legume pasture is 25% or 0.75 pounds PLS per 
acre.  For pasture establishment, seed is drilled into a 
well-prepared seedbed that has been plowed, 
harrowed, and compacted to produce a very firm 
seedbed.  The seed should be inoculated with the 
correct  Rhizobium  before seeding.  Seeding depth 
should be 1/8- 1/4 inch.  Typically in grass/legume 
mixtures, the grass is drill seeded in rows and alsike 
clover is over seeded to limit competition from grass.  
For stabilization use, seed is often broadcast by 
cyclone seeders, hydroseeders, or blower-type 
equipment. 
 
The proper time of seeding  is determined by seasonal 
moisture conditions.  In most areas, this may vary 
from early April to mid May.  Late summer and fall 
seedings should only be conducted when the site is 
irrigated and when at least six weeks of growing 
season remain to assure establishment before freezing 
conditions. 
 
Management  
Alsike clover is usually planted with grasses for 
pasture and hay in areas where other higher yielding 
legumes are not adapted.  Pure stands of alsike clover 
should be harvested for hay when in full bloom.  
However, there may be many heads with ripe seed 
when a field is in full bloom.  Despite the presence of 
some mature heads, the fi ne stems of alsike clover 
keep growing and do not harden quickly.  This will 
allow for harvesting nutritious hay over an extended 
time but it should not be allowed to become too ripe.  
The presence of ripe seed in hay that is cut too late 
often causes slobbering in horses.  Straw from seed 
production or late cutting hay makes fair winter feed 
for sheep, foals and young cattle. 
 
A mixture of alsike and red clover makes good hay.  
Although alsike clover is lower yielding than red 
clover, it withstands excessive soil moisture and is 
more tolerant of acid soils.  Mixtures of alsike and 
red clover ensure some clover is present if the red  clover fails to establish on water-logged and/or low 
pH areas within a field. 
 Alsike and red clover 
mixtures will produce more hay combined than when 
planted separately. 
 
Alsike clover is most commonly used in a mixture 
with timothy but is also compatible with brome 
grasses.   Avoid planting alsike clover with tall-
statured grasses as it is not tolerant of shade.  Grasses 
minimize the lodging of alsike clover by helping to 
keep it upright.  Grass also helps to keep the clover 
from packing after cutting and allows air to penetrate 
the windrow, resulting in more rapid and thorough 
drying. 
 
When seed is properly inoc ulated at time of planting, 
alsike clover fixes nitrogen from N
2 in the 
atmosphere, requiring little or no additional nitrogen 
fertilizer.  However, it does respond to relatively 
large amounts of phosphorus and potassium and 
sometimes sulphur fertilizer applications.  In grass-
legume mixtures, it is not possible to supply the ideal 
combinations of elements for both grass and legume.  
If nitrogen is applied to a grass-legume mixture, the 
grass will tend to increase at the expense of the 
legume.  Well-fertilized grass will outgrow clover in 
fall and winter and could smother the clover. 
 
Spring applications of nitrogen will stimulate grass 
and provide early feed, but excessive rates are 
detrimental to the clover stand.  Phosphate 
applications are broadcast in fall or spring according 
to soil tests.  Sulfur, boron, or magnesium may be 
needed for maximum production on some soils in the 
western part of the ra nge of alsike clover. 
 
Management for forage is aimed at maintaining 40% 
to 50% clover.  Close grazing (2 inch stubble height) 
favors clover, whereas light grazing favors grass.    
Pastures should be rotationally grazed. 
 
Alsike clover has a tendency to cause bloat and 
should be fed to livestock with care.  On pasture high 
in alsike clover content, take steps to introduce 
animals gradually to the forage or risk of bloat can be 
high.  It has also been implicated as causing “alsike 
clover poisoning” in horses but existing experimental 
evidence is insufficient to prove that such a poisoning 
exists caused by alsike clover.  Alsike-induced 
photosensitization has been reported among animals 
grazing alsike clover.  This will occur in bright, 
sunny weather and causes a re ddening of the skin and 
swelling of the affect ed areas in horses. 
 
Alsike clover can be used as a cover crop in rotation 
with cereal grains or corn.  It can be seeded with a

cash crop in spring, and after the cash crop is 
harvested, the clover is allowed to grow until it is 
plowed down.  The amount of commercial nitrogen 
fertilizer can be decreased for the succeeding crop. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Alsike clover is resistant to  many diseases, such as 
bacterial wilt, bacterial blight, mildew, and northern 
anthracnose, which can cause major losses in other 
forage legumes.  Most cr op losses of alsike clover 
can be minimized by management practices that 
maintain a vigorous stand.   The use of clean seed and 
rotation with non-legume cr ops are the most effective 
to control most diseases of alsike clover. 
 
Alsike clover is subject to brown and fusarium root 
rot, rust, crown and stem rots, seedling blight, sooty 
blotch, spring black stem,  stagonospora leaf spot and 
snow mold. 
 
Lygus bugs, aphids, and leafhoppers can cause injury 
to alsike clover. 
 
Weeds can be detrimental to stand establishment.  It 
is important to prepare clean fields for planting.  The 
use of Certified seed can reduce weed problems and 
crop rotation with competitive annual crops is also 
beneficial. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Alsike clover may be spread by seed and may be 
considered weedy in some  locations.  It can spread 
into adjoining vegetativ e communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions. 
 
Seed Production 
Plant alsike clover at 1- 3 pounds per acre PLS in 12 
inch rows as early in the sp ring as possible.  It can 
also be solid seeded up to 6 pounds PLS per acre for 
seed production.  The use of  a companion crop is not 
recommended.  Diploid and tetraploid cultivars must 
not be mixed and each must be grown in isolation 
from each other.  Seed yields of tetraploid cultivars 
can be reduced as much as 50% if they are fertilized 
by diploid pollen. 
 
Alsike clover must be cross-pollinated to produce 
seed.  The honey bee is the most important pollinator 
of alsike clover.  Two to three hives or colonies 
should be placed per acre.  Bumble bees also 
pollinate alsike clover but can not be relied on 
because their populations fluc tuate from year to year. 
 
Alsike clover should be harvested when 90% of the 
seedheads are brown.  To obtain highest seed yields, 
it is usually cut and windrowed for drying prior to  combining.  Chemical defoliation and straight 
combining 5-7 days later can also be used.  Seed 
yields average 400-500 pounds per acre. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Most of the seed available in the United States is 
common seed and can be ob
tained from commercial 
seed sources. 
 
Canada has several cultivars.  ‘Aurora’ was released 
in 1961 by Agriculture Canada.  It is medium to late 
maturing, tolerates acidic and alkaline soils and some 
spring flooding.  It is the standard of comparison for 
official trials in Alberta.  ‘Dawn’ was released in 
1974 by Agriculture Canada and is noted for 
moderate resistance to mosaic virus disease.  These 
cultivars should be adapted to most areas in the 
United States where alsike clover is adapted. 
 
A number of cultivars have been developed in 
Denmark, Norway and Sweden but are not available 
or used in the United States to any extent. 
 
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to determine what works best 
in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  
USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named, and other 
products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
MacGregor, S.E. 1976. Ch apter 3 clover and some 
relatives.   IN S.E. MacGregor. 1976. Insect 
pollination of cultivated crop plants.  USDA ARS. 
http://gears.tucson.ars.ag.gov/book/chap3/alsike.html 
[Accessed: 05December2008] 
 
Fairey, D. T. 1986. Alsike Clover. Publication 
1264/E, Communications Branch, Agriculture 
Canada, Ottawa. 17pp. 
 
Forage Fact Sheet: Alsike Clover 
http://forages.oregonstate.edu/fi/topics/fact_sheet_pri
nt_legume.cfm?specid=39&use=Forage 
[2008December5] 
 
Jensen, Kevin et al. 2004. Intermountain Planting 
Guide. 80pp.

Montana Interagency Plant Materials Handbook.  
1990.  Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 
337pp. 
 
Nation, P.N. 1989. Alsike clover poisoning: A 
review.  The Canadian Veterinary Journal. 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi
?artid=1681272 
[2008December5] 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth. 
2008. Grass, grass-like,  forb, legume and woody 
species for the Intermountain West. Natural 
Resources Conservation Servi ce. Boise, Idaho.  Idaho 
Plant Materials Technical Note 24. 43pp. 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, J, Cornwell, M. Stannard, and 
L. Holzworth. 2008. Pasture and Range Seedings: 
Planning, Installation, Evaluation, Management. 
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Boise, 
Idaho.  Idaho Plant Materials Technical Note 10. 
36pp. 
 
Shewmaker, Glenn. 2005. Idaho Forage Handbook. 
University of Idaho. 99pp. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Loren St. John,  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle,  USDA NRCS Idaho St ate Office, Boise, 
ID 
 
Edited: 09Dec2008 LWS; 18Dec08dgo; 090105 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.