Plant Guide
CRIMSON CLOVER 
Trifolium incarnatum L.  
Plant Symbol = TRIN3  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon  
 
© G.D. Carr, 2006, courtesy of Burke Museum   
of Natural History, University of Washington  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names: scarlet clover, Italian clover,  
German clover,  French clover,  carnation clover, incarnate 
clover  
Alternate  Scientific Names: Synonyms for  Trifolium 
incarnatum  var. incarnatum  include : Trifolium  
incarnatum  L. var . elatius  Gibelli & Belli,  Trifolium 
incarnatum  L. var . sativum  Ducommun , Trifolium  
stellatum  L.  ssp . incarnatum  (L.) Gibelli & Belli,  and  
Trifolium  stellatum  L. var . elatius  Gibelli & Belli.    
Synonyms for  Trifolium incarnatum var . molinerii 
include : Trifolium incarnatum s sp. molinerii  (Balb. ex 
Hornem.) Syme , Trifolium molinerii Balb. ex Hornem. , 
Trifolium stellatum subvar.  stramineum  (C. Presl) Gibelli 
& Belli,  and  Trifolium stramineum C. Presl .  Uses 
 
Cover crop : Crimson clover is commonly  used as a 
winter or summer annual cover crop in rotation with 
vegetables or field crops  (Clark, 2007).  It can be used  
alone or as part of  a mix ture with other legumes , small 
grai ns, and winter annual grasses.  Species commonly 
used in mixes with crimson clover include  vetches  ( Vicia  
spp.) , subclover  ( Trifolium subterraneum ), red clover  
( Trifolium pratense ), black medic k ( Medicago lupulina) , 
oats ( Avena sativa ),  cereal  rye ( Secale  cereale) , and 
annual ryegrass  ( Lolium  perenne  ssp. multiflorum ).  It is 
also  used as a winter annual reseeding cover crop  between 
rows  in vineyards , berries, and  fruit  and nut orchards .  A 
case study in West Virginia showed that a corn silage 
crop was more  profitable  (10% savings)  when preceded 
by  an incorporated crimson clover  cover crop than when 
side -dressed with  a solution of urea and ammonium 
nitrate  (UAN ) at the standard rate of 120 lb/acre 
(Wickline and Rayburn, 2008).   Given sufficient soil 
moisture , crimson clover can also be  interseeded with 
corn  and cotton or vegetable crops such as cantaloupe 
r ight after the last cultivation (Westgate, 1913).   
Green manure : Crimson clover makes an excellent  weed-
suppressing  green manure crop, adding 70 to 15 0 lb 
N/acre  as a winter annual if it is allowed to reach the late 
bloom stage before being killed or turned under (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000; Clark, 2007 ).  Mutch and Martin (2010) 
found that as  a summer annual in lower Michigan, 
crimson clover produced ¾ t o 1 ton dry matter and 50 to 
60 lb N/acre by late November ( as cited in Clark, 2007).  
At least three  weeks should be allowed between green 
manure crop termination and planting another crop to 
allow residue to break  down and soil microbial 
communities to s tabilize. 
Forage , silage, and hay : C rimson clover  is reportedly 
“among the most widely planted annual forage legumes in 
the United States” (Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  It  has been  
a  popular winter pasture crop in the South  since the 
1940’s  due to its good growth under cool temperatures 
and  its ability to produce  a substantial seed crop if 
livestock are removed six to eight weeks prior to 
flowering (Hollowell, 1951).   Crimson clover also 
produces high yields of good quality hay when harvested 
at or before th e mid-bloom stage.  A good stand can yield 
1  to 2½ tons dry matter per acre, while mixtures with 
winter annual grasses generally yield much higher (Ball 
and Lacefield, 2000; Hollowell, 1951 ).  When overseeded  
on warm season grasses, crimson clover provides 60 to 
100 pounds or more N per acre to the grass, even if 
grazed or hayed (Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  
Livestock:  Crimson clover forage is highly nutritious, with 
over  25% crude protein that  can be 80% digest ible in

2007).  It is also grown as a winter annual in the Pacific 
Northwest and California, and as a summer annual in the 
extreme northern US and parts of Canada (Hardiness 
Zones 3 –4).  There are natural ized populations of crimson 
clover in the southeastern and temperate western United 
States (Vincent and Isely, 2012).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Naturalized populations of crimson clover can 
be found in moist to dry sites along roadsides, and in  
fields, pastures, and disturbed areas from lowlands to 
montane zones (Douglas et al., 1999).  
Adaptation  
Crimson clover grows  best on  well -drained, fertile , loamy 
soils , and is adapted to  sandy to clayey soils of moderate 
acidity  (pH  5.5 to 7.0) ; it  does not grow  well  on  poorly -
drained or highly alkaline soils  ( Clark, 2007; Knight, 
1985) .   This species  tolerates more acidity than white and 
red clover (Whyte, 1953).   Once established, it produces 
more biomass at lower temperatures than most other 
clover species (Hollowell, 1951).  
Establishment  
If sowing in a location where crimson clover has not been 
grown  in the last three years , seed should be inoculated 
( use  inoculant  type  “R”,  Rhizobium leguminosarum  
biovar  trifolii) immediately before sowing for best stand 
establishment and root nodulation (Harper, 2004).  Soil 
testing prior to sowing is important, particularly for 
phosphorus and potassium levels, which may limit N 
fixation and stand productivity if they are too low.  Boron 
may also be limiting if reseeding is desired, especially on 
sandy soils, and lime is often needed to adjust the soil pH 
(Ball and Lacefield, 2000).   Nitrogen fertilizer is 
generally not needed  a s these legumes are able to obtain 
sufficient N from symbiotic N fixation , and excess N 
levels  may actually inhibit nodule formation (Gardner et 
al., 1983) .  Consult your local extension service for 
recommended fertilizer types and rates.  
As a winter annua l, crimson clover is seeded  from 
summer to  late fall  depending on region and intended use.   
It is generally recommended to plant six to eight weeks 
before the average first frost date (Clark, 2007), although 
r esearch at Mississippi State University showed highest 
yields for crimson clover planted August 15  (Knight, 
1985) .  For summer annual plantings in northern regions, 
sow in late May or early June  as soon as all danger of 
frost has passed  for a fall hay harvest , rotation with fall 
vegetables , or overseed ing of corn (Clark, 2007; 
Westgate, 1913) . 
Seed should be planted at a depth of  no more than  ¼ inch 
in clay soils and ½ to ¾ inch in sandy soils  (Hollowell, 
1951) .  In a well -prepared seedbed,  drill at a single 
species  rate of 15 to 18  pounds  pure live seed (PLS) per 
acre, or  broadcast  at 2 2 to  30 lb  PLS /acre  (Clark, 2007) .  
For mixtures, sow crimson  clover  at about two -thirds the 
normal rate  and companion crops at one -third to one -half  their single species rate, or
 no more than 90 lb/acre for 
small grains and  15 to 20 lb/acre annual  ryegrass (Ball 
and Lacefield, 2000; Clark, 2007 ).  Seedlings generally 
emerge within 7 days given proper soil moisture and 
optimum germination temperature of 70°F ( Johnson et al., 
2007 ). 
Crimson clover can also be seeded into ex isting pastures 
or  hayfields  of  warm season perennial grasses such as  
b ermuda grass (Cynodon  dactylon), dallis grass ( Paspalum 
dilatatum ), Johnson grass (Sorghum hal epense ), and 
broad- leafed bahiagrass ( Paspalum notatum ) if the 
grasses are burned,  grazed, or  mowed  short  just prior to 
sowing  (Hollowell, 1951) .   The clover should be seeded 
into summer sod around the time of the first killing frost  
(Ball and Lacefield, 2000).   Seed can be broadcast or 
drilled  to a shallow depth ; if broadcast, a light disking or 
h eavy stocking with livestock after seeding may improve 
seed -to -soil contact and establishment.  
Management  
Livestock/ Grazing: If seeded with winter annual grasses, 
initial growth should be monitored  closely and grazed 
appropriately to keep the grasses from  shading out the 
clover.  In general, crimson clover should not be grazed 
until the plants are 4 to 6 inches tall, and grazing should 
leave at least 3 inches of stubble (Ball and Lacefield, 
2000).  However, leaving too much foliage may increase 
the occurren ce of crown rot, so  mowing or grazing prior 
to  the coolest, wettest months is often necessary .  Careful 
monitoring and grazing management is needed to prevent 
overgrazing crimson clover pasture, both alone and in 
mixtures.   Crimson clover is generally a lo w-bloat forage, 
but should be fed with a mixture of grasses to minimize 
the risk of bloat.  Other methods to avoid problems with 
bloat include providing dry hay to animals during periods 
of lush growth, avoiding turning hungry animals into a 
lush pasture, and providing anti -bloat materials (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000).    
Reseeding : While some varieties of crimson clover have 
been selected for hard seed , seed does not persist long in 
the soil,  so stands should still be allowed to make seed 
every year if reseed ing is desired (Ball and Lacefield, 
2000).  As soon as bloom begins, livestock should be 
removed or stocking rates should be significantly reduced 
for at least a month to allow seed set.  Plants can then be 
grazed again or cut for hay.   Clover head weevils  can 
severely limit reseeding potential some years if not 
controlled with an insecticide, but care should be taken to 
avoid harming bees if any sprays are used (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000; Hancock, 2009).  
Cover crop termination: Crimson clover is easily killed 
mechanically by mowing  or by spraying with herbicide  
after early bud stage, but N gains are maximized by 
waiting until late bloom or early seed set  (Clark, 2007) .   If 
spraying as part of a conservation tillage system, a 
systemic herbicide will produce a more complete kill than 
a contact herbicide (Owsley, 2012).   Clover can  also  be  
killed by a roller -crimper or rolling stalk chopper ahead of