Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INTERMEDIATE WHEATGRASS 
Thinopyrum intermedium 
(Host) Barkworth & D.R.  Dewey 
Plant Symbol = THIN6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron intermedium , Elytrigia intermedia, 
pubescent wheatgrass,  Agropyron trichophorum , 
Thinopyrum intermedium  ssp. barbulatum 
 
Uses 
Grazing/pastureland/hayland : This is an introduced 
species used for hay and pasture in the northern Great 
Plains, west to eastern Washington, and south into  Colorado and Kansas.  It produces good hay yields, 
both individually and with alfalfa (
Medicago spp.), 
where stiff stems tend to keep alfalfa from lodging.   
 
Intermediate wheatgrass has fairly slow re-growth 
following clipping and is best adapted to single crop-
haying situations.  Intermediate wheatgrass responds 
very well to irrigation with production nearing the 
level of 'Regar' meadow brome ( Bromus 
biebiersteinii ) and orchardgrass and exceeding 
smooth brome ( Bromus inermis ) under full irrigation.  
'Regar' and orchardgrass ( Dactylis glomeratus) will 
normally out produce intermediate wheatgrass hay 
production in multiple cutting situations.  
Intermediate wheatgrass responds well to limited 
irrigation.  It is able to tolerate droughty conditions 
when irrigation ceases as lo ng as about 12 inches of 
total moisture is provided.  It provides excellent 
spring, early summer, and fall pasture, but must be 
carefully managed to ensure maintenance of the stand 
and high production.  
 Hitchcock (1950) 
 
Intermediate wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It  is a preferred feed for 
cattle, sheep, horses, deer, antelope, and elk in spring, 
early summer and fall.  It is considered a desirable 
feed for cattle, sheep, horses, and elk in summer and 
winter.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Intermediate 
wheatgrass is well adapted to the stabilization of 
disturbed soils.  This grass can be used in critical and 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited and to 
stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and roadsides.  This grass 
can also be use to build  soils because of its heavy 
root production.  Levels as high as 7000 pounds (dry 
weight) per acre of root production in the upper 8 
inches of soil have been measured in five-year-old 
stands. 
 
Wildlife : Strips of this grass ungrazed provide good 
nesting cover for game birds and migratory 
waterfowl. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.

Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  As one of the 
common names implies, the spikes, spikelets, 
glumes, lemmas, and leaves of what was considered 
pubescent wheatgrass were densely covered with 
hairs, whereas intermediate wheatgrass vegetative 
structures are for the most part smooth, but may have 
ciliate hairs on the leaf margins.  The materials of 
both are now considered to be encompassed by the 
species  Thinopyrum intermedium . 
Intermediate wheatgrass grows to 3 to 4 feet tall.  It is 
a long-lived, cool season gr ass with short rhizomes 
and a deep feeding root system.  The seed spikes may 
be up to 4 to 8 inches long.  Leaves are 4-8 mm wide 
and green to blue-green in color and sometimes 
drooping.  The lemmas, paleas, and glumes are 
smooth to pubescent.  The gl umes are acute to blunt, 
generally five nerved, awnless to awn tipped.  The 
florets are usually fewer than seven.  Intermediate 
wheatgrass commercial seed often contains both 
pubescent and glabrous forms.  
 
Distribution : Intermediate 
wheatgrass is a perennial grass 
introduced in 1932 from 
Europe and Asia.  Included in 
this group is a form that was 
known as pubescent wheatgrass 
( Agropyron trichophorum ), 
which was introduced in 1934 
from Europe and Asia and 
considered slightly more 
drought tolerant and winter 
hardy.  For current U.S. 
distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : Intermediate wheatgrass is adapted to 
areas with 12 to 13 inches of annual rainfall or 
greater.  The pubescent form can tolerate slightly 
more droughty conditions of about 11 to 12 inches of 
rainfall or greater.  It performs best above 3500 and 
up to 9000 feet elevation.  It can be seeded at lower 
elevations, but its moisture requirement is greater.  It 
is not as drought tolerant as 'Hycrest', 'Nordan', 
'Ephraim', 'Douglas', 'Fairway' crested wheatgrasses 
( Agropyron cristatum ); 'P27', 'Vavilov' Siberian 
wheatgrasses ( Agropyron fragile ); or 'Bozoisky-
Select', 'Mankota' Russian wildrye ( Psathyrostachys 
juncea ).  
 
Intermediate wheatgrass prefers well drained loamy 
to clayey textured soils.  The pubescent form  performs best on loamy to sandy to shallow soils.  It 
will tolerate slightly acidic to mildly saline 
conditions, is cold tolerant, can withstand moderate 
periodic flooding in the spring, and is very tolerant of 
fire.  The pubescent form can tolerate lower fertility, 
more alkaline soils, higher elevations, and drier 
conditions than glabrous form.  It performs poorly on 
wet, poorly drained, and moderately saline to alkaline 
soils with prolonged inundation. 
 
Planting
: It should be seeded with a drill at a depth of 
1/2 inch or less on medium to fine textured soils and 
no more than 1 inch deep on coarse textured soils.  
Recommended seeding rates are 10 to 12 pounds 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 21 to 25 PLS seeds 
per square foot.  A firm weed free seedbed enhances 
stand establishment.  It is compatible with other 
species, particularly alfalfa ( Medicago spp.).  Stand 
longevity and seeding w ith alfalfa can enhance 
productivity.  If used as a component of a mix, adjust 
to percent of mix desired.  The best dryland results 
are obtained from seeding in very early spring on 
heavy to medium textured soils and in late fall 
(dormant) on medium to light textured soils.  
Irrigated lands should be seeded in spring through 
summer.  Late summer (August - mid September) 
seedings are not recommended unless irrigation is 
available. 
Hitchcock (1950) 
 
For mind lands, roadsides, and other harsh critical 
areas, the seeding rate should be increased to 15 to 18 
pounds PLS per acre or 31 to 38 PLS seeds per 
square foot.  
 
Intermediate wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly, 
more quickly than 'Regar' meadow brome or smooth 
brome varieties.  Seedling vigor is good to excellent.  
Under favorable conditions intermediate wheatgrass 
provides good noxious weed suppression.  It makes 
good spring growth, fair summer growth, and good 
fall growth, if moisture is av ailable.  Light, frequent 
irrigation is beneficial for stand establishment.  
 
Protect a new seeding until it is fully established and 
are able to withstand pu lling by grazing animals 
without being uprooted.  It is desirable to cut at least 
one hay crop prior to grazing.  
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stages.  Mow weeds at or pr ior to their bloom stage.  
Grasshoppers and other insects may also damage new 
stands and pesticides may be needed.

Management 
Intermediate wheatgrass has good palatability to 
livestock and wildlife.  Livestock and wildlife will 
graze it throughout the growing season, but it is most 
preferred as forage in spri ng, early summer, and fall.  
It will not withstand heavy continuous grazing and 
maintain a healthy productiv e stand.  Stands are not 
as susceptible to spring and fall freezing as smooth 
brome, meadow brome, or orchardgrass. 
 
Ten to twelve inches of new growth should be 
attained in spring before grazing is allowed on 
established stands.  A six-inch stubble height should 
be maintained following each mowing and going into 
winter.  In pasture tests, stands consistently out-yield 
other grass-legume mixtures.  For this reason, 
stocking rates can be set higher than other grasses.  
Care should be taken to allow proper rest of 21 to 28 
days between grazing periods in irrigated and high 
moisture situations. 
 
When planted with a legume, harvest hay at optimum 
stage for the legume.  This will allow the grass to be 
harvested prior to flowering and result in very high 
quality hay.  Harvest pure stands for hay when plants 
start to flower. 
 
Apply nitrogen as needed to maintain vigorous 
growth. Irrigated seedings and those in higher rainfall 
zones (18 inches +) will respond well to annual 
applications of 40 or more pounds of available 
nitrogen per acre during the establishment year and 
70 to 90 pounds per acre each fall.  A balance of 
nitrogen and phosphate fertilizer needs to be 
considered in order to maintain a legume component.  
A soil test is recommended. 
 
Forage production can be restored and stands may 
benefit from ripping if sodbound conditions occur.  
Care should be taken to avoid excessive tillage 
because stands may be damaged.  
 
Environmental Concerns : Intermediate is long-lived 
(50+ years), spreads slowly  vegetatively, and very 
little via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions.  Research 
indicates that most seedings do not spread from 
original plantings.  It is known to coexist with native 
taxa.  On favorable sites where it is best adapted, it 
can maintain dominance and  exist as a monoculture.  
There is no documentation that it crosses with native 
species. 
 
Seed Production 
Seed production of intermediate wheatgrass is 
generally not difficult.  If fields are maintained in 
rows and adequate fertility levels are maintained, 
seed can be produced for 7 to 10 years or more.  Row 
spacing of 36 inches dryl and and 24 to 36 inches 
irrigated are recommended (although rhizomatous, 
intermediate wheatgrass should be maintained in 
rows).  Cultivation is required to maintain rows. 
 
Average production of 250 to 350 pounds per acre 
can be expected under dryland conditions.  Average 
production of 450 to 550 pounds per acre can be 
expected under irrigated conditions.  Seed yields drop 
significantly after about four years of production.  
Swathing, followed by combining of the cured rows, 
best completes harvesting.  The seed heads will 
shatter when mature and if direct combining is 
desired the stand should be harvested with 15 to 20 
percent moisture.  This will require drying to 12 
percent moisture before storing in bins and to 15 
percent before storing in sacks.  Seed is generally 
harvested in mid to late August. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Foundation and registered seed of the many cultivars 
mentioned below are available through the 
appropriate state Crop Im provement Association or 
commercial sources. 
 
'Amur' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originally obtained from China by the Pullman 
PMC and transferred to the Los Lunas PMC, New 
Mexico and released by the PMC, New Mexico AES 
and University Park in 1 952.  It was selected for 
leafiness, vigorous growth, strong seedling vigor, and 
good seed production.  It is a slow sod former.  It was 
originally released for revegetation of disturbed lands 
and for pasture seedings at higher elevations.  
Introgression has occurred resulting in a high 
percentage of pubescent types over the years. 
Certified seed stock is no longer available.  It has 
been replaced by species,  which are more widely 
adapted and/or better producers.  It is not readily 
utilized in the northern U.S. 
 
'Chief' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating in Russia by the Agriculture Canada 
Research Station in Sask atoon, Saskatchewan and 
was released in 1961.  It was selected for high seed 
yield and forage quality.  Its intended uses are as a 
grass component in grass-alfalfa hay mixtures and for 
short-term pasture that remains productive for about 
five years under heavy grazing pressure.  Certified

seed is available and Agriculture Canada maintains 
breeder seed. 
 
'Clarke' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating in Russia by the Agriculture Canada 
Research Station and was released in 1980.  It was 
selected for drought tolerance, winter hardy and high 
seed yielding.  It's intended uses are for hay and 
pasture either dryland or irrigated in the northern 
Great Plains of Canada and the U.S.  Certified seed is 
available and breeder seed is maintained by 
Agriculture Canada. 
 
'Greenar' intermediate wheatgrass was developed 
from seed originating in Russia by Pullman PMC and 
was released by Idaho-Oregon-Washington AES and 
the PMC as P-2327 in 1945.   Aberdeen and Pullman 
Plant Materials Centers named it in 1956.  It was 
selected for vigor, moderate sod formation, leafy, 
broad-leafed, late maturing, and high production. Its 
intended use is for hay and pasture.  Certified seed is 
available and Pullman PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Greenleaf' pubescent wheatgrass was developed 
from seed originating from unknown European or 
Asian sources.  Commercial seed sources in 
Washington and North Dakota were utilized by the 
Agriculture Canada Research Station to develop this 
cultivar and it was released in 1966.  It has higher 
forage yields than 'Topar' and improved seedling 
vigor over 'Mandan 759'.  It was intended for use as a 
winter hardy plant for pasture and hay production.  
Stands will not maintain high productivity under 
continuous heavy grazing.  Ce rtified seed is available 
and Agriculture Canada  maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Luna' pubescent wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating in Russia and Turkey by the Los 
Lunas PMC and was released by the New Mexico 
AES and PMC in 1963.  It was selected for excellent 
seedling vigor, fast establishment and good forage 
production.  Luna is one of the most broadly adapted 
pubescent wheatgrasses available and performs well 
from the central to northern Great Plains to the 
northern Rockies and Sierra Nevada regions.  
Certified seed is available and the Meeker PMC 
maintains breeder seed.  
 
'Mandan 759' pubescent wheatgrass was developed 
from seed originating in Russia by the ARS Northern 
Great Plains Research Labo ratory in Mandan, North 
Dakota and was never officially released.  It has 
excellent seedling vigor and good forage production 
in the northern Great Plains .  It is a rapid spreader 
under favorable conditions.  It is an integrate type 
with about 75 percent of the plants pubescent and 25  percent glabrous.  It performs well as the grass 
component in alfalfa mixes for hay and for pasture.  
Certified seed is available, but 'Manska' is intended to 
replace 'Mandan 759' over time.  The Great Plains 
Research Laboratory ma
intains breeder seed. 
 
The Great Plains Research Laboratory developed 
‘Manska’ pubescent wheatgrass from seed 
originating in Russia.  It traces to 11 separate 
commercial lots of 'Mandan 759'.  It was selected for 
improved vigor, resistance to leaf spot, high forage 
and seed production, and nutritional quality.  High 
nutritional value is the primary advantage of 'Manska' 
over other pubescent wheatgrass cultivars.  ARS, 
Bismarck PMC, University  of Nebraska and North 
Dakota AES, released it in 1992.  It is intended for 
use in grass alfalfa hay mixes and for pasture.  
Certified seed is available and the Great Plains 
Research Laboratory ma intains breeder seed. 
 
'Oahe' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating in Russia by South Dakota AES, 
Brookings, South Dakota and was released in 1961.  
Named after the Oahe Dam on the Missouri River, it 
is an abbreviation for the Sioux word meaning "Big 
House."   It was selected for its uniformly bluish-
green color, drought tolerance, vigor, rhizomatous 
traits and high seed yields.  Oahe is adapted for hay, 
pasture and conservation purposes.  Certified seed is 
available and South Dakota State University 
maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Reliant' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
sources adapted to the Northern Great Plains region.  
It was developed by the Northern Great Plains 
Research Laboratory and released by ARS, North 
Dakota AES and Bismarck PMC in 1991.  It was 
selected for resistance to leaf spot, vigor, forage and 
seed production, forage quality and winter survival. It 
is of medium height, late maturing and adapted for 
hay, pasture and conservation purposes.  Persistence 
and sustained productivity under hayland 
management in mixes with alfalfa are the primary 
advantages of 'Reliant' over other intermediate 
wheatgrass cultivars.  Certif ied seed is available and 
the Great Plains Research Laboratory maintains 
breeder seed. 
 
'Rush' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating from sources in Germany.  It was 
developed by the Aberdeen PMC and released by the 
Idaho AES and Aberdeen PMC in 1994.  It was 
selected for superior s eedling emergence and vigor 
compared to other interm ediate wheatgrasses, good 
spring recovery, good rate of spread by rhizomes, 
uniform seedheads, wide  leaves, high forage

production, and high seed production.  It has the 
largest seed of intermediate wheatgrasses, averaging 
66,000 seeds per pound.  It is adapted for soil erosion 
control, roadside stabilization, mine spoil 
stabilization, hayland, pastureland both dry and 
irrigated, and forage for livestock and wildlife.  
Certified seed is available and Aberdeen PMC 
maintains breeder seed. 
'Slate' intermediate wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating from a derivative of 'Amur' and 
another accession.  It was developed by the Nebraska 
AES and ARS and was released in 1969.  It was 
selected for strong rhizomatous spread, erect form, 
broad flat leaves, and slate gr een color.  It is adapted 
for use in the central Great Plains region.  Certified 
seed is available and breeders seed is maintained by 
Nebraska AES and ARS. 
 
'Tegmar' intermediate wheatgrass was developed 
from seed originating in Turkey.  It was developed by 
Pullman PMC and was released by Idaho-
Washington AES and Aberdeen and Pullman PMCs 
in 1968.  It was selected for long life, late maturing, 
vigorous seedlings, rapidly developing rhizomes, 
drought tolerance and dwarf growth form.  It is 
generally about half the height of other intermediate 
wheatgrasses.  Intended for use in erosion control, 
roadside and ditch stabilization, dam stabilization and 
grassed waterways.  Certified seed is available and 
Aberdeen PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
'Topar' pubescent wheatgrass was developed from 
seed originating in Turkey.  It was developed by 
Pullman PMC and was released by the California-
Idaho-Oregon-Washington AES and Aberdeen-
Lockford-Pullman PMCs in 1953.  It was selected for 
seedling vigor, vigorous growth, late maturing, sod 
formation, and drought resistance.  It forms sod 
faster, is more adapted to poor fertility, higher 
elevations and saline conditions than most pubescent 
wheatgrasses.  Intended use is soil erosion and site 
stabilization.  Certified seed is available and 
Aberdeen PMC maintains breeder seed. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994.   Grass varieties in 
the United States .  Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  
USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 
 
Barkworth, M.E. & D.R. Dewey 1985.   Thinopyrum 
intermedium .  American Journal of Botany 72:772. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
Reveal, & P.K. Ho lmgren 1977.  Intermountain flora .  
Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  Columbia 
University Press, New York, New York. 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950.   Manual of the grasses of the 
United States .  USDA, Washington, DC. 
 
International Plant Names Index 2000.   Thinopyrum 
intermedium .  <http://www.ipni.org>.  Version: 
000418.  Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Powell, A.M. 1994.   Grasses of the Trans-Pecos and 
adjacent areas .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
USDA, Forest Service 1996.   Fire effects information 
system .  Version: 000418.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 
 
USDA, NRCS 2006.   The PLANTS database .  
Version: 060818.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA, NRCS, Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 Edited 18sep00 jsp; 11feb03 ahv; 10sep03jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.