Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINESE ELM 
Ulmus parvifolia Jacq. 
Plant Symbol = ULPA 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
 Courtesy of Smithsonian Institu tion, Department of Botany 
 
Alternative Names 
Drake elm, lacebark elm 
 
Uses 
Horticulture: Most of the elms make great shade and 
avenue trees, and Chinese elm is one of the best. It 
has been found to be invasive in some situations in 
Wisconsin.  This is a good replacement for American 
elm which is apparently going extinct due to Dutch 
elm disease.  Foliage in autumn often turns shades of 
red and purple.  With its multi-colored exfoliating 
bark, Chinese elm is especi ally attractive in winter. 
There are some small cultivars that are used for 
bonsai.  'Hokkaido' has tiny leaves and gets only 
about 1 ft (0.3 m) tall.  It is hardy enough to use in 
harsh planting situations such like parking lots, and in 
small planters along streets and in plazas or patios. 
 
Fairly resistant to maritime exposure, it can be grown 
in a shelter belt.  Chinese elm is a tough tree, tolerant 
of urban air and soils, and resistant to Dutch elm 
disease. Fast growing and adaptable, this is a good 
choice when you want a shade tree for a small 
landscape.  Additionally, hybridization between the 
Chinese and American elms has led to cultivars that 
are resistant to the disease,  but they do not have the 
characteristic shape of the American elms. 
 
Although Chinese elm  is an excellent tree, the 
variability of seedling stock can be seen in many 
streetscapes.  Seed-grown  trees can be misshapen, 
and will not necessarily fulfill the role chosen for 
them. Trees budded onto understocks will give a 
more uniform tree, and can be managed more 
efficiently. Cutting-grown trees maintain clonal 
stability, but can be slow to  establish because of a 
less-vigorous root system. 
 
Chinese elm can develop mo re than one dominant 
leader when young, making it difficult to manage in 
the streetscape.  Purchase  only trees with a single 
leader to prevent high maintenance costs later in the 
landscape 
 
Ethnobotanic :   
Raw or cooked immature fruits are used just after 
they are formed (Tanaka 1976).  It has an aromatic, 
unusual flavor, leaving the mouth feeling fresh and 
the breath smelling pleasant.  It contains about 34.4% 
protein, 28.2% fat, 17%  carbohydrate, 5% ash.  
 
Cooking the inner bark produces a mucilaginous 
texture (Tanaka 1976; Kunkel 1984). No more details 
are given but inner bark is often dried, ground into a 
powder and then used as a thickening in soups etc or 
mixed with cereals when making bread. 
 
The leaves are purported to be an antidote and 
lithontripic.  The stem bark is a demulcent, diuretic, 
expectorant, febrifuge, hypnotic and lithontripic.  The 
flowers are used in the treatment of fevers and 
neuritis (Duke & Ayensu 1985). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values. 
 
Description  
The Chinese elm is native  to China, Korea, and 
Japan.  It is a small to medium-sized deciduous 
(rarely semi-evergreen) tree growing to 10-18 m tall 
with a slender trunk and crown.  The leaves are 
small, 2-5 cm long and 1-3 cm broad. The flowers are 
produced in early autumn, small and inconspicuous, 
with the seed maturing rapidly and dispersing by late 
autumn.  The fruit are round samaras appearing in the 
fall.   The growth rate of  Chinese elm can be over 3 
feet per year reaching 60 to  80 feet tall.  It has

beautiful exfoliating bark which is cinnamon in color.  
It grows in a vase shape and is a good city tree 
resistant to Dutch Elm disease.  It is drought tolerant, 
but will tolerate moist sites.  It can be messy with lots 
of fruit falling and causing seedling growth.  When 
receiving a shipment, make sure it is not Ulmus 
pumila  (which has a black, rounded bud).  
 
Trees retain their leaves until early in the new year 
and in areas with mild winters will often retain them 
until new leaves are formed in the spring.  
 
This tree likes full sun to partial shade and grows in 
USDA Hardiness Zones 5-9. 
 
Establishment 
This species is easily grown in any soil of at least 
moderate quality so long as it is well drained.  The 
various species of elm hybridize freely.  The pollen 
stores well and can be kept for use with species that 
flower at different ti mes (Huxley 1992).  
 
Propagation by seed.  Sow seed outside in containers 
as soon as they ripen in fall. Cultivars are sometimes 
grafted onto seedlings. Greenwood tip cuttings may 
be rooted under glass with bottom heat. 
 
If sown in a cold frame as soon as it is ripe, it usually 
germinates within a few days (Huxley 1992).  Stored 
seed does not germinate so  well and should be sown 
in early spring.  One to two months of stratification 
can improve germination rates.  The seed can also be 
harvested 'green' (when it has fully developed but 
before it dries on the tree) and sown immediately in a 
cold frame.  It should germinate very quickly and 
will produce a larger plant by the end of the growing 
season (McMillan-Browse 1985).  When they are 
large enough to handle, prick the seedlings out into 
individual pots and grow them on in the greenhouse 
for their first winter.  Plant them out into permanent 
positions in late spring or early summer, after the last 
expected frosts.  Plants should not be allowed to 
grow for more than two years in a nursery bed, since 
they form a tap root and will then be difficult to 
move.  Layering can be done on suckers or coppiced 
shoots (Huxley 1992). 
 
Management  
It is easily grown in any soil of at least moderate 
quality so long as it is well drained (Bean 1981).  
Fairly tolerant of maritime exposure, it succeeds 
outdoors in a very exposed position.  It is resistant to 
Dutch elm disease, which is spread by a beetle. There 
is no effective cure for the problem, but most east 
Asian, though not Himalayan, species are resistant 
(though not immune) to the disease so the potential  exists to use these resistant species to develop new 
resistant hybrids with the native species.
  The various 
species hybridize freely, the pollen stores well and 
can be kept for use with species that flower at 
different times (Huxley 1992).  Trees retain their 
leaves until early in the new year (Bean 1981) and in 
areas with mild winters will often retain them until 
new leaves are formed in the spring (Brickell 1990).  
A good companion for grapes (Philbrick & Gregg 
1979). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Many cultivars of this species have been released 
such as 'Drake', 'Frosty', and 'True Green'.  ‘Pumila’ 
is a minute bush for rock gardens. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean. W.J. & D.L. Clarke. 1991. Trees and shrubs 
hardy in the British Isles.
 John Murray, London. 
864p. 
 
Brickell. C. 1990. The RHS gardener's encyclopedia 
of plants and flowers.
 Dorling Kindersley Publishers 
Ltd, New York. 
 
Chittendon, F. 1956. RHS dictionary of plants plus 
supplement. 
 Oxford University Press, U.K. 
 
Duke. J. A. & E.S. Ayensu. 1985. Medicinal plants of 
China.
 Reference Publicati ons, Inc., Algonac, 
Michigan. 
 
Flora of China Project 2007.  Flora of China.  
Accessed: 070212. Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
<http://flora.huh.harvard.edu/china/index.html> 
 
Gregg, R.B. 1966. Companion plants. Devin-Adair 
Co., Greenwich, Connecticut. 
 
Huxley. A. 1992. The new RHS dictionary of 
gardening. 
 MacMillan Press, U.K. 
 
Kunkel. G. 1984. Plants for human consumption. 
Koeltz Scientific Books, Koenigstein, Germany. 
 
McMillan-Browse. P. 1985. Hardy woody plants 
from seed.
 Grower Books, London.

Philbrick, H.L.P. 1976. Companion plants and how 
to use them . Shambhala Publications, Boston. 113p. 
 
Plants for a Future 2006.   Plants for a future.  
(Accessed: 060902) England, U.K. 
 
Tanaka. T. 1976. Tanaka's cyclopaedia of edible 
plants of the world.
 Keigaku Publishing Co., Tokyo. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007.  The PLANTS database . 
Acessed: 070212. National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore  and Kellie King, formerly USDA, 
NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Lincoln Moore , formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 06sep00 lmm; 070209jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.