Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA LAUREL 
Umbellularia californica  
(Hook. & Arn.) Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = UMCA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Warning: The oils in California laurel leaves may 
produce toxic effects in some people (Stone 1993).   
 
Alternate Names 
Balm of heaven, bay, bay laurel, cajeput, California 
bay, California olive,  cinnamon bush, laurel, 
mountain laurel, myrtle, Oregon myrtle, peppernut 
tree, pepperwood, sassafras  laurel, spicebush, spice-
tree; two varieties are recognized,  A. c. var. 
californica  and A. c. var. fresnensis .   
  
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Cahuilla, Chumash, Pomo, 
Miwok, Yuki, and Salinan are among the California 
tribes that value California laurel trees for its many 
uses.   
 
All parts of the plant, but especially the leaves, 
contain an aromatic camphor -like volatile oil that has 
cooling, irritant, insecticidal and germicidal qualities 
(Chestnut 1902).  Laurel leaves were tucked into and 
under hats or into headbands made of laurel twigs to 
relieve headaches (Barrett & Gifford 1933).  The  Salinan tribe treated sudden fits and probably 
headaches by making a headband of the aromatic 
laurel leaves (Heinsen 1972).
  The Catholic Fathers at 
Mission San Antonio de Padua, borrowing from 
Salinan medicinal practices , made a hot poultice of 
laurel leaves mixed with  nutmeg, cinnamon, and 
olive oil, which was repeatedly applied to the head of 
persons suffering fits until they regained 
consciousness.  The Kashaya Pomo made a poultice 
of laurel leaves that was used to treat rheumatism and 
neuralgia (Goodrich et al . 1980).  The Pomo and 
Yuki tribes of Mendocino County treated headaches 
by placing a single leaf in the nostril or bathing the 
head with a laurel leaf in fusion (Chestnut 1902).   
© R.A. Seelig @ PLANTS
 
Laurel leaf tea was drunk to treat stomachaches, 
colds, sore throats, and to clear up mucus in the lungs 
(Chestnut 1902, Goodrich et al. 1980, Timbrook 
1990).  The leaves were steeped in hot water to make 
an infusion that was used to wash sores (Goodrich et 
al. 1980).  Laurel leaves were steeped in baths for 
rheumatic patients.  Infusions of the leaves were used 
to rid the head of lice.  Leaves and branches were 
placed around the yard to discourage fleas.   
 
Both the flesh and the inne r kernel of the olive-like 
fruit were used as food.  The fruits were sun dried 
until the fleshy outer part had split and loosened from 
the pit (Goodrich et al. 1980).  The dried flesh was 
removed from the seeds ready to eat.  Only the 
bottom third of the outer dried fruit was eaten as the 
upper, thinner part contains a higher concentration of 
the acrid oil that is a component of all parts of the 
tree (Chestnut 1902).  The seeds were roasted until 
they were crisp and brown (Goodrich et al. 1980).  
The roasting removes much of the pungency and 
leaves just a hint of acridity and gives the roasted 
nuts a spicy or coffee-like flavor.  The parched nuts 
are then shelled and either eaten whole or pounded 
into a meal.  The oily meal is easily pressed into 
small cakes that are then sun-dried and stored for use 
in the winter.  Both the nuts and the cakes were 
served with clover, seaweed , buckeye meal, or acorn 
meal and mush.  The roaste d seeds were eaten as an 
accompaniment with clover  in order to prevent 
bloating (Murphey 1959).  The seed meal was also 
made into a beverage that tasted “like chocolate” 
(Kelly 1978).   
 
California laurel was an  important ceremonial plant 
for the Kashaya Pomo (G oodrich et al. 1980).  
Branches were placed arou nd the house to protect

households against harm.  Chumash hunters burned 
laurel leaves to attract and stupefy deer (Timbrook 
1990).   
 
Wildlife : Black-tailed deer browse on the leaves and 
twigs, which are high in protein (Howard 1992).  
Birds, squirrels, and other small mammals eat the 
seeds.  Wild pigs eat the seeds and the roots.  The 
trees provide valuable cover for deer, black bear, 
wild pigs, game birds, and songbirds.  
 
Conservation : California laurel has been used to 
restore wildlife habitat, riparian vegetation, and flood 
controls (Howard 1992).   
 
Wood products : California laurel is a high quality 
wood that is used for cabinetry, furniture, paneling, 
and interior trim.   
 
Other : California laurel leaves are used as a more 
robust seasoning substitute for sweet bay leaves 
( Laurus nobilis ) in cooking.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).   
 
Description 
General: Laurel family (Lauraceae).  California 
laurel is a perennial, evergreen tree or shrub that is 
native to California and southern Oregon.  The trees 
have many slender erect branches and a dense crown 
that can be rounded to pyramidal in shape.  The 
height is variable depending on conditions and the 
plants can grow from 3 to 45 meters tall.  The 
smallest forms are found under dry conditions and 
they reach their greatest size on deep alluvial soils 
near rivers.   
 
The greenish to reddish brown bark, which is thin 
and smooth on young trees, begins to peel and shed 
as the trees mature.  The a lternately arranged leaves 
are oblong to lance-shaped (2.5 to 11 cm long and 1.5 
to 3 cm wide).  Leaves ar e glossy dark yellow-green, 
thick, and leathery.  When  crushed, the leaves give 
off a strong peppery menthol-like odor, which is the 
reason the early European settlers gave the tree the 
name pepperwood.  The small yellow-green flowers 
are borne in clusters of 6 to 10 flowers.  The round 
olive-like fruits (1 to 2.5cm in diameter) turn from 
green to deep brown-purple.  Inside the fruit is a 
single large seed, which is  a white kernel surrounded 
by a light brown shell.   
 
Distribution : California laurel is distributed from San 
Diego County to Northwestern California and into 
southwestern Oregon.  In California, it occurs in both 
the Coast Ranges and Sierra Nevada.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: California laurel trees are abundant near 
water sources in alluvial flood plains as well as shady 
hillsides and canyons below 1600 meters.  The trees 
occur in oak woodlands, mixed evergreen forest, 
redwood forest, and chaparral.  In chaparral 
communities they grow in canyons, valleys, and 
sometimes in high rocky areas  were they are able tap 
into moisture.   
Adaptation 
 1999 Beatrice F. Howitt © California Academy of Sciences @ Calflora 
California bay can regenerate after fires of light to 
moderate intensity (Howard 1992).  The trees can 
sprout from the root crown and seed germination may 
increase following fires.   
 
Establishment 
California laurel is a versatile, medium to fast 
growing tree that can be used for specimen, hedge, 
and container plantings.  California laurel tolerates a 
wide range of conditions and does well in full sun to 
deep shade.  The trees grow fastest and tallest in 
deep, fertile soils that are well drained, with regular 
water availability.  California laurel trees can tolerate 
dry conditions but are known to dieback during 
droughts (Labadie 1978).   
 
California laurel is propag ated from fresh seeds.  
Seeds can be collected from October to December 
(Mirov & Kraebel 1939).  The seeds are mature when 
they are dark brown and th e fruits are dark purple 
(Young 2001).  Labadie (1978) suggests lightly 
cracking the seeds before planting to increase 
germination.  Hildreth & Johnson (1976) recommend 
90-120 days of cold stratification for best

germination.  To do this, mix the seeds with 3 parts 
of loose soil or a mixture of equal parts peat moss 
and perlite.  Lightly moisten the mixture and place it 
into a plastic bag that can be tightly sealed.  Place the 
bag in a refrigerator kept at 30-42°F and examine 
them periodically for signs of germination.  The 
seeds generally take around 93 days to germinate.  If 
any of the seeds begin to germinate, plant them 
immediately keeping in mind  that the primary root is 
first to emerge from the seed.  The seeds may be 
planted directly into 4x4x14 inch containers filled 
with a standard potting mix of peat moss, fir bark, 
perlite and sand (Young 2001).  Transplant container 
grown seedlings when they are under 1 year old if 
possible.   
 
Management 
Young trees can be trained to form a single trunk by 
pruning the suckers as they appear (Labadie 1978).  
Mature trees can be thinned to reduce the deep 
shading that their dense canopies can produce.  
Although evergreen, the trees drop an abundance of 
leaves, especially in the autumn.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
California laurel is relatively free of insect pests but 
can be affected by aphids, greedy scale, ivy scale, 
soft brown scale, thrups, white fly, laurel white fly, 
leaf blotch miner, and inconspicuous white fly 
(Labadie 1978).  Heart ro t, caused by the fungus 
Ganoderma applanatum  can be controlled by cutting 
down infected trees to a he ight of 20cm and allowing 
them to stump sprout (Howard 1992).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
California laurel trees are readily available from 
commercial nurseries.  There is a variety,  U. 
californica  var. fresnensis,  which occurs in Fresno 
County, California (Howard 1992).  Contact your 
local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barrett, S.A. & E.W. Gifford 1933.   Miwok material 
culture: Indian life of the Yosemite region.   Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum Vol. 2, No. 4.  
Yosemite Association,  Yosemite National Park, 
California.  388 pp. 
 
Brenzel, K.N., Editor 2001.   Western garden book.  
Sunset Publishing Corp., Menlo Park, California.  
768 pp. 
 
Chestnut, V.K. 1902.   Plants used by the Indians of 
Mendocino County, California .  Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium Vol. VII.  Reprinted 
1974 by Mendocino County Historical Society.  422 
pp.   
 
Emery, D.E. 1988.   Seed propagation of native 
California plants .  Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, California.  115 pp.   
 
Goodrich, J., C. Lawson & V.P. Lawson 1980.  
Kashaya Pomo Plants .  Heyday Books, Berkeley, 
California.  171 pp. 
 
Heinsen, V. 1972.   Mission San Antonio de Padua 
Herbs: Medicinal herbs of early days .  Third edition. 
Lockwood. California.  142 pp. 
 
Hildreth, W.R. & S. R. Johnson 1976.   Seed 
propagation at the Saratoga Horticultural 
Foundation.   Pacific Horticulture Vol. 37, No. 4.  Pp. 
49-57.   
 
Howard, J.L. 1992.   Umbellularia californica.   U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station,  Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(2002, February).  Fire Effects Information System , 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/datab ase/feis/ [22 February 
2002]. 
 
Jepson, W. L. 1911.   A flora of western middle 
California .  Second Edition.  Cunningham, Curtiss & 
Welch, San Francisco, California.  515 pp.   
 
Kelly, I. 1978.   Coast Miwok in Handbook of North 
American Indians, Vol. 8, California , R.F. Heizer, 
Ed.  Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.  Pp 
414-425. 
 
Labadie, E.L. 1978.   Native plants for use in the 
California landscape.   Sierra City Press, Sierra City, 
California.  248 pp.   
 
Mirov, N.T. & C.J. Kraebel. 1939.   Collecting and 
handling seeds of wild plants.  Civilian Conservation 
Corps Forestry Publication No. 5.  US. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  42 pp.    
 
Moerman, D.E.  1998 Native  American ethnobotany. 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.

Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available:  
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(2002). 
 
Murphey, E.V.A. 1959.   Indian uses of native plants.  
Mendocino County Historical Society, Fort Bragg, 
California.  81 pp. 
 
Parsons, M. E. 1966.   The wild flowers of California.   
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  425 
pp. 
 
Stone, W. J.  1993.  Lauraceae: Laurel Family In: 
J.D. Hickman, Editor.   The Jepson manual:  Higher 
plants of California.   University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California.  Pp. 734.     
 
Timbrook, J.  1990 Ethnobotany  of Chumash Indians, 
California, based on collections by John P. 
Harrington.   Economic Botany Vol. 44, No. 2.  Pp 
235-253.   
 
Young, B.  2001.   Propagation protocol of container 
Umbellularia californica  (Hook & Arn.) Nutt. plants 
(Treeband 14).   Golden Gate National Parks, San 
Francisco, California .  IN:  Native Plant Network 
[Online] Available: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org.  Moscow (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery [2 February 2001].   
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department,  
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center,  
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California  
 Edited: 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.