SIBERIAN ELM 
Ulmus pumila L. 
Plant symbol = ULPU 
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Chinese elm, dwarf elm, Asiatic elm 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The dried inner bark was grounded 
into a powder and used as a thickener in soups or 
added to cereal flours when making bread.  The 
immature fruit was used to produce a sauce and a 
wine (Facciola 1990).  The hardy, heavy tough wood 
was used for agricultural implements and boat 
making (Vines 1987). 
 
Agroforestry: Ulmus pumila is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to 
protect livestock, enhance production, and control 
soil erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with 
harsh winter conditions better handle the impact of winter storms and reduce home heating and cooling 
costs. 
 
Status 
Considered a noxious weed in New Mexico.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Elm Family (Ulmaceae).  Siberian elm 
(Ulmus pumila) is an introduced, fast-growing, small 
tree, five to ten meters high.  The leaves are alternate, 
simple, elliptic to oblong-lanceolate, usually simple 
serrate and 2.54  to 8 cm long.  The flowers are 
greenish, clustered, short pediceled and appear with 
or before the leaves from March through April (Vines 
1960).  The bark is light grayish-brown, irregularly 
furrowed, and often streaked with stains caused by 
bacterial wetwood.  The fruit is a long and broad 
samara, appearing from March through April, 
composed of a central, dry, compressed nutlet 
surrounded by a thin wing. (Ibid.). 
 
Distribution: Siberian elm is a fast-growing tree that 
was introduced to the United States in the 1860's. 
Native to northern China, eastern Siberia, Manchuria, 
and Korea.  It is the hardest of all elms and does well 
even in areas with cold winters and long periods of 
summer droughts.  Because this, elm tolerates a 
variety of conditions such as poor soils and low 
moisture, it is found in dry regions, along roadsides, 
in pastures and grasslands.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Ulmus pumila is easily grown in any well-drained 
soil type but prefers well-drained fertile soil.  This 
species prefers full sun and succeeds well in arid 
regions. The tree also grows in moist soils along 
streams.  It invades dry and mesic prairies, including 
sand prairies, drought resistant and fairly wind 
tolerant. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed: Siberian elm seeds should be 
sown as soon as ripe in a cold frame.  Excessive 
drying and dewinging should be avoided as they 
reduce viability (Dirr & Heuser 1987). Twelve to 
twenty seeds are sown per linear feet in drills ten 
inches apart and covered ¼ inch with firmed soil.  
The seedbeds should be kept moist, but not 
particularly shaded.  When the seedlings are large 
enough to handle, place them into individual pots and 
© Noble Foundation

grow them in the greenhouse for the first winter.  
Plant them into their permanent positions in late 
spring or early summer of the following year. 
 
Management 
Siberian elm has been planted in the Upper Midwest 
in shelterbelts and as a shade trees along boulevards 
and in parks (Rosendahl 1955).  Some of the 
plantings have proved successful while others have 
not, because the seeds were derived from climatically 
different areas of the species geographical range, 
which varies in the level of winter hardiness (Ibid.).   
 
Siberian elm seeds with three to eight percent 
moisture can be stored at 36 to 40ºF in sealed 
containers for eight years (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  
Seedlings should not be allowed to grow in a nursery 
bed for more than two years because the plant will 
develop a taproot that make lifting harder and 
reduces outplanting survival rates.   
 
Weediness 
Considered invasive by several sources.  Consult the 
sources cited on the Invasive portion of the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Readily available through commercial nurseries. 
 
References 
Benson, L. & R.A. Darrow 1954.  The trees and 
shrubs of the southwestern desert.  The University of 
New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Bruggen, T.V. 1976.  The vascular plants of South 
Dakota.  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Brown, C.A. 1965.  Louisiana trees and shrubs.  
Claitor’s Book Store, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Carter, J.L. 1997.  Trees and shrubs of New Mexico.  
Mimbres Publishing. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.  The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: from seed to 
tissue culture.  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 
 
Facciola, S. 1990.  Cornucopia-a source book of 
edible plants.  Kampong Publications. 
 
Noble Foundation 1999.  Siberian elm.  Accessed: 
10jan02.  
<http://www.noble.org/imagegallery/woodhtml/Siber
ianElm.html>  
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.  North American trees.  4th 
ed.  Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Rosendahl, C.O. 1955.  Trees & shrubs of the upper 
Midwest.  University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis. 
 
Steyermark, J.A. 1963.  Flora of Missouri.  The Iowa 
State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1960.  Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of 
the southwest.  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Vines, R.A. 1987.  Trees of central Texas.  
University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Dept., Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 04jun03 ahv 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all 
its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and 
marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) 
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication 
of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil 
Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, 
Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.