Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLIPPERY ELM 
Ulmus rubra Muhl. 
Plant Symbol = ULRU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Red elm 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: This tree was valued for its bark, 
which supplied material for the sides of winter 
houses and roofs of the Meskwaki.  The inner bark 
was used for cordage by many tribes.  The Menomini 
gathered the bark, boiled it, and used it for making 
fiber bags and large storage baskets.  The Dakota, 
Omaha-Ponca, Winnebago, and Pawnee used the 
inner bark fiber for making ropes and cords.  Slippery 
elm was also used extensively as a medicine.  The 
Iroquois scraped the bark of the tree and used it in 
combination with other plants to treat infected and 
swollen glands.  The inner bark was made into an eye 
wash for sore eyes.  The Menomini used the inner 
bark in a tea and it was taken as a physic.  The inner 
bark was used by the Menomini and the Meskwaki in 
a poultice to heal sores on the body.  Meskwaki 
women drank a tea of the bark to make childbirth 
easier. The tree also was used by the Ojibwe to treat 
sore throats.  The fresh inner bark was boiled and the 
Dakota, Omaha-Ponca, and other tribes drank the 
resulting decoction as a laxative.  The indigenous 
people generously taught some of these uses to early 
non-Indian settlers.  Today slippery elm is found in 
health food stores and is used to relieve sore throats,  coughs and other bronchial ailments, and used as a 
laxative.  The wood is used commercially for making 
furniture, paneling, and containers. 
 
Wildlife: 
Birds often nest in the thick elm foliage, and 
the seeds and buds are food to songbirds, game birds, 
and squirrels.  Deer and ra bbits browse on the twigs. 
 
Status 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS, Wetland Science Institute @ PLANTS 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Elm Family (Ulmaceae).  This graceful, 
arching tree reaches 20 m,  with twigs that are 
scabrous-pubescent.  It can live to be 200 years old 
and is identified by its "slippery" inner bark.  The 
winter-buds are densely covered with red-brown 
hairs.  The leaves are oblong to obovate, thick and 
stiff and 10-20 cm.  They are pinnately veined and 
not equilateral.  The flowers are subsessile in dense 
fascicles with 5-9 stamens.  They appear before the 
leaves in the spring.  The fruit is a flat, 1-seeded 
samara.  It is suborbicular, 1.5-2 cm and pubescent 
over the seed. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS web 
site.  This plant is found in moist woods, in southern 
Maine and southern Quebec to eastern North Dakota, 
and south to Florida and Texas.  
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seeds:  Slippery elm samaras can be 
gathered when green and ripe from April to June, by 
sweeping them up from the ground soon after they 
fall or by knocking the branches with poles and 
collecting seeds that fall onto tarps.  The seeds should 
then be air-dried for several days, but too much 
drying can reduce germination.  Sow the seeds in 
flats as soon as they are ma ture.  Sow them with their 
wings, as de-winging them damages them.  There are 
approximately 90 seeds per gram.  Seeds sometimes 
show dormancy and if so, ne ed stratification.  They 
should be stratified at 41° F for 60-90 days in a moist 
medium.  If storing the seeds before planting, for best 
results, store them at low moisture content in sealed 
containers at cool temperatures.  Seedlings are 
susceptible to damping off.  In the seedling stage,

transplant them into larger containers.  The seeds can 
also be directly planted in the garden and the tree 
grows in a range of soil types, but prefers moist, rich, 
bottomland soils.  This species can become a weed as 
it tends to inhabit unkempt shrub borders, hedges, 
fence-rows, and other open ground.  It is susceptible 
to Dutch elm disease, but not to the degree of 
American elm. 
 
Propagation by cuttings : take cuttings in early 
summer and root with IBA treatment. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is somewhat  available through native 
plant nurseries within its range. 
 
References 
Cooley, J.H., &  J.W. Van Sambeek 1990.   Ulmus 
rubra Muhl.  Slippery elm.   pp. 812-816 IN: Silvics of 
North America volume 2. hardwoods.   USDA, Forest 
Service, Agriculture Handbook 654.  Washington, 
D.C. 
 
Densmore, F. 1974.   How Indians use wild plants for 
food, medicine and crafts.   Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, New York. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr's hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia.   Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1975.   Manual of woody landscape 
plants: their identification, ornamental 
characteristics, culture, propagation and uses .  Fifth 
Edition.  Stipes Publishing L.L.C.  Champaign, 
Illinois. 
 
Gilmore, M.R. 1977.   Uses of plants by the Indians of 
the Missouri River region.   University of Nebraska 
Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
Gleason, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991.  Manual of 
vascular plants of Northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.   Second Edition.  The New York 
Botanical Garden.  Bronx, New York. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Pres s.  Syracuse, New York. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany.   
Timber Press.  Portland, Oregon. 
 
Smith, H.H. 1923 .  Ethnobotany of the Menomini.  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee  4:1(8-175). 
 
Smith, H.H. 1928.   Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki .  
Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of 
Milwaukee 4:2(175-326). 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.   Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.   Discorides Press.  Portland, 
Oregon. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Horticulture, Univers ity of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Edited 30nov00 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.