Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SEA OATS 
Uniola paniculata  (L.) 
Plant Symbol = UNPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Gary Fine, USDA-NRCS, 2000 
 
 
Uses 
Sea oats is exceptionally tolerant of harsh conditions 
associated with coastal b each environments, such as, 
salt spray, short inundation of saltwater from  storm 
surges,  strong winds, xeric soil conditions, and rapid 
sand accretion.  It is considered an excellent 
pioneering species because its ability to rapidly 
establish and colonize on fore-dunes and dune crests,  
and a climax species because  of its ability to persist 
in these extreme coas tal beach conditions.  
 
 The attributes found in sea oats makes this species 
and excellent dune builder and sand stabilizer.  Sea 
oats is an excellent conservation plant for dune 
building, dune enhancement, and sand stabilization 
on coastal beaches and barrier islands of the Atlantic, 
and Gulf of Mexico.   
 
Status 
This species is ranked on the Rare, Threatened, and 
Endangered Species state heritage conservation lists 
in Louisiana as a S2 - impe riled because of rarity (6 
to 20 known extant populations) or because of some 
factors making if very vulnerable to extirpation, and a  
global ranking as a G5 - demonstrably secure 
globally although it may be quite rare in parts of its 
range, especially at th e periphery (1000 + known 
extant populations). 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Sea oats is a native, warm-season, 
semi-tropical, rhizomatous perennial, C4 grass 
dominating many beach and dune environments.   
Culms are stout, erect 1-2 meters tall, nodes and 
internodes glabrous.  Leaves are both basal and 
cauline with blades elongate to 60 cm long and 1.2 
cm wide, both surfaces glabrous.  The inflorescence 
is a large open panicle 8-15 cm long with flat 
yellowish spikelets, 10-20  flowered.   Seed heads 
become a yellow-brown, straw color in late summer 
and into the fall.   
 
Distribution :  Sea oats occurs along the U.S. coast 
and barrier islands from Virginia through Florida, the 
Gulf coast, and south to Mexico.  However, it is 
uncommon in Louisiana west of the Mississippi 
River delta over to Texas.   
 
Habitat:   Sea oats is typically found on loose sands 
of upper beaches, and the more exposed and 
accreting areas of dunes such as foredunes and dune 
crests.  It is one of the few species that are able to 
establish and grow in this  dynamic beach zone. Sea 
oats thrives and is actually stimulated where sand is 
actively accumulating.  It is highly tolerant of xeric 
conditions, but sea oats does not tolerate water 
logging of roots, which will stress or kill plants 
within a few days.  There are also beneficial 
microorganisms associated with  the roots of sea oats.  
Vesicular-arbuscular mycorr hizal fungi are reported 
to increase the surface area of roots facilitating 
nutrient absorption and improving nutrition of sea 
oats communities.   
 
Adaptation  
Sea oats is an excellent pioneering species on upper 
beaches, fore-dunes, and dune crests, where loose 
sands accumulate.  If is tolerant of salt spray, short 
periods of inundation by saltwater, rapid sand burial, 
and it is very drought tolerant.  The extensive system 
of rhizomes and roots binds and holds blowing sands.

Establishment 
Sea oats are generally established using vegetative 
propagules. Freshly dug bare-root plant divisions can 
be used effectively. Container grown plant materials 
have been proven to be more reliable in establishing 
stands.  Propagation methods from plant division to 
micropropagation techniques are used.    
 
Generally, no site preparation is needed when 
planting vegetative plant materials.  Beach plantings 
are established by planting propagules on 2 to 5 feet 
centers.  Spacing is dependent on site conditions, 
erosion potential, and desired outcome of the 
planting.  Sea oats is relatively slow to establish, so 
planting faster growing companion species, such as, 
bitter panicum or other desirable pioneering species 
is recommended.   
 
Generally, container grown plant materials can be 
planted year around, however, better results are 
achieved by planting mid-winter to early spring.  
Bare-root propagules should be planted November 
through March. Though sea oats are drought tolerant 
always consider site moisture conditions before 
planting.   Since sea oats growing season varies 
considerably by geographic location, consult with 
local professionals when planning sea oats plantings.   
 
Management 
Restrict traffic during establishment.   Sea oats can be 
effectively established and grow on low fertility soils 
without fertilization, howe ver, if fertilization is 
desired for establishment purposes, apply 3.5-4.5 
actual N per and 1.0- 1.5 pounds actual P per 1,000 
square feet.  Or place a slow  release tablet with each 
plant when planting.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious  pests associated with sea 
oats.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns associated with 
sea oats.  It is highly desirable and beneficial native 
species.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Mate rials Centers have one 
released one variety:  
 
Caminada Germplasm sea oats is a pre-varietal 
release from the Golden Meadow Plant Materials 
Center, Galliano, Louisiana, selected to provide a 
plant for dune building, enhancement, and sand  stabilization on coastal  beaches and barrier islands of 
the Gulf of Mexico.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government”.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Duncan, W.H. and M.B. Duncan. 1987. 
The 
Smithsonian guide to seaside plants of the Gulf and 
Atlantic coasts .  Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Washington, D.C. 409 pp. 
 
Hester, M.W., and I.A. Mendelssohn. 1989.   Water 
relations and growth response of Uniola paniculata 
(sea oats) to soil moisture and water-table depth . 
Oecologia. 78(3):298-296. 
 
Mendelssohn, I.A., M.W. Hester, F.J. Monteferrante, 
and F. Talbot. 1991.  Experimental dune building and 
vegetative stabilization in a sand-deficient barrier 
island, setting on the Louisiana coast, USA . Journal 
of Coastal Research. 7 (1): 137-149.  
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell. 1976. 
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas . 
University of North Carolina  Press. Chapel Hill. 1183 
pp. 
 
Sylvia, D.M. 1986.  Spatial and temporal distribution 
of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi associated 
with Uniola paniculata in Florida foredunes  
Mycologia 78 (5): 728-734. 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2006.  The PLANTS database  
(
http://plants.usda.gov, 27 December, 2006). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 
 
USDA, SCS. 1984.  Plants for coastal dunes of the 
Gulf and South Atlantic coasts and Puerto Rico. 
Agricultural Bulletin 460. U.S. GPO: 1984—445-
394.  41 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Gary Fine , USDA NRCS ACES Project, Thibodaux, 
Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Morris Houck , USDA NRCS Louisi ana State Office, 
Alexandria, Louisiana 
 Edited: 11jan2007 rhn, 01feb2007 mjh; 070209 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.