Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED HUCKLEBERRY
Vaccinium parvifolium Sm. 
Plant Symbol = VAPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Freya Holm, Evergreen State College, Olympia, Washington 
 
Alternate Names 
Red bilberry, red whortleberry 
 
Uses 
Red huckleberries are edible and widely used today 
for pies, jams, jellies, and are frozen or canned.  A 
wine can be made from the fruit.  Red huckleberries 
are quite tart, so some people prefer the blue 
huckleberry (Vaccinium ovatum ).  The berries can be 
dried, mashed, or pressed for juice.  The leaves can 
be used fresh or dried to make tea.  Red huckleberry 
makes an attractive and versatile ornamental.  
Sometimes, the branches are used for floral 
arrangements. 
 
Red huckleberries are an important fruit and were 
used by virtually all groups within the range of the 
plant, including the Skallam, Lummi, Makah, 
Quileute, Quinault, Skagit, Skokomish, Snohomish, 
Swinomish, and tribes throughout western British 
Columbia.  The berries were eaten fresh or pressed  into cakes and dried for the winter.  The Lower 
Chinook and Lummi preferred the berries raw, rather 
than drying them.  Other first people dried the 
berries.  Like other fruits, huckleberries were often 
eaten with some type of o
il or animal/fish grease, and 
were often mixed with other berries, such as salal 
( Gaultheria shallon ).  The berries, instead of being 
picked individually, are usually brushed or combed 
from the twigs.  Some people harvested the berries by 
clubbing the branches on the hand and letting the ripe 
berries fall into a basket. 
 
The Skagit boil the bark fo r a tea for colds.  The 
leaves and finely chopped st em contain quinic acid, a 
former therapeutic for gout said to inhibit uric acid 
formation, but never widely used because of mixed 
clinical results.  The leaves have been widely used to 
lower or modify blood sugar levels, particularly in 
Europe.  Taken on a regular basis, huckleberry tea 
will gradually help alleviate both glycosuria and 
hyperglycemia and has a benign, but useful effect as 
an adjunct treatment to diabetes mellitus. 
 
Wildlife .  Huckleberry fruits are an important food 
source for songbirds, gulls, cranes, pigeons, turkeys, 
and upland game birds.  Many mammals, from black 
bears to mice, feed on red  huckleberries.  Herbivores 
graze on the entire plant.  It  appears to be a favorite 
browse of deer.  Huckleberries and blueberries form a 
major part of the grizzly’s and black bear’s diet in 
late summer and fall.  Grouse feast on the leaves and 
blossoms.  The fruit, twigs, and foliage are eaten by 
foxes, opossums, raccoons, squirrels, deer, moose, 
caribou, elk, pikas, cottontail rabbits, and skunks. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Heath Family (Ericaceae).  Red huckleberry 
is a deciduous shrub from 1-4 m tall, with strongly 
angled twigs and bright green stems.  The 10-25 mm 
leaves are elliptic to ovate, thin, and with a sharp 
point at the tip.  The flowers are greenish to pinkish, 
and the blossoms are solitary in the axils of the 
lowest leaves of the youngest shoots.  The berries are 
bright red.

Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  It grows from southeast Alaska 
to central California, Oregon, and Washington,  It 
occurs in the lower Ca scades to the coast. 
 
Habitat: Red huckleberry grows on old decaying 
stumps or logs in moist coniferous woods, wetlands, 
or in the transition zone of wetlands.  It is absent or 
scarce in dry woods.  It is very shade tolerant.  Red 
huckleberry is one of the most frequent pioneering 
species on old stumps in association with western 
hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla ) seedlings. 
 
Establishment 
Red huckleberry is best grown from seed or by 
layering.  It requires excessive drainage and acidic 
soils to become established.  It does best in full or 
partial shade.  It may tolerate morning and winter 
sun.  Red huckleberry sp routs after plants are 
damages.  Take cuttings from stems in the winter, 
during the dormant season.  It does not salvage well, 
so transplanting may result in high mortality. 
 
Management  
This plant grows very rapidly in moist, shady 
conditions.  If summer drought occurs, the plants 
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist.  For 
the Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island, stumps of 
old conifers become tended gardens for red 
huckleberry and salal berry orchards (Turner and 
Efrat 1982). 
 
Traditional resource management of this plant 
includes the following: 1) occasional burning to 
stimulate new growth; 2) pruning the branches after 
picking the berries to stimulate new growth and fruit 
production the next growing season; and 3) 
ownership of red huckleberry shrubs provides the 
basis for careful tending and sustainable yield of 
valued resources. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Collect fruit when berries  are ripe (they should be 
bright red).  Fruit ripens from July to August and is 
easily collected by hand picking or by beating the 
bush over a large bucket.  Following collection, chill 
the fruit to 10 degrees C for several days.  Clean the 
seeds by macerating and floating off the pulp and 
unsound seed.  Clean the se eds carefully, since they 
are miniscule, so you may want to use cheesecloth to 
strain the seed from the pulp. 
 
Seeds dried at 15-21 degrees C for two days can be 
stored in a refrigerator for up  to 12 years.  Fresh seed 
not planted in the fall may germinate better if cold  stratified for 1-3 months.  Stored seed germinates 
well when exposed to alternating temperature and 
light regimes of 28 degrees C for 14 hours of day 
(light) and at 13 degrees C for 10 hours of dark. 
 
Fresh or stored and cold-stratified seeds can be sown 
directly into flats or small pots (a salt shaker can be 
used for sowing).  Plant in a mixture of sand and peat 
moss.  Seedlings will begin to emerge in a month and 
will continue to emerge for quite some time 
thereafter.  Transplant seed
lings into larger pots 6-7 
weeks after emergence.  Plant outside after the first 
growing season.  Water as needed.  Seeds are very 
slow to sprout and seedlings are small and grow very 
slowly.  Seeds per kilogram: 5,268,955 – 7,142,860 
(Crossley 1974). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Angier, B. 1974. Field guide to edible wild plants . 
Stackpole Books. 256p. 
 
Barton, B.J. 1997 Gardening by mail: A source book . 
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, New York. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon . Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society. 414p. 
 
Crossley, J.A. 1974.  Vaccinium L. blueberry . Pp. 
840-843. In: Shopmeyer, C.S (tech. coord.), Seeds of 
the Woody Plants in the United States. USDA Forest 
Service, Agric. Handbook 450, Washington, D.C. 
883p. 
 
Galloway, B. 1982.  Upper Sto:lo ethnobotany
. 
Coqualeetza Education Training Center, Sardis, B.C. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973 . Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington . University of Washington Publ. in 
Anthropology 10(1). University of Washington Press, 
Seattle. 
 
Harbinger, L.J. 1964.  The importance of food plants 
in the maintenance of Nez Perce cultural identity .  
Thesis, M.A. in Anthropology. Washington State 
University, Seattle.

Harrington, H.D. 1972. Western edible wild plants . 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 156p. 
 
Heller, C.A. 1976.  Wild edible and poisonous plants 
of Alaska . Cooperative Extension Service Bull F-40, 
University of Alaska, College. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual: Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 1399p. 
 
King County Department  of Public Works, Surface 
Water Management Division. 1994.  Northwest native 
plants, identification and propagation for 
revegetation and restoration projects . King County, 
Washington. 
 
‘Ksan, People of. 1980.  Gathering what the great 
nature provided. Food traditions of the Gitksan . 
Douglas & McIntyre, Vancouver and University of 
Washington Press, Seattle. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner. 1991.  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples. Nutrition, 
botany and use . Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology, Volume 8. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 632p. 
 
Leigh, M. (August) 1997.  Grow your own native 
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and 
landscaping with western Washington native plants . 
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington 
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State 
University Cooperative Extension. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publication, Inc., New York. 500p. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.  Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west . Museum of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 
200p. 
 
Norton, H.H. 1981.  Plant use in Kaigani Haida 
culture: Correction of an ethnohistorical oversight . 
Econ. Botany 35:434-449. 
 
Randall, W.R., R.F. Kenist on, D.N. Bever, & E.C. 
Jensen. 1994.  Manual of Oregon trees and shrubs . 
Oregon State University Bookstore, Corvallis. 305p. 
 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D Haase. 1998. 
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants . 
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis. 
 
Stevens, M. & R. Vanbianchi. 1993.  Restoring 
wetlands in Washington. A guidebook for wetland 
restoration, planning and implementation . 
Washington State Department of Ecology Publication 
93-17. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson, & 
A.Z. York. 1990 . Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia . Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson, & R.T. 
Ogilvie. 1983 . Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island . B.C. Provincial Museum 
Occasional Paper No.  24, Victoria. 165p. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat. 1982 . Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island . B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2. 
Victoria. 99p. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part I. Coastal peoples . B.C. Provincial 
Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007.  The PLANTS web site . 
Accessed 070118. http://plants.usda.gov. National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan, & S 
Hashisaki. 1994.  A citizen’s guide to wetland 
restoration . USEPA Region 10. 71p. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young. 1974.  Collecting, 
processing, and germinating seeds of wildland 
plants . Timber Press, Portland. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens, form erly USDA NRCS NPDC, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
And 
Dale C. Darris, USDA NRCS Oregon PMC, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Davis, California 
 Edited: 070118 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.