Plant Guide
DEER PEA VETCH 
Vicia ludoviciana Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = VILU  
 
Deer pea vetch plant . Photo by Forrest Smith, South Texas 
Natives , Kingsville, TX. 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center and South Texas Natives  
Uses  
Livestoc k: Deer pea vetch ( Vicia ludoviciana  Nutt.)  a 
cool season annual legume that is grazed by 
live stock.   
 
Wildlife :  Deer pea vetch  provides  leaf material for 
wildlife forage .  It also produces seeds which are 
eaten by bobwhite quail  and Rio Grande Turkeys . 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General :  Deer pea vetch is a cool season , annual 
legume that has climbing stems .  Leaves are 3 -9 cm 
long  with 6 to 12 leaflets r achis terminating in a 
usually forked tendril.  Flowers are generally solitary , 
and are   lavender -blue in color.  P ods are 2- 3 cm. 
long,  with 4 to 8 seeds in each pod.  Seed is spherical 
in shape very hard and light brown in color with dark 
brown markings  (Correll and Johnston, 1970).   
Distribution :   T he natural range  of deer pea vetch  is 
throughout  the southern half of the United States .   For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.
 
 
Adaptation  
Deer pea vetch  grows best on medium  to heavy  
textured  soils.   
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting should be done in late fall to early 
w
 inter in South Texas. Deer pea vetch can also be 
included in warm -season planting mixtures, but will 
not  establish until the fall after planting. Establish a 
clean, weed -free seedbed by either tillage or 
herbicides. Prior to planting, the site should be firm 
and have accumulated soil moisture.  
 
Deer pea vetch can be seeded using a drill or 
broadcaster.  If broadcast seeded, some type of 
additional coverage such as culti-packing or light 
dragging is recommended to ensure good seed to soil 
contact.  
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep. It is 
better to plant too shallow than too deep.    
 
If one plant  per  square foot has  become established  in 
field plantings , then the seeding can be considered 
successful.  
Management  
Areas planted to Hoverson Germplasm should be 
deferred for 30 days to allow plants to become 
established.  Established plants should be allowe d to 
produce seed annually because in many areas with 
proper soil moisture deer pea vetch readily reseeds 
itself with minimal soil disturbance.  As perennial 
cover increase on most sites deer pea vetch decreases 
without soil disturbance.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No severe insect or disease problems have been 
observed in deer pea vetch once established.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with  deer pea vetch.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed increase plots have been  managed by flat  drill 
planting  on  8” rows.   It can also be grown from 
transplants planted in the late fall.  Harvesting when

50% of the seed is ripe allows for some seed to References  
shatter allowing stand to reseed itself for subsequent  Correll, D. S., and M. C. Johnston.  1970.  Manual of 
years of harvest.    the vascular plants of Texas.  Texas  
  Research Foundation, Renner, TX.  
Seed can be harvested using a combine with a grain  Everitt, H.J., D.L. Drawe, and R.L. Lonard. 1999. 
header.  This harvest method will result in both green  Field Guide to the Broad-Leaved Herbaceous 
and mature seed, as well as other high moisture  Plants of South Texas. Texas Tech University 
material in the harvested product.  Most of the green  Press, Pg. 145. 
seed will mature, but care must be taken to insure  Smith, F.S., A.D. Falk, and W.R. Ocumpaugh. 2012.  
adequate seed drying procedures are followed to  Notice of Release of Hoverson Germplasm deer 
prevent molding and heating of this mixture.   Seed  pea vetch.  Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research 
harvested with this method is  best cleaned by 
Institute. Kingsville, TX. 
hammer milling to release seed from un -opened pods, 
 
then screened using a Clipper seed cleaner.  Prepared By:   
  John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager  
USDA -NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and  Center, Kingsville, Texas 
area of origin)  
 
Hoverson  Germplasm  deer pea vetch  was released by 
Forrest S. Smith, Director  
South Texas Natives,  the E.  “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife 
Materials Center, and Texas AgriLife Research  Research Institute, Texas A&M University-
Beeville in 2012.  It was selected for its seed  Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas  
production , plant vigor, forage production and  its 
ability to be harvested .  Hoverson Germplasm has 
Citation 
also shown excellent performance when used as a  Lloyd-Reilley, J. and F. Smith. 2012.  Hoverson 
component of range plantings.  This germplasm is  Germplasm deer pea vetch. USDA-Natural 
known to be adapted to the Rio Grande Plain, Gulf  Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la 
Coast  Prairies and Marshes, and Coastal Sand Plains  
Garza Plant Materials Center and South Texas 
Ecoregions of South Texas.    Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, 
  Texas A&M University-Kingsville , Kingsville, Texas 
For calibration purposes, Hoverson  Germplasm 
78363.   
contains approxima tely 66,000 seeds per bulk pound.  
A

 seeding rate of 5 -10 pounds of pure live seed 
(PLS) per acre is recommended.  In planting mixtures 
reduce the rate according to the percent of deer pea 
vetch  desired on the planting site.  Breeder seed is 
maintained by  South Texas Natives .     
  Well managed seed fields of  Hoverson Germplasm 
have produced 200  bulk pounds of clean seed per 
year.  Purity of the seed is usually around 70% and 
germination rates average near 90 %.  Hoverson 
Germplasm  typically has 50%  dormant s eed, 
however after scarafiction active germination is 
increased to 90% .  It produces one  seed crop  per year 
when grown in s outh Texas.    Published 
August 2012 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site  
http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.  
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER