Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GROUSE 
HUCKLEBERRY  
Vaccinium scoparium Leib. Ex 
Coville 
Plant Symbol = VASC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Clinton Shock Oregon State Univ., Malheur Experiment Station 
 
Alternate Names 
Littleleaf huckleberry, whortleberry, grouse 
whortleberry, red huckleberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotany.  The small berries are eaten by the 
Mlaka’-pamus in British Columbia, and the 
Okanagan-Colville and Kootenay people in the 
Pacific Northwest.  The berries are picked with a 
comb and usually eaten fresh.  However, berries are 
gathered less commonly in modern times due to their 
size and the limited number produced.  Like the wild 
strawberries, the tiny red fruits are sweet and 
delicious and well worth the effort.  They are also 
used by backpackers. 
 
Grouse huckleberry is sometimes used 
horticulturally, due to its bright green stems, pretty 
pink flowers and red fruits, and tolerance to a wide 
range of light levels. 
 
Wildlife .  For several species of grouse, these are 
among the most important summer and early fall 
foods.  They are also  important to songbirds, 
chipmunks, mice, and other mammals.  Grouse 
huckleberry is not a favorable browse due to its small 
size.  However, small mammals, such as rabbits, 
browse freely on the plants. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Heath Family (Ericaceae).  Littleleaf 
huckleberry is a small, broom-like, U.S. native, 
deciduous shrub <5 dm tall.  The twigs are strongly 
angled and green.  The leaves are 8-15 mm, ovate, 
and serrate.  The flowers are solitary, urn-shaped, 
pink blossoms in the axils of the lowest leaves and 
youngest shoots.  The bright red berry is tiny, 3-6 
mm in diameter. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  Grouse huckleberry ranges from 
Alaska south to California, northern New Mexico, the 
Rocky Mountains, and Alberta.  It can be found from 
760-2300 m in the Pacific Northwest, from 1800-
2300 m in California, and from 2600-3800 m in 
Colorado.  This plant is rare in California. 
 
Habitat: Grouse huckleberry grows in rocky 
subalpine to alpine woods to open slopes.  It grows in 
acidic soils in both moist and dry sites, but is most 
common in sandy or gravelly loams and is always 
found in the understory of lodgepole pine ( Pinus 
contorta ) stands. 
 
Establishment 
Grouse huckleberry can be propagated by rhizome 
cuttings.  Seed collections: The berries ripen from 
late July through September.  After collection, place 
the berries in a plastic bag and keep them at 5 degrees 
C from a few days to a few weeks.  Clean seed by 
macerating and floating the pulp and unsound seed 
off the top.  Seed should be dried before storing.  One 
study reported best germination with a cold 
stratification with warm night temperatures of 10 
degrees C. Seed reportedly does not need 
pretreatment to germinate.

Seeds are very slow to sprout and seedlings are small 
and grow very slowly.  Fresh or stored seeds can be 
sown directly into flats or small pots (a salt shaker 
can be used for sowing).  Plant in a mixture of sand 
and peat moss.  Seedlings will begin to emerge in a 
month and will continue to emerge for a long period 
thereafter.  Transplant seedlin gs into larger pots 6 to 
7 weeks after emergence.  Pl ant outside after the first 
growing season.  Water plants, as needed. 
 
Management  
This plant grows very rapidly in moist, shady 
conditions.  If summer drought occurs, the plants 
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist.  
Traditional Resource Management of this plant 
includes the following: 1) occasional burning to 
stimulate new growth; 2) pruning the branches after 
picking the berries to stimulate new growth and fruit 
production the next growing season; and 3) 
ownership of huckleberry shrubs provides the basis 
for careful tending and sustainable yield of valed 
resources. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Cooke, S.S. 1997. A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon . Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society. 414p. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser. 1987. The reference 
manual of woody propagation: From seed to tissue 
culture. Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia. 239p. 
 
Crossley, J.A. 1974.  Vaccinium L. blueberry . Pp. 
840-843. In: Shopmeyer, C.S (tech. coord.), Seeds of 
the Woody Plants in the United States. USDA Forest 
Service, Agric. Handbook 450, Washington, D.C. 
883p. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973 . Ethnobotany of Western 
Washington . University of Washington Publ. in 
Anthropology 10(1). University of Washington Press, 
Seattle. 
 
Harbinger, L.J. 1964.  The importance of food plants 
in the maintenance of Nez Perce cultural identity .  Thesis, M.A. in Anthropology. Washington State 
University, Seattle. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972. 
Western edible wild plants . 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 156p. 
 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual: Higher 
plants of California . University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 1399p. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner. 1991.  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples. Nutrition, 
botany and use . Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology, Volume 8. Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers. 632p. 
 
Leigh, M. (August) 1997.  Grow your own native 
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and 
landscaping with western Washington native plants . 
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington 
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State 
University Cooperative Extension. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951. 
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits . Dover Publication, Inc., New York. 500p. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.  Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west . Museum of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 
200p. 
 
Peck, M.E. 1961 . A manual of the higher plants of 
Oregon . Binfords & Mort., Portland, Oregon. 936p. 
 
Romme, W.H. L. Bohland, C. Persichetty, & T. 
Caruso. 1995 . Germination ecology of some common 
forest herbs in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, 
U.S.A . Arctic and Alpine Research 27(4):407-412. 
 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D Haase. 1998. 
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants . 
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis. 
 
Tirmenstein, D.A. 1990.  Vaccinium scoparium. In 
Fischer, W.C. (comp.) The Fire Effects Information 
System. Accessed 970312.  USDA Forest Service, 
Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/Shrub/VAC
PAR. 
 
USDA Forest Service. 1988.  Range plant handbook. 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York. 816p. 
 
USDA NRCS. 2007.  The PLANTS web site . 
Accessed 070122. http://plants.usda.gov. National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Young, J.A. & C.G. Young. 1974. Collecting, 
processing, and germinating seeds of wildland 
plants . Timber Press, Portland. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens, form erly USDA NRCS NPDC, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
And 
Dale C. Darris, USDA NRCS Oregon PMC, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Davis, California 
 Edited: 070122 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.