Plant Guide
HOOKEDSPUR VIOLET 
Viola adunca Sm.  
Plant Symbol = VIAD  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  
 Hookedspur violet, Photo by Amy Bartow, Corva llis Plant Materials 
Center, 2008  
   
Alternate Names  
Alternate  Common Names: early blue violet, western blue 
violet, western long -spurred violet, western dog violet, 
hooked violet, sand violet  
Warning: The rhizomes, fruit, and seeds are poisonous  
to humans , and can cause upset stomach, intestinal 
problems, respiratory and circulatory depression.    
 
Uses  
Wildlife:  The Mardon skipper butterfly ( Polites mardon) 
uses the hookedspur violet as a spring- flowering nectar 
source, and is listed as a State of Washington Endangered 
Species and a Federal Candidate Species. Zerene f ritillary 
butterflies ( Speyeria zerene) use hookedspur violet as a 
larval host, and three subspecies of the Zerene  fritillary 
are listed on  the Federal Endangered Species Lis t, 
including the  Myrtle’ s silverspot  (ssp.  myrtleae ), the 
Behren’ s silverspot  (ssp.  behrensii ), and the Oregon 
s ilverspot  (ssp. hippolyta ). The Myrtle’s and Behren’ s 
s ilverspot are also classified as endangered in California, 
and the Oregon s ilverspot is classified as threatened in 
California, Oregon, and Washington  (Hayduck, 2012) 
Bees and other insects pollinate hookedspur violet, and 
are led to the flower’s nectaries by purple veins on the  flower’s lower petals. In addition, birds and mice use the 
seeds
 of hookedspur violet as a food source.  
 
Habitat Restoration :  Hookedspur violet is used for 
coastal butterfly habitat restoration in the Pacific 
Northwest, and is established by either seed or as plugs.  
Ornamental : Hookedspur violet is a popular ornamental 
plant for wildflower and butterfly gardens in the Pacific 
Northwest.   
 
Status  
Viola adunca  is listed as endangered by the State of 
Massachusetts . Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natu ral Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  
General : Hookedspur violet is a common, native, 
perennial forb of the violet family (Violaceae) with sho rt 
to elongate slender rhizomes . Plants typically grow to 
approximately 4 inches  in height . A branched stem from 
hairy rhizomes terminates in round to oval 2 inch leaves. 
Flowers are pale to deep violet with a white patch and 
purple veins at the base of th e lower three petals, which 
act as nectar guides for bees. The two side petals have 
white beards at the base and hooked spurs at the tips 
( Clark and Trelawny, 1998).  In this species, petaliferous 
flowers are produced in the spring while cleistogamous 
flowe rs are produced later in the season  ( Reznick and 
Voss , 2011) .  Seeds are  borne in unique pods and are 
explosively thrown some distance when pods burst.  
Hookedspur violet blooms in midspring  (Clark and 
Trelawny, 1998) .  
 
 Hookedspur  violet, Image Courtesy of USDA  PLANTS, 2012