Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAPLELEAF VIBURNUM  
Viburnum acerifolium  L. 
Plant Symbol = VIAC 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Dockmackie, guelder-rose, maple-leaved arrow-
wood, possum-haw, squash-berry 
 
Uses 
Deer, rabbits, mice, skunks,  ruffed grouse, ring-
necked pheasants, wild turk eys, and many species of 
songbirds eat the fruits of maple-leaf viburnum.  
Deer, moose, rabbits, and beavers eat the twigs, bark, 
and leaves.  The relatively low-growing plants 
provide good nesting and escape cover for birds and 
small mammals.   
 
Maple-leaf viburnum has long been cultivated for its 
attractive summer flower s and foliage; then the 
autumn leaves turn  rose-purple and contrast with the 
mature dark fruits.  The plants will thrive in moist 
soils and a range of light conditions but they are a 
good choice for dry soils in  deep shade.  They can be 
used along forest edges, streamsides, and lakeshores.   
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Native shrubs 0.5-2 m high, rhizomatous and forming  
 
thickets; twigs pubescent.  Leaves deciduous, ovate 
or orbicular, mostly deeply 3-lobed, 5-12 cm broad, 
coarsely toothed, lower surface minutely black-
dotted, nearly glabrous to thinly pubescent with 
stellate hairs.  Flowers white, bisexual, 4-6 mm wide, 
in upright, flat-topped clusters 4-7 cm wide.  Fruit 
berry-like (drupes), 6-8 mm long, nearly black, with a 
single stone.   
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Variation within the species:   
No varieties are currently  formally recognized within 
V. acerifolium  – previous named varieties within the 
species  have described vaguely discernible and 
widely overlapping geographic trends of 
morphological variation.   
     V. acerifolium  var. acerifolium  
    V. acerifolium  var. densiflorum  (Chapm.) McAtee 
    V. acerifolium  var. glabrescens  Rehd. 
    V. acerifolium  var. ovatum (Rehd.) McAtee 
 
Distribution: Widely distributed in eastern North 
America, New Brunswick (rare), Quebec, and 
Ontario south through Wisconsin, Illinois, and 
Arkansas to Florida and eastward into east Texas.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation  
Maple-leaf viburnum occurs in upland forests, 
hillsides, and ravine slopes.  It grows best in well-
drained, moist soils and is tolerant of acid soils.  It 
requires partial shading for optimum growth and 
development and occurs primarily in mid- to late-
seral communities.  It is a common understory 
species in beech-maple forests in the northeastern and 
midwestern United States; along the Gulf coastal 
plain, it is found in rich deciduous woods, often with 
white oak.  Flowering May-August; fruiting July-
October.   
 
Establishment 
Maple-leaf viburnum begins seed production at about 
2 years of age and produ ces abundant fruit every 
year.  Most seeds have an impermeable seedcoat and 
embryo dormancy that requires a warm-cold 
stratification sequence to be broken.  Vegetative 
reproduction through rhizomes is extensive.

Management 
Low- to moderate-severity fires top-kill maple-leaf 
viburnum.  It apparently survives fire by sprouting 
from underground rhizomes, but these are shallow 
and easily damaged and the species decreases with 
exposure to repeated fires.       
  
Viburnum leaf beetle: The viburnum leaf beetle 
( Pyrrhalta viburni ), native to Europe and Asia, was 
first encountered in North America in 1947, perhaps 
arriving earlier from Europe on nursery plants.  It 
received little notice until 1978, when it caused 
severe defoliation of ornamental viburnums in 
Ontario and Quebec.  It has now reached western 
New York and Maine and become a concern in urban 
landscapes and nurseries.   
 
The adult and the larva “skeletonize” leaves by 
feeding on the leaves betw een the midrib and larger 
veins.  Plants, which have been defoliated for 2-3 
consecutive years, may be ki lled.  The preferred host 
is  Viburnum opulus  and its selections; lesser damage 
is caused to  V. lantana and V. rafinesquianum , V. 
dentatum , V. acerifolium , and V. lentago .  Other 
species, particularly  V. rhytidophyllum and V. 
carlesii, are relatively unaffected.   
 
The entire life cycle of the viburnum leaf beetle takes 
about 8-10 weeks.  Larvae  hatch in early May and 
feed on the viburnum leav es throughout the larval 
period, which lasts 4-5 weeks.  The larvae pupate in 
the soil.  The adults (4.5-6.5 mm long, brown) appear 
by mid-July and continue eating the leaves, then mate 
and lay overwintering eggs on the twigs.  Egg-laying 
holes are in a straight line on the underside of the 
current season's growth.   
 
Chemical control of the viburnum leaf beetle is best 
applied to young larvae, because adults will fly away 
or drop to the ground if disturbed.  If over-wintering 
egg sites are found, affected wood should be pruned 
and destroyed before the eggs hatch.  Examine upper 
and lower leaf surfaces for  feeding larvae.  Potential 
biological control mechanisms are being studied.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Coladonato, M. 1993.   Viburnum acerifolium.  IN: 
W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  U.S.D. A, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory.  Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
 
Donoghue, M. 1980.   Flowering times in Viburnum .  
Arnoldia 40:2-22;  
 
Donoghue, M. 1983.   A preliminary analysis of 
phylogenetic relationships in Viburnum 
(Caprifoliaceae s.l.) .  Syst. Bot. 8:45-58.    
 
Egolf, D.R. 1962.  A cytological study of the genus 
Viburnum.  J. Arnold Arb. 43:132-172.   
 
Friedlander, B.P., Jr. 1999.   Voracious viburnum leaf 
beetle munches into Ithaca area .  Cornell Chronicle.  
<http://www.news.cornell.ed u/Chronicles/6.17.99/lea
f_beetle.html> 
 
Hauser, E.J.P. 1965.   Characteristics and distribution 
of Viburnum (Caprifoliaceae) in Georgia .  Bull. Ga. 
Acad. Sci. 23:(11 pages).   
 
Kessel, C. 2000.   Viburnum leaf beetle, Pyrrhalta 
viburni (Paykull), in the nursery and landscape .  
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Affairs, Ontario, Canada.  Web site.  
<http://www.gov.on.ca/OMAFRA/english/crops/facts
/vlb.htm>   
 
McAtee, W.L. 1956.   A review of the Nearctic 
Viburnum .  Published by the author, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.   
 
Thomson J. & O. Thomson 1981.   Leaf shapes of 
Viburnum acerifolium . Bull. Bot. Club Wisconsin 
12:4-5. 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 17jan01 jsp; 060818 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.