Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK 
HUCKLEBERRY  
Vaccinium membranaceum  
Dougl. ex Torr. 
Plant Symbol = VAME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Oregon Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Thinleaf huckleberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The nlaka'pamux of British Columbia, 
the Okanagan-Colville and Nez Perce of eastern 
Washington, the Plateau Indians of the Columbia 
River Gorge, the Kootenay of southeastern British 
Columbia, and the Flathead people of Montana 
(among others) really savored the black huckleberries 
(Turner et al. 1990; Hunn 1990; Hart 1976). 
 
Traditionally, black huckleberry  fruits were eaten raw 
and fresh, or were cooked, mashed, and dried in the 
sun as cakes.  The Nez Pe rce boiled the dried berries 
before they were eaten.  The Stoney (Assiniboin) 
sometimes mixed the berries in pemmican.  
Okanagan-Colville people used the ripening of black 
hawthorn fruits ( Crataegus douglasii   Lindl.) as an 
indicator of when black huckleberries would be ripe  in the mountains.  They ate huckleberries fresh with 
meat; partially dried  
 
them, crushed them and formed them into cakes; or 
fully dried them.  In British Columbia, the 
Kwakwaka'wakw cooked them with salmon roe and 
the Sechelt smoke-dried them, using black 
huckleberry branches as part of the fuel.  
 
A first fruits ceremony or feast is held by many 
nations in the Pacific Northwest, including the 
Columbia Plateau Indians, the Umatilla, the Yakima, 
the Warm Springs, and the Colville Confederated 
Tribes.  Huckleberry feasts
 are held in July or 
August, coinciding with the first berry harvest.  A 
thanksgiving ceremony is held at this time, with 
gratitude expressed through prayer, dancing, and 
celebration.  Feasts used to also be given at a girl's 
first berry picking or root gathering and at the first 
procuring of game by a boy.  These generally 
occurred when the child was ten years old.  At these 
feasts, they served food procured by the child along 
with other foods.  The elders praised and blessed the 
work of the child, giving the child the power to 
become great and successful later in life.  
 Used with permission of the publishers ©  Stanford University Abrams & Ferris (1960) 
 
After the hucklebe rry feast, the Sahaptin people of 
the Columbia Plateau would leave for a seasonal 
migration to the mountains to gather berries and to 
escape the summer heat.  Special baskets, called 
"Klikitat baskets" of cedar root decorated with bear 
grass and bitter cherry bark, were used for berry 
picking.  The surplus berries  were dried slowly over a 
fire that was kept smoldering in a rotten log (Filloon 
1952).  This method of drying the berries preserves 
the bulk of the Vitamin C content in the fruits 
(Norton et al. 1984:223).  
 
Each family from the Columbia Plateau area would 
gather four or five pecks (ca. four to five gallons) of 
dried berries for winter use (Perkins n.d. (1838-43), 
Book 1:10).  Hunn (1990)  estimates that there were 
28-42 harvest days in a year.  This resulted in a total 
annual harvest of 63.9-80. 2 kg/woman/year from the 
Tenino-Wishram area, an d 90 kg/woman/year from 
the Umatilla area.  The net result was a huckleberry 
harvest yield of 31 kcal/person/day in the Tenino-
Wishram area and 42 kcal/person/day for the 
Umatilla area (Hunn 1981: 130-131).   Vaccinium 
species contain 622 Kcal per 100 gm berries, with 
15.3 gm carbohydrate, 0.5 gm fat, 0.7 gm protein and 
83.2 gm water (Hunn 1981:130-131).

Huckleberries are used for a lavender or purple 
natural dye in the twined corn husk bags made by the 
Nez Perce; the cornhusks ar e dyed with the juice of 
the berries.  The Nlaka'pamux sometimes used the 
leaves in smoking mixture (Turner 1990). 
Other Uses : Vaccinium membranaceum  is the most 
highly regarded of the huckleberry species within its 
range, especially in British Columbia and 
neighboring areas (Turner 1975, 1978).  People of all 
cultures love these huckleberries.  Today, the berries 
are eaten fresh, baked in pancakes, pies, and muffins, 
canned, frozen, or made into jams and jellies.  Berries 
are usually picked in late Ju ly or August.  The leaves 
can be used fresh or dried to make a tea.   
 
Huckleberry leaves and finely chopped stems contain 
quinic acid, a former therapeutic for gout said to 
inhibit uric acid formation but never widely used 
because of mixed clinical results (Moore 1979).  The 
leaves have been widely used to lower or modify 
blood sugar levels, particularly in Europe.  Taken on 
regular basis, huckleberry tea will gradually help 
alleviate both glycosuria and hyperglycemia and has 
a benign but useful effect as an adjunct treatment to 
diabetes mellitus. 
 
Wildlife : Huckleberry fruits are an important food 
source for songbirds, gulls, cranes, pigeons, turkeys, 
and upland game birds.  Many mammals, from black 
bears to mice, feed on red  huckleberries.  Herbivores 
graze on the entire plant; it  appears to be a favorite 
browse of deer.  Huckleberries and blueberries form a 
major part of the grizzly and black bear's diet in late 
summer and fall.  Grouse  feast on the leaves and 
blossoms.  The fruits, twigs, and foliage are eaten by 
foxes, opossums, raccoons, squirrels, deer, moose, 
caribou, elk, pikas, cottontail rabbits, and skunks. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General : Huckleberry Family (Ericaceae).  Black 
huckleberry is an erect, deci duous shrub 0.1-2 m tall.  
The leaves, up to 5 cm long,  are elliptical with a long 
pointed tip and a finely serrated margin.  The bell-
shaped flowers are creamy-pink, and are found singly 
on the underside of the twigs.  The berries are large, 
spherical, sweet, and dark pu rple or black.  In some 
forms the berries are covered with a waxy bloom; 
others have shiny dark berries. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  Black huckleberry is found in 
thickets and on Montana slopes in coniferous woods 
at elevations from 1000-1800 m.  It grows in sandy or 
gravelly soils, ranging from moist to dry growing 
conditions.   Vaccinium membranaceum grows from 
British Columbia to Alberta and Ontario, north to the 
Mackenzie Delta area, south to California in the 
Klamath Range and North Coast Range, and east to 
Michigan. 
 
Establishment 
Black huckleberry requires moist and acidic soils to 
become established.   Vaccinium membranaceum  is 
very difficult to establish.  
 
Cuttings : Take cuttings from rhizomes in early spring 
or late summer and autumn.  Dig up the rhizomes and 
cut them into lengths of 10  cm or longer.  Place the 
cuttings in vermiculite at 21 °C.  Once the roots are 
established and meristematic activity is initiated, the 
small cuttings may be moved to individual pots with 
a peat:sand soil mixture (1:1) potting soil.  The soil 
should be kept fairly moist.  When plants are the size 
desired, plant in soils that  are fairly acidic, or add the 
peat-sand mixture to the soil before planting.  Plants 
must be kept well watered to become established.  
Plants establish well in partial shade. 
 
Seeds: Collect the berries in the fall and clean by 
running them through a blender with dull blades, 
straining the pulp with a sieve, and spreading them to 
dry on a paper towel.  Most authors believe that the 
seeds require no stratification or scarification 
(Haeussler et al. 1990; Link 1993; Minore and Smart 
1978).  However, Albright (1996) found poor 
germination without stratification and recommends 
over-wintering of seeds in flats outside.  Seeds 
germinate within 16-21 days of sowing.  Germination 
percentages can be improved by sowing the seed on 
moist peat in a growth chamber at 18°
 C (for 12 hours 
a day) and 13° C (for 12 hours a day).  Seven weeks 
after germination warm the growth chamber to 20 ° C 
(for 14 hours a day) and 14° C (for 10 hours a day).  
Fertilize the seedlings after they are 10 weeks old and 
transplant into a peat-sand soil mixture (1:1) in 
individual pots after 12 weeks (Minore and Smart 
1978).  The soil should be kept fairly moist. 
 
Management 
Huckleberry plants grow very rapidly in moist, shady 
conditions.  If summer drought occurs, the plants 
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist.

Traditional Resource Management: Management of 
this plant includes the following: 1) occasional 
burning to stimulate new growth; 2) pruning the 
branches after picking the berries to stimulate new 
growth and fruit production the next growing season; 
and 3) ownership of black huckleberry shrubs 
provides the basis for careful tending and sustainable 
yield of valued resources.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available at some native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  
 
References 
Abrams, L & R.S. Ferris 1960.   Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states .  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Albright, M. 1996.   Greenhouse Manager .  USDI, 
National Park Service, Olympic National Park, Port 
Angeles, Washington.  Personal communication. 
 
Cooke, S. S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon .  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Crossley, J.A. 1974.   Vaccinium  L. blueberry .  Pages 
840-843, IN: Shopmeyer, C.S. (tech. coord.) Seeds of 
the woody plants in the United States.  USDA, FS, 
Agric. Handbook 450. Washington, D.C.  883 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. & C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987.   The reference 
manual of woody plant propagation: From seed to 
tissue culture .  Varsity Press, Athens, Georgia.  329 
pp. 
 
Filloon, R. M. 1952.   Huckleberry pilgrimage .  
Pacific Discovery 5(3):4-13. 
 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973.   Ethnobotany of western 
Washington .  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Haeussler, S., D. Coates, & J. Mather 1990.  
Autecology of common plants in British Columbia: A 
literature review .  British Columbia Ministry of 
Forests.  272 pp. 
 
Harbinger, L. J. 1964 .  The importance of food plants 
in the maintenance of Nez Perce cultural identity.  
Master of Arts in Anthropology.  Washington State 
University, Pullman, Washington.  73 pp. 
 
Hickman, J. C. (ed.) 1993.   The Jepson manual.  
Higher plants of California .  University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California.  1399 pp. 
 
Hitchcock, C. L. & A. Cronquist 1973  . Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest. An illustrated manual .  University 
of Washington Press, Seattle and London.  730 pp. 
 
Hunn, E. S. 1990 .  Nch'i-Wana "The Big River" Mid-
Columbia Indians and their land .  University of 
Washington Press, Seattle and London.  378 pp. 
 
Hunn, E. S. 1981.   On the relative contribution of 
men and women to subsistence among hunter-
gatherers of the Columbia Plateau: A comparison 
with ethnographic atlas summaries .  J. of 
Ethnobiology 1:124-34. 
 
Isaacson, R. T. 1993.   Anderson horticultural 
library's source list of plants and seeds . Anderson 
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries.  Minnesota Landscape Arboretum. 261 pp. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. a& N. J. Turner 1991.   Traditional 
plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  
Nutrition, botany, and use. Food and nutrition in 
history and Anthropology Volume  8.  Gordon and 
Breach Science Publishers.  632 pp. 
 
Leigh, M.A. 1997.   Grow your own native landscape: 
A guide to identifying, propagating, and landscaping 
with western Washington native plants .  
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington 
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State 
University Cooperative Extension. 
 
Link, E. (ed.) 1993.   Native plant propagation 
techniques for national parks: Interim guide .  USDA, 
NRCS, Rose Lake Plant Material Center, East 
Lansing, Michigan.  240 pp. 
 
Minore, D. & A.W. Smart 1978.  Frost tolerance in 
seedlings of Vaccinium membranaceum, Vaccinium 
globulare, and Vaccinium deliciosum .  Northwest 
Science 52(3):179-185. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.   Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west .  Museum of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico.  200 pp.

Moser, C. L. 1993.  Native American basketry of 
Southern California .  Riverside Museum Press, 
Riverside, California.  155 pp. 
 
Norton, H.H., E.S. Hunn, C.S. Martinsen, & P.B. 
Keely 1984 .  Vegetable food products of the foraging 
economies of the Pacific Northwest.   Ecology of 
Food and Nutrition 14:219-228. 
 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D. Haase 1998 .  
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants .  
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Stevens, M.L. & R. Vanbianchi 1993.   Restoring 
wetlands in Washington.  A guidebook for wetland 
restoration, planning and implementation .  
Washington State Department of Ecology, 
Publication #93-17, Olympia, Washington. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson & 
A.Z. York 1990  . Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia .  Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie 
1983 .  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island .  British Columbia, Provincial 
Museum Occasional Paper No. 24,  165 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982   Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island .  British 
Columbia, Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery 
Paper No. 2. 99 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.   Food plant of British Columbia 
Indians. Part II.  Interior Peoples . British Columbia 
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.   Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians.  Part I. Coastal Peoples . British Columbia 
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 34.  Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M.L. Stevens, T. Sullivan & S. 
Hashisaki 1994.   A citizen's guide to wetland 
restoration .  U.S. EPA, Region 10, Seattle, 
Washington.  71 pp.  
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Dale C. Darris 
USDA, NRCS, Oregon Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Edited: 19sep00 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.