Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HIGHBUSH 
BLUEBERRY  
Vaccinium corymbosum L. 
Plant Symbol = VACO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Northern highbush blueberry,  southeastern highbush 
blueberry, Maryland highbush blueberry, black 
highbush blueberry, American blueberry, New Jersey 
blueberry, rabbiteye blueberry, swamp blueberry, tall 
huckleberry, mayberry, whortleberry  
 
Uses 
Highbush blueberry is the major blueberry of 
commerce.  It is extensively cultivated in New 
Jersey, Michigan, North Ca rolina, and Washington 
and to a lesser extent in Ge orgia, Florida, Indiana, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, Massachusetts, 
British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Nova Scotia.  
In 1989, there were over 100,000 acres in 
commercial fruit production in North America.  More 
than 50 cultivars highbush blueberry have been 
developed, primarily based on selections for 
commercially valuable fr uit characteristics and 
seasonality.  Good summaries of information relating 
to commercial fruit produ ction are available (see 
Reiger 2000; Garrison 1998).  A few selections are 
used in landscaping, especially where they might be 
planted in wet places and  to attract wildlife.   
 
The berries are eaten raw, smoke-dried, sun-dried, 
boiled, and baked -- in a wide variety of culinary 
settings.  They have one of the highest concentrations  of iron of the temperate fruits.  The fruits provide 
important summer and early fall food for numerous 
species of game birds, songbirds, and mammals.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution 
@ PLANTS 
General: Heath family (Ericaceae).  Native shrubs 2-
3(-4) meters tall, crown-forming, forming dense 
colonies, the twigs warty and yellow-green, glabrous.  
Leaves deciduous, altern ate, simple, narrow to 
broadly elliptic or ovate, 3.8-8.2 cm long, pubescent 
at least on the veins beneath, slightly waxy above, the 
edges smooth and ciliate to toothed.  Flowers 8-10 in 
a cluster, 6-12 mm long, urn-shaped, white, with 5 
petals.  Fruits berries are 5-12 mm wide, blue to blue-
black and many-seeded.  The common name refers to 
the relatively tall stature of these plants.   
 
Variation within the species : The highbush blueberry 
complex is highly variable and includes diploids, 
tetraploids, hexaploids, and various hybrid 
combinations.  Recent stud ies (Vander Kloet in 1980 
and 1988) have recommended treating the complex 
very broadly, using only the single name  V. 
corymbosum , but not all authors have accepted that 
(for example, see Uttall 1986, 1987).  As treated in 
the PLANTS database, the complex includes a group 
of interrelated species that have generally been 
recognized as “highbush” blueberries – these 
species* (or hybrids), with synonyms, are listed 
below.   
 
* Vaccinium X atlanticum  Bicknell 
* Vaccinium corymbosum  L. 
      synonym:  Vaccinium constablaei  Gray 
  * Vaccinium formosum  Andr. 
      synonym:  Vaccinium australe  Small 
* Vaccinium fuscatum  Ait.  
      synonym:  Vaccinium arkansanum  Ashe 
      synonym  Vaccinium atrococcum  (Gray) Heller 
      synonym  Vaccinium fuscatum  Aiton 
*Vaccinium simulatum  Small 
*Vaccinium virgatum  Ait. 
      synonym:  Vaccinium amoenum  Aiton 
      synonym:  Vaccinium ashei  Reade

Highbush blueberry (V. corymbosum) hybridizes with 
one of the “lowbush” blueberries ( V. angustifolium 
Ait.).  Hybrids used in commercial fruit production 
are  V. corymbosum  X V. darrowi (southern highbush 
blueberry), ( V. arboreum  X V. darrowi ) x V. 
corymbosum  (pollen donor), and southern highbush 
blueberry hybrids X  V. simulatum.   
 
Distribution : Widespread in eastern North America, 
from Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, and 
Ontario, Maine to Wisconsin, southward to South 
Carolina and Georgia and along the Gulf coast to 
Arkansas, Louisiana, east Texas, and Oklahoma.  It 
has been introduced outside of its natural range for 
commercial berry production in Wisconsin, 
Washington, British Columbia, and New Brunswick.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Adaptation 
Highbush blueberry grows best and most commonly 
in moist or wet peat of moderate to high acidity – in 
and around marshes, swamps, and lakes, often with 
extended flooding, as well as on floodplains, 
sheltered slopes, and ravines.  It also occurs in drier 
areas – dunes and barrier beaches, rocky hillsides, 
oak woods, and pine woods.  It occurs as a dominant 
or co-dominant on Appalachian "heath balds."  All of 
these are more or less open sites, and because of its 
shade intolerance, highbush blueberry can be 
eliminated as shading increas es with overstory cover.  
Flowering (February-)March -June, sporadically in 
the southern portion of its range; fruiting (April-
)May-October, about 62 days after flowering.   
 
Establishment 
Highbush blueberry produces abundant fruit every 
year.  Bees are the primary pollinator.  The seeds 
may be widely dispersed in bird and mammal 
droppings, but germination success can be reduced 
up to 15% after passing through an animal gut.  In the 
southern portion of its range, highbush blueberry 
seeds have thick seed coats and require cold 
stratification before germination.  Those from 
northern regions produce thinner seed coats and 
germinate in the autumn after dispersal.   
  
Some reports describe vigorous sprouting from the 
root-crown in highbush blueberry after top-kill by 
fire or disturbance, while others note that sprouting is 
uncommon.  This perhaps reflects the variability (and 
perhaps the taxonomic uncertainty) that exists within 
the species complex.  Plants also have been noted to 
occasionally produce root  sprouts 1-2 meters away 
from the parent.      
Management 
Seeds or cuttings can propagate plants of highbush 
blueberry.  Ideal soil for cultivation is moist, high in 
organic matter, highly acidic (4.5-5.5), and well 
drained.  The plants grow in full sun to partial shade, 
but those in open sites produce more flowers and 
have brighter fall foliage color.  Highbush blueberry 
(
V. corymbosum ) is self-fertile, but cross-pollination 
increases fruit set and results in larger, earlier berries 
with more seeds (see Agriculture Western Australia 
2000).  Other species of the complex are partially or 
completely self-incompatible.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agriculture Western Australia 2000.   Bee pollination 
benefits for blueberry crops.  Web site.   
<http://www.agric.wa.gov.au/programs/dairy/apicult
ure/blueberry.htm#ref10>   
 
Camp, W.H. 1945.   The North American blueberries 
with notes on other groups of Vacciniaceae .  
Brittonia 5:203-275.     
 
Garrison, N.  1998.   Descriptions of blueberry 
varieties in trial conducted by Nancy Garrison .  
Master Gardeners of Santa Clara County Online.  
Univ. of California Cooperative Extension, Urban 
Horticulture Program.  
<http://www.mastergardeners.org/recommend/blueva
r.html>  
 
Reiger, M.  2000.   Mark’s fruit crops.  Univ. of 
Georgia, Dept. of Horticulture.  Web site.  
<http://www.uga.edu/hortcrop/rieger/index.html>  
 
Uchytil, R.J. 1993.   Vaccinium corymbosum .  IN: 
W.C. Fischer (compiler).   The fire effects information 
system  [Data base].  U.S.D.A., Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire 
Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/> 
  
Uttal, L.J. 1986.   Updating the genus Vaccinium 
(Ericaceae) in West Virginia .  Castanea 51:197-201.

Uttal, L.J. 1987.  The genus Vaccinium L. 
(Ericaceae) in Virginia.  Castanea 52:231-255.   
 
Vander Kloet, S.P. 1980.   The taxonomy of the 
highbush blueberry, Vaccinium corymbosum .  Canad. 
J. Bot. 58:1187-1201.   
 
Vander Kloet, S.P. 1988.   The genus Vaccinium in 
North America .  Research Branch, Agriculture 
Canada, Publ. 1828.   
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 17jan01 jsp;060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.