Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NANNYBERRY 
Viburnum lentago  L. 
Plant Symbol = VILE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Sheepberry, wild raisin, sweet viburnum, nanny-
berry 
 
Uses 
Nannyberry is shade-tolerant species useful in 
landscape plantings as shrub borders, taller barriers, 
hedges, and windbreaks.  It produces good seasonal 
displays of flowers, fruits,  and fall leaf color and the 
fruit are eaten by many speci es of birds and wildlife.  
Cultivars are not commonly available. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Native, multi-stemmed shrubs or small trees growing 
to 9 m high, somewhat open at maturity and leggy at 
the base, the crown irregular to rounded, often 
suckering at the base; bark dark gray to black, 
forming a pattern of small blocks.  Leaves are 
deciduous, simple, opposite, elliptic-obovate to ovate, 
5-10 cm long, long-pointed, glabrous or nearly so on 
both sides, the petiole with a wavy-winged margin, 
margins finely toothed; mature foliage dark glossy,  green, becoming deep maroon to red in the fall.  
Flowers are small, all bisexual, creamy white, in flat-
topped clusters 5-12 cm wide.  Fruit in hanging 
clusters, berry-like (a drupe), oval to nearly round, 
10-15 mm long, changing from green to yellow, pink, 
rose and finally to blue-black, sweet and edible, with 
an odor of wet sheep wool when ripe and rotting, 
with a single, smooth, nearly flat stone. 
  
 ©
 R.A. Seelig Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Distribution 
Across northeastern North America, from New 
Brunswick and Quebec to  Saskatchewan, south to 
Colorado and Nebraska (rare), Missouri (extinct), 
West Virginia, and Pennsylvania, rare in the 
Appalachians in Maryland and Virginia and 
apparently disjunct in Georgia.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  A detailed 
distribution map is also provided by Northern Prairie 
Wildlife Research Center (2000).   
 
Adaptation  
Common habitats for nannyberry are low woods, 
swamp borders, and rich valleys at or near 
streambanks, usually in rich loam to clay-loam soil.  
It also occurs in moist soil of wooded slopes and 
other upland sites, sometime s even in sandy or rocky 
soil.  It is a shade-tolerant understory shrub, but 
reaches relatively larger si ze in partial openings or 
along edges.  Flowering occurs in May-June and 
fruits in July–September.   
 
Establishment 
Reproduction is primarily by seed.  Suckering from 
the base can replace and add to main stems.  The 
“leggy” habit sometimes allows lower branches to 
fall over – they root where touching the ground.   
 
Management 
Nannyberry is one of the more shade-tolerant woody 
plants, but it also grows well in open sites.  It is 
tolerant of both moist and dry soils.  It is easily 
transplanted and established and can be propagated 
by cuttings.  Although the growth habit is primarily a 
multi-stemmed shrub, it can be maintained as a small 
tree by pruning stems and removing basal suckers.   
  
Pests & Potential Problems 
Nannyberry is susceptible to powdery mildew where 
air circulation is not good.  Infected plants are not 
killed but the leaves can be discolored and disfigured 
in late summer and fall.

Viburnum leaf beetle.  The viburnum leaf beetle 
( Pyrrhalta viburni ), native to Europe and Asia, was 
first encountered in North America in 1947, perhaps 
arriving earlier from Europe on nursery plants.  It 
received little notice until 1978, when it caused 
severe defoliation of ornamental viburnums in 
Ontario and Quebec.  It has now reached western 
New York and Maine and become a concern in urban 
landscapes and nurseries.   
 
The adult and the larva “skeletonize” leaves by 
feeding on the leaves betw een the midrib and larger 
veins.  Plants, which have been defoliated for 2-3 
consecutive years, may be ki lled.  The preferred host 
is  Viburnum opulus  and its selections; lesser damage 
is caused to  V. lantana and V. acerifolium , V. 
dentatum , V. lentago , and V. rafinesquianum .  Other 
species, particularly  V. rhytidophyllum and V. 
carlesii, are relatively unaffected.   
 
The entire life cycle of the viburnum leaf beetle takes 
about 8-10 weeks.  Larvae  hatch in early May and 
feed on the viburnum leav es throughout the larval 
period, which lasts 4-5 weeks.  The larvae pupate in 
the soil.  The adults (4.5-6.5 mm long, brown) appear 
by mid-July and continue eating the leaves, then mate 
and lay over-wintering eggs on the twigs.  Egg-laying 
holes are in a straight line on the underside of the 
current season's growth.   
 
Chemical control of the viburnum leaf beetle is best 
applied to young larvae, because adults will fly away 
or drop to the ground if disturbed.  If over-wintering 
egg sites are found, affected wood should be pruned 
and destroyed before the eggs hatch.  Examine upper 
and lower leaf surfaces for  feeding larvae.  Potential 
biological control mechanisms are being studied. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Brumbaugh, J.H. & A.T. Guard 1957.  A study of 
evidences of introgression among Viburnum lentago, 
V. prunifolium and V. rufidulum based on leaf 
characteristics (Abstr.).  Proc. Indiana Acad. Sci. 
66:300.  
 
Donoghue, M. 1980.   Flowering times in Viburnum .  
Arnoldia 40:2-22.  
 
Donoghue, M. 1983.   A preliminary analysis of 
phylogenetic relationships in Viburnum 
(Caprifoliaceae s.l.) .  Syst. Bot. 8:45-58.    
 
Egolf, D.R. 1962.  A cytological study of the genus 
Viburnum.  J. Arnold Arb. 43:132-172.   
 
Friedlander, Jr, B.P. 1999.   Voracious viburnum leaf 
beetle munches into Ithaca area .  Cornell Chronicle.  
<http://www.news.cornell.ed u/Chronicles/6.17.99/lea
f_beetle.html> 
 
Hauser, E.J.P. 1965.   Characteristics and distribution 
of Viburnum (Caprifoliaceae) in Georgia .  Bull. Ga. 
Acad. Sci. 23:(11 pages).   
 
Jones, T.H. 1983.   A revision of the genus Viburnum 
sect. Lentago (Caprifoliaceae) .  Ph.D. diss., North 
Carolina State Univ., Raleigh, North Carolina. 
 
Kessel, C. 2000.   Viburnum leaf beetle, Pyrrhalta 
viburni (Paykull), in the nursery and landscape .  
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Affairs, Ontario, Canada.  Web site.  
<http://www.gov.on.ca/OMAFRA/english/crops/facts
/vlb.htm>   
 
McAtee, W.L. 1956.   A review of the Nearctic  
Viburnum .  Published by the author, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.   
  
Niering W.A., G.D. Dreyer, F.E. Egler, & J.P.J. 
Anderson 1986.   Stability of a Viburnum lentago 
shrub community after 30 years .  Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club 113:23-27.   
 
Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center 2000.   
Viburnum lentago.  NPWRC, Biological Resources 
Division, U.S. Geological Survey, Jamestown, North 
Dakota.  Web site. 
<http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/ resource/othrdata/plntg
uid/species/vibulent.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina

Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 17jan01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.