Plant Guide
COWPEA 
Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.  
Plant Symbol = VIUN 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, NJ  
 
Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata). (Photo by Christopher Sheahan, USDA -
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center)  
Alternate Names 
Alternate  Common Names: blackeyed  pea,  field pea, 
southern pea , crowder pea,  caupi, catjang, yardlong bean  
 
Alternate  Scientific Names:  
Vigna sinensis (L.) Savi , 
Uses  
Commercial  crop:  Cowpea  is  commonly cultivated as a 
nutritious and highly palatable food source in the southern 
United States , Middle East, Africa, Asia, and throughout 
the tropics and subtropics. The seed is reported to contain 
24%  crude p rotein, 53 % carbohydrates, and 2 % fat (FAO , 
2012 ). The leaves and flowers can also be consumed.  
   
Forage:  Cowpea  can be used as forage, hay, and silage. 
When used as forage , it should only be lightly grazed 
after flowering  (FAO, 2012). If there are several buds left 
after defoliation, the plant will regenerate. When used as 
silage, it can be mixed with sorghum, maize, or molasses 
to provide sugar for fermentation (FAO,  2012).  In some 
Africa n countries , several varieties of Cowpea has  been 
grown together  for both food and feed (Cook et al., 2005).  
 
Cover crop/green manure : Cowpea  is  a quick growing 
cover crop that produces 2,500– 4,500 lb/ac re/yr of dry 
matter,  while providing  100– 150 lb/ acre o f N to the 
subsequent crop (Clark , 2007). Its long taproot and wide, 
vegetative spread make it an excellent plant for erosion  prevention and weed suppression. Allelopathic 
compounds in the plant may help to suppress weeds 
(Clark, 2007). 
It has also been used successfully as 
groundcover in orchards a nd intercropped with cash crops 
such as cotton.   
 
Wildlife:  Cowpea  is  eaten by deer as forage , and is 
commonly used in food plots for deer. A  variety of birds , 
including wild turkey,  eat  the seeds and the plant can be 
used  by quail as cover.  Some varieties  of  cowpea  are used 
specifically for wildlife purposes (Ball et al., 2007).   
 
Ethnobotany : Cowpea  has been a staple crop and 
important protein source for many cultures since the 
Roman Empire. It was the most commonly cultivated 
bean used for human consumpt ion in the Old World 
(Allen and Allen, 1981). Roman writers such as Pliny 
referred to it as phaseolus. Thomas Jefferson is credited 
with first using the name cowpea. Today the crop is still 
widely popular, and good harvests are critical to ensure 
adequate  levels of protein in the diets of populations in 
India and East Asia (Allen and Allen, 1981).  
 
Status  
Cowpea  is an introduced species in the United States.  It is 
native to tropical and subtropical regions. It  can grow 
both wild and cultivated.  Please  consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  
General : Cowpea  is a w arm-season, annual le gume that 
exhibits a wide range  of growth habits. Varieties may be 
short and bushy, prostrate,  or tall and  vine -like.  Canopy 
heights can be 2 –3 feet, depending on the variety.   
 
The upright stems are hollow and hairless, roughly 0.4 or 
2/5 inch ( 1 cm) wide . The stems of twining varieties are 
thinner.  The 4 inch ( 10 cm) long and 3 inch ( 8 cm) wide 
l eaves are three -parted,  egg-shaped,  and hairless . The two 
lateral leaves are asymmetrical, and the terminal leaf is 
symmetrical.  The plant also has extra floral n ectaries, 
small pores on its leaves and stems  of leaves that release 
nectar  and attract beneficial insects.   
 
The branchless inflorescence produces stemmed flowers, 
1 inch ( 2.5 cm) long,  along the main axis. The flowers can 
be purple or  white.  The lowermost whorl of leaves under 
the flower is bell- shaped. The lobes of the flower are 
fused, and the lateral petals are shorter than the upper 
petal.