Plant Guide       
 
WOOLLYPOD VETCH  
Vicia villosa  Roth ssp. varia 
(Host) Corb.  
Plant Symbol = VIVIV8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
 
 Alternate Names 
Hairy vetch, winter vetch, woolly vetch 
 
Uses 
Range Improvement: Woollypod vetch is particularly 
valuable for improving the quantity and quality of 
annual range in the Mediterra nean-like climatic zone.  
 
Noxious Weed Control: Woollypod vetch has been 
used successfully to suppress such weeds as star 
thistle and medusahead, an unpalatable grass 
invading annual range.  Because Woollypod vetch 
can be established from direct seeding without seed 
preparation, it offers a very practical method of weed 
control on rough terrain. 
 
Erosion Control and Beautification : Woollypod 
vetch has been widely used for revegetating critical 
areas and stabilizing soils on roadbanks, channel 
banks, dikes, and dams.  In these situations, it has 
added attractiveness because of the beauty of its 
flowers.  
 
Wildlife : Woollypod vetch seed is utilized by most 
seed-eating birds.  It is es pecially attractive to doves, 
quail and pigeons.  The vine-like growth provides 
excellent nesting cover for many ground-nesting  birds.  It is especially valuable for pheasant habitat 
along ditches and fence lines in cropland areas.  
 
Covercrop
: Woollypod vetch may be used as a 
substitute for purple vetch in cover crop and green 
manure seedings.  Because it matures relatively early 
and reseeds well, Woollypod vetch can be used 
where a perpetuating annual cover is desired.  
 
Ethnobotanical Uses : Woollypod vetch, part of the 
Fabaceae family was used as a dematological and 
gastrointestinal aid taken for sores and stomach pain 
respectively.  
 © William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS website. 
 
Description 
Legume Family (Fabaceae).  Woollypod vetch is an 
introduced, self-seeding, cool season annual legume 
similar in appearance to other annual and perennial 
vetches.  The leaves are compound and each usually 
possess 10-20 narrowly oval, pointed leaflets.  
Flowers are born in long clusters called racemes.  
Each raceme usually has 5-15  flowers.  The color of 
the flowers is pinkish-pur ple compared with the 
reddish-purple of purple vetch.  The growth form of 
woollypod vetch is semi-prostrate with trailing stems 
up to three feet long.  It will climb on a any available 
support, such as brush or the stiff stems of grass and 
grain. 
 
Distribution 
Woollypod vetch is found in the California Floristic 
Province and throughout the re st of the United States.  
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation

Woollypod vetch performs well on light to heavy 
textured soils when the annual rainfall is 14 inches or 
more.  It can be grown in low rainfall desert areas 
when irrigation water is applied.  It is adapted to 
moderately acid to moderately alkaline soils.  In 
California, it can grow in the coastal and central 
valleys up to about 3000 feet.  In other parts of the 
United States, it grows along roadsides, fields and 
urban waste areas.  
 
Establishment 
A seedbed should be prepared for the best 
establishment of Woollypod vetch.  Drilling at one 
inch depth with or without seedbed preparation has 
been superior to broadcast seeding.  All broadcast 
seeding should be harrowed or lightly disked after 
planting.  Woollypod vetch  is drilled 12 pounds per 
acre and broadcast at 16 pounds per acre.  Seed 
should be inoculated with  the proper bacteria before 
planting.  
 
Management 
Range Improvement : As forage, Woollypod vetch is 
best used when mature.  Deferment insures maximum 
production and seed set for perpetuation.  The high 
protein content of mature, dry Woollypod vetch 
contrasts with the lower nutritive value of dry annual 
range.  Woollypod vetch provides high quality feed 
in the summer and early fall when native annual 
range requires supplementation.  On most soils in 
California, a significant response is obtained when 
Woollypod vetch is fertilized with phosphorus and 
sulfur.  A general recommendation is to fertilize with 
200-500 pounds per acre of single superphosphate at 
the time of planting with a similar application every 
two or three years following.  Treble superphosphate 
can be used in areas where no sulfur deficiency 
exists.  
 
Noxious Weed Control : Studies have shown that the 
keys to weed suppression using Woollypod vetch are 
annual fetilization with phosphorus and sulfur, 
deferred grazing, and broadcast seeded at a rate of 20 
pounds per acre. 
 
Critical Area Stabilization : Woollypod vetch can be 
broadcast seeded at 15 pounds per acre and drilled at 
10 pounds per acre with an annual grass. The 
following seeding rates for grasses in the mixture are 
recommended: Blando brome- broadcast-seeded at 9 
pounds per acre and drilled at 6 pounds per acre; 
Cucamonga broadcasted-seeded at 25 pounds per 
acre and drilled at a rate of 16 pounds per acre.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Woollypod vetch stands have been injured by a 
disease known as black stem, Micospharella ssp. in 
certain areas along the North Coast in California. The 
effects have been sporadic.  Some years no damage is 
observed.  If the disease is suspected, the seed should 
be treated with a fungicide at the time of planting.  In 
stands where it occurs, a one year rotation with 
another crop will generally destroy the residue which 
harbors the pathogen.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Lana’ Cultivar- is a commercially available variety 
of Woollypod vetch.  Lana is the earliest maturing 
vetch available.  It blooms about two weeks earlier 
than hairy vetch and produces a moderate amount of 
hard seed.  These character istics are responsible for 
the ability of Lana to perpetuate under range 
conditions.  Lana was selected and developed at 
Pleasanton by the USDA Soil Conservation Service 
Plant Materials Center in cooperation with the 
University of California Agronomy Department, 
Davis, from material introduced from Turkey in 
1937.
  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
USDA NRCS. 1973.  Management and uses of 
woollypod vetch . Berkeley, California. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, and Reina O’Beck. California State 
Office, Davis, California. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California 
 Edited: 28Mar2005 ro; 23sep05 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national  origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, larg e print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
 To file a complaint of discrimina tion, write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.