Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ANNUAL FESCUE 
Vulpia myuros (L.) K.C. Gmel.
Plant Symbol = VUMY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS California State Office 
and Lockeford Plant Materials Center, California 
  
Alternative Names 
Rat-tail fescue, foxtail fescue 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Annual fescue has an excellent 
fibrous root system that provides soil stabilization on 
natural and man-made disturbed areas.  It will 
provide initial erosion control and as the site 
improves in condition, will allow climax species to 
invade.  
 
Cover Crop: Annual fescue has proved to be a 
valuable cover crop in almonds and other crops 
where a shorter height is required and mowing is 
frequent.  It increases water penetration in problem 
orchards and provides a self-perpetuating cover.  In 
comparison trials, it took  more abuse than Blando 
brome (Bromus mollis ) and produced less residue.  
 
Wildlife: Its early green growth provides some value 
for wildlife food, nesting and good cover in the 
spring season.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
© 2002 James B. Gratiot CalPhotos 
 
Weediness 
Annual fescue is irregularly  scattered in the West in 
wasteland, fields, and over grazed areas.  This plant 
may become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site.  Please consult the Related Web Sites on the 
Plant Profile for this species. 
 
Description 
General : Grass Family (Poaceae).  Annual fescue is 
an introduced, short, aggressive, early maturing cool 
season annual grass with many fibrous roots.  It has 
excellent seedling vigor and emerges in fall very 
soon after the first rain.  It matures seed earlier than 
most annual grasses, assuring perpetuation.  It can 
tolerate soil problems of acidity, serpentine, and low 
fertility.  This species is native to Asia and Europe. 
 
Distribution : This species can be found in California, 
Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, Texas 
and in several localities on the East Coast.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Annual fescue is a drought tolerant grass that will 
persist and provide good erosion control cover with 
an annual precipitation of at  least 25cm. (10 in.), or 
on areas receiving extra run-in moisture, and on areas 
receiving some supplementa l irrigation.  It has 
persisted on sites up to 1365 m. (4500 ft) and 
tolerates highly acid sedimentary soils and acidic 
mine spoils (pH 4.5).  It germinates and grows in low 
fertility and shallow soils.

Establishment 
The optimum time for seeding is between October 1 
and November 15.  Loosening the soil surface before 
seeding and covering lightly produces the best stands.  
Seed can be hydro-seeded, but best establishment 
occurs when the seed is in contact with the soil.  
Recommended seeding rates on critical areas are: 
broadcast, hydroseeded-3 pounds pure live seed per 
acre; drilled- 2 pounds pure live seed per acre and 
depth should be 1 to 2 cm (0.5 to 1 inch).  Seed can 
be drilled or broadcast, but because of its size and 
shape, it tends to stick together.  Rice hulls and/or a 
good companion seed will help prevent “bridging 
over,” and allow proper dispersion of seed.  There are 
about 993,700 seeds per pound. 
  
Management 
Applying 40 pounds of nitrogen per acre every other 
season during October or November will maintain 
healthy, erosion resistant stands.  Annual fescues are 
initial invaders, so as sites improve, taller, more 
enduring plants will probably replace annual fescue, 
unless the area is mowed or grazed.  In cover crop 
planting, annual fescue can be mowed frequently, but 
should be allowed to produce mature seed for 
continued perpetuation.  It is readily controlled by 
several herbicides, providing assurance that it will 
not become a troublesome weed.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Annual fescue has been grown in large-scale seed 
increase blocks at the Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center for the last three years.  Seed was planted at a 
3 lb./acre rate in 30 inch rows with a Planet Junior 
planter.  Broad-leaf weed control herbicides are used.  
Seed is combined directly with an Allis Chalmers 
All-Crop Harvester, Model 72.  Shattering is a 
problem at harvest time, so the seed is usually 
harvested while still a little  green.  Therefore, seed 
has to be dried in the field or a dryer before cleaning.  
Also, seed can be harvested using a flail-vac 
harvester.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Zorro’ Cultivar- Seed for this cultivar was collected 
from native plants on droughty strips of a Colombia 
fine sandy loam at the Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California.  This collection was assigned 
as P1-109-71 and named Zorro in December 1976.  It 
has excellent seedling vigor and has shown superior 
seedling establishment compared to ‘Blando’ soft 
brome (Bromus mollis ) on infertile, shallow or 
droughty soils where erosion control is critical.  It 
matures seed about 10 days to two weeks earlier than 
Blando (in May-June) if moisture conditions are 
normal.  This earlier maturity assures perpetuation in 
droughty and low rainfall areas. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
CalPhotos. 2005. Vulpia myuros .  Accessed: 24 
August 2005. 
http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/photos/browse_imgs/plant
_com_411.html.  
 
USDA NRCS. No date.  Notice of release of ‘Zorro’ 
annual fescue for soil stabilization and cover.  USDA 
NRCS and California Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Davis, CA. 
 
USDA NRCS. 1977.  Management and uses of Zorro 
annual fescue.  Davis, CA. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dyer, Dave, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA and Reina  O’Beck, California State 
Office, Davis, CA. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dave Dyer, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California, 
 
Edited: 14sep2005 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all

prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.