Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YARDLONG BEAN 
Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp. 
ssp. sesquipedalis  (L.) Verdc. 
Plant Symbol = VIUNS2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pacific Islands West 
Area Office and National Plant Data Center 
 
 University of California at Davis Small Farm Research Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Vigna sesquipedalis (L.) Fruw., Chinese longbean, 
yard-long bean, judia esparrago, haricot asperge, pea-
bean, asparagus bean, Taao-hla-chao (Hmong); juro-
kusasagemae (Japanese); dow gauk (Chinese); sitaw 
(Filipino);  
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : Edible pods should be picked at 
maximum length while the skin is still smooth, and 
before the seeds mature and expand.  At this tender 
stage, they can be snapped and cooked in stew with 
tomato sauce; boiled and drained, then seasoned with 
lemon juice and oil; or simmered in butter or oil and 
garlic.  The pale green bean is meatier and sweeter 
than the dark green bean, which has a less delicate 
taste. 
 
The mature bean is often dried, stored, and later 
cooked as a pulse or used  as bean sprouts by soaking 
in water and allowing them to sprout. 
 
The young leaves and stem tips are steamed and 
eaten as a green vegetable. 
 
Commercial : Long bean can be harvested and sold 
fresh at local farmers’ mark ets or harvested and sold 
to local distributors for processing and packaging for 
later resale. 
 
Ornamental:  The large violet-blue flowers and 
draping pods make yardlong bean a useful 
ornamental in city parks, office buildings, and around 
homes. 
 
Wildlife:  The young leaves an d bean pods are good 
food for deer, small mammals, and birds.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Family (Fabaceae).  Yardlong bean pods 
may grow to 10-20 inches long, but customers prefer 
them 10-12 inches in length and pencil-size.  
Although both red seeded and black seeded yardlong 
bean exist, the black seed ed pod is preferred for 
human consumption.  
 
These unique beans grow on  twining, delicate stems 
with a tenacious root syst em.  The plants bloom in 
mid-summer with a pair of large white or purple 
flowers.  Once pollinated,  the flowers are followed 
by tiny dark green beans that  reach 12 inches long in 
only a few days.  The beans can grow up to three feet 
long, ripening to pale green and inflating as the red or 
black seeds ripen.   
 
Although yardlong bean resembles pole snap beans 
( Phaseolus vulgaris ), it is botanically more closely 
related to southern cowpeas ( Vigna unguiculata).  
However, yardlong bean is much more a trailing and 
climbing plant than the southern pea, often reaching 
9-12 feet in height 
 
Yardlong bean, a true legume, enriches the soil by 
fixing atmospheric nitrogen in nodules on its roots.  
With the help of nitrogen fixing bacteria, the plant 
makes its own food. 
 
Distribution : The yardlong bean  originated in 
southern Asia and is now grown extensively in Asia, 
Europe, Oceania, and North America.  For current 
naturalized U.S. distribution, please consult the Plant

Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Yardlong bean tolerates acid soils but 
prefers soil pH range of 5.5 – 7.5.  The plant thrives 
in soils that are loose, friable, and not too rich in 
nitrogen.  Soils heavy in nitrogen can cause over 
abundant leaf growth and reduced bean production.  
Choose a site in full sun and loosen the soil to a depth 
of eight to ten inches in preparation for sowing.  Mix 
in compost or composted manure in spring to slightly 
boost soil fertility 
 
The plant's long, trailing growth habit requires a 
trellis for best production.   Training the vine requires 
labor, about as much as for tomatoes and peas.  The 
plant will climb by itself, but still needs some help 
and a very strong trellis system.  The vines will grow 
to the top of your trellis, so don't build the trellis so 
high that harvesting is made difficult. Bamboo 
tripods or row trellising with poles and string, at least 
seven feet high are required to accommodate the 
vines. Various trellising systems can be used.  
Yardlong bean will climb poles, especially if they are 
not completely vertical and the poles are 3/4 inch to 2 
and a half inches in diameter, but must be trained to 
poles early during the growing season. 
 
Yardlong bean thrives in heat and withers in cold, so 
sow after all danger of frost has passed and the soil 
has warmed.  To move the planting schedule ahead, 
one can put down black plastic mulch to warm soil.  
If using a tripod system, plant three or four seeds to 
each pole.  If using a row trellis, plant the seeds 3 to 4 
inches apart in the row..P lant the seeds two inches 
deep in loose friable soil or an inch deep in heavy 
soil.  In areas with very long growing season, make 
two more successive sowings, at two-week intervals.  
In northern climates, a singl e sowing in late spring 
will often produce until frost.  
 
Seeds will germinate in about a week and the young 
plants will start producing abundantly once the 
weather heats up.  They easily tolerate hot weather 
and even some drought.  However, to keep the beans 
producing, water in dry spells.  It is unnecessary to 
fertilize yardlong bean unless you have nutrient-poor 
soil.  
 
This warm-season crop can be planted in a wide 
range of climatic conditions, but is very sensitive to 
cold temperatures.  It can tolerate heat, low rainfall 
and arid soils, but the pods become short and fibrous 
with low soil moisture.  Yardlong bean prefer high  temperature, conditions under which other green 
beans cannot be produced
.  
 
Propagation by seed:  Plant seeds in a raised bed 1 to 
2 inches deep in late spring when the soil is warm.  
To ensure good germination water beds immediately 
after planting.  Thin the young plants to 6-12 inches 
in the row with 3-4 feet between rows.  Since 
yardlong bean is a legume , inoculate the seed with 
nitrogen fixing  Rhizobium bacteria as an alternative 
to using nitrogen fertilizer.  If the seed is not 
inoculated with a Rhizobium,  high nitrogen fertilizer 
may be required when seeding and during the 
growing season. 
 
Management  
General:  
Yardlong bean is harvestable about two months after 
direct seeding or sowing and continues throughout 
summer and into the fall.  Harvest pods when the 
beans are about half the diameter of a pencil, before 
the seeds have filled out inside and when they still 
snap when bent.  You may need to harvest daily since 
continuous picking keeps the plants producing.  The 
plants will stop producing if beans are left to ripen.  
Although the beans will keep several days in the 
refrigerator, they are best eat en soon after harvesting.  
They can also be blanched  and frozen for winter 
storage. 
 
Yardlong bean have a more dense texture than those 
of snap beans and more intense "bean" flavor.  Their 
texture and flavor hold up well when stir-fried or 
steamed.  If the beans are left to mature somewhat, 
they can be shelled and cooked as other southern 
"peas".  
 
Harvested beans develop rusty patches quickly.  
Keep moist while in coolers, since dehydration in the 
coolers will lower quality and make them 
unmarketable. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Aphids, particularly the black bean aphid  (Aphis 
fabae ), are drawn to the pods of this plant. Thrips 
tend to be a pest early in the season, but the plants 
will often out grow them, especially as the weather 
gets warmer and the plants grow faster.  Mites can be 
a problem, primarily after insecticide applications, 
which often lead to mite outbreaks. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local agricultural extension vegetable 
specialist for recommendations pertinent to your 
growing site.

References 
Abdullah, W.D., A.A. Powell, and S. Matthews 1991.  
Association of differences in seed vigor in long bean 
(Vigna seequipedalis} with testa colour and 
imbibition damage.  Journal of Agri. Sci. 116. 259-
264. 
 
Duke, J.A. 1981.   Handbook of Legumes of World 
Economic Importance. Plenum Press, New York, 
New York. 
 
Federal-State Market News  Service. 1987 & 1988. 
San Francisco Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Wholesale 
Market Prices. USDA and CDFA. 
 
Fery, F.L. 2002. New opportunities in Vigna . p. 424–
428. In: J. Janick and A. Whipkey (eds.), Trends in 
new crops and new uses. ASHS Press, Alexandria, 
Virginia. 
 
Harrington, G. 1984. Grow your own Chinese 
vegetables. Garden Way Publishing, Pownal, 
Vermont.  268 pp.  
 
Knott, J.E. & J.A. Deanon. 1967.  Vegetable 
production in Southeast Asia .  University of 
Philippines, College of Agriculture, Los Banos.  366 
pp. 
 
Lim, T. K.  199?.   Loofahs, gourds, melons and snake 
beans.  The New Rural Industries. Ed.: K. W. Hyde. 
Canberra, Rural Industries Research and 
Development Corporation . 212-218 . 
 
Stephens, James M. 1994.  Bean, yard-long Vigna 
unguiculata subsp. sesquipedalis (L.) Verde .  Fact 
Sheet HS-562. Hort. Sci.  Dept., Inst. Of Food and 
Agri. Sci.  University of Florida.  Gainesville, 
Florida. 
 
Wall, G.C., C.A. Kimmons, A.T. Wiecko & J. 
Richardson.  Blackeye cowpea mosaic virus (BlCVM) 
in yard-long bean in the Mariana Islands . 
Micronesica 29(2): 101 -111. 
<http://www.uog.edu/up/micronesica/ > 
 
Yamaguchi, M. 1983.   World vegetables. AVI 
Publishing Company, Inc., Westport, Connecticut. 
415 pp.  
 
You, Z., M. Marutani, & D. Borthakur. 2002. 
Diversity among Bradyrhizobium isolates nodulating 
yardlong bean and sunnhemp in Guam . J. Applied 
Microbiology 93:577-584.  <http://www.ctahr.hawaii.e
du/mbbe/faculty/files/You
_et_al_2002.pdf> 
 
Prepared By 
John H. Lawrence , Pacific Islands West Area Office, 
Pacific Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam 
And 
Lincoln M. Moore , Formerly USDA, NRCS, National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
John H. Lawrence , Pacific Islands West Area Office, 
Pacific Islands Area, Mongmong, Guam 
 Edited: 070212 jsp; 070322 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.