Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VENTENATA 
Ventenata dubia  (Leers) Coss. 
Plant Symbol = VEDU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Pamela Scheinost, USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center 
 
Caution:  This plant is weedy and can be invasive
. 
 
Alternate Names 
Wiregrass, North Africa grass,  Avena dubia Leers, 
Ventenata avenacea  Koel. 
 
Uses 
Ventenata may be grazed in the early spring, however 
its forage value is minimal.  Once the panicles begin 
to emerge, the stems harden and become unpalatable.  
There are no other known uses of this plant. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. st ate noxious status). 
  Description 
General
: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Ventenata is a 
winter annual that germinates in the fall when 
temperatures are moderate to high (18º - 28º C, or 64° 
- 82° F) (Northam & Callihan, 1986).  Seed heads are 
produced May through June, about one month 
following annual  Bromus species.  The plant has 
slim, erect culms from 10 to 46 cm (4 to 18 in) tall 
with microscopic hairs that give the appearance of 
being smooth.  Seedling leaves are in-rolled or 
lengthwise folded and app ear very narrow.  The 
inflorescence is an open  panicle, appearing silvery 
green but rapidly maturing to a yellowish-tan color.  
At the end of each spreading to drooping rachilla are 
1-5 spikelets.  About 15  – 35 seeds are produced per 
plant (Lass & Prather, 2007).  Ventenata was named 
after a professor of botany at Paris, Pierre Etienne 
Ventenat, 1757-1805 (Hitchcock & Cronquist, 1973). 
 
Ventenata is beginning to replace perennial grasses 
and forbs along roadsides and in hay, pasture, range 
and CRP fields in the western U.S.  In addition to 
having minimal forage value for livestock or wildlife, 
ventenata is also undesirabl e because its shallow root 
system may cause the soil to be more prone to 
erosion.  Over time, decline of productivity and land 
value occurs. 
 
Key characteristics:  Ventenata can be easily 
identified in May – June based on its reddish-black 
nodes.  Its unusually long ligule (1-8 mm) is another 
distinguishing characteristic.  By late June - July the 
plant adopts a shiny appearance and an open panicle 
emerges.  Once the plant se nesces in July - August, 
the awns (1 – 2.5 mm in length) become twisted and 
bent, which is typical of members of the Aveneae 
tribe. 
 
 Pamela Scheinost, USDA NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center

Distribution 
Ventenata is native to southern Europe, western Asia 
and northern Africa. There are 5 known species of 
Ventenata, however only V. dubia has been 
documented on the North American continent. 
 
Ventenata was first reported in the U.S. in 
Washington state in 1952 (Flora of North America 
Editorial Committee, 1993).  Currently it is found 
throughout the northwestern and northeastern states 
of the U.S. (WA, OR, CA, ID, UT, MT, WY, WI, 
NY, ME) and the western and eastern provinces of 
Canada (BC, AB, ON, QC, NB).  In the western U.S., 
ventenata is beginning to receive a great deal of 
attention due to its rate of spread and difficulty in 
control.     
 
Adaptation 
Ventenata is typically found from near-sea level to 
mid-range elevations (10 – 1800 m, or 35 – 6000 ft) 
and within moderate precipitation zones (35  – 112 
cm/yr, or 14 – 44 in/yr).  It is most commonly found 
on south-facing hillsides with shallow, rocky, clay or 
clay-loam soils.  In addition,  sites that are inundated 
in early spring but dry out by late spring tend to be 
preferred (Old, 2008).    
 
Vectors 
Ventenata is spread primarily as a contaminant of 
Kentucky bluegrass, hay and annual crops.  In 
addition, ventenata is found along roadsides and 
likely is moved along the  transportation corridors 
where it has opportunities to move into surrounding 
areas.  It can also be spread by humans and animals 
due to having long awns. 
 
Control 
Few control methods are known for ventenata, 
particularly in range and pasture settings.  However, 
because the seed is thought to be viable for only two 
or three years, three to  four years of aggressive 
management followed by vigilant monitoring may 
eliminate or severely  reduce an infestation. 
 
Manual and Mechanical Control 
Ventenata cannot be mowed during heading; plants 
will only bend over or become tangled in the swather 
(hence the name wiregrass).  If ventenata is mowed 
once prior to heading, plants may produce another 
flush of heads (Lass & Prather, 2007).  Mowing 
ventenata multiple times throughout the growing 
season, however, has proven to be a successful 
method of control (Gribble, 2008).  Plants kept at 
minimal height until soil moisture is unavailable may 
be prevented from producing seed. 
  Fire shows no promise as a control method.  Where 
wildfires or prescribed fires burned in Oregon, 
ventenata populations have flourished (Brummer, 
2008; Mafera, 2008).  In Idaho, fire suppressed 
ventenata but tended to stimulate annual weedy 
bromes and left an opening for more ventenata the 
following year (Lass & Prather, 2007). 
 
Environmental/Cul
tural Control 
Maintaining a healthy stand of perennial vegetation 
may help to prevent venten ata invasion.  A healthy 
stand can be created and ma intained with appropriate 
selection of plant species, application of proper 
amount of nutrients, use of Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) strategies such as spot spraying, 
following a suitable grazing plan, and good forage 
management. 
 
Chemical Control 
In cropland, several herbicides are available and 
known to be effective.  In hay, pasture, range and 
CRP fields, selection of registered herbicides is 
limited.  Ventenata has shown to be tolerant to 
glyphosate and sethoxydim when applied in the 
spring.  Imazapic applied in the fall to semi-dormant 
perennial grass stands has been effective, particularly 
when ventenata comprises more than 25% of the 
vegetative ground cover.  One technique that has 
shown promise is application of imazapic in the fall 
followed by applications of nitrogen fertilizer in the 
spring and fall of the next year.  Fertilizer can help 
perennial grasses recover from herbicide damage and 
be more competitive. 
 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to l earn what herbicides work 
best in your area and how to use them properly.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective.  
 
Biological Control 
Biological control methods have not been considered. 
 
References 
Brummer, F.,  Oregon State University Extension.  
2008.  Personal communication. 
 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  
University of Washington. 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php?Genus=Ve ntenata&Species=dubia 
(Accessed 5/27/2008).

Flora of North America Editorial Committee.  1993.  
Flora of North America: North of Mexico. Vol. 24.  
Magnoliophyta.  Oxford University Press, New York.  
pp. 683-684. 
 
Gribble, R., NRCS, Grangeville, ID.  2008.  Personal 
communication. 
 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist.  1973.  Flora of 
the Pacific Northwest.  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London.  p. 674. 
 
Jaberg, J., Ochoco National Forest, Paulina Ranger 
District. 2008.  Personal communication. 
 
Johnson, C.G. and D.K. Swanson.  2005.  Bluebunch 
Plant Communities of the Blue and Ochoco 
Mountains: A Guide for Managers.  Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-641.  Porland, OR: USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.  119 p. 
 
Lass, L. and T. Prather.  2007.  A scientific 
evaluation for noxious and invasive weeds of the 
highway 95 construction project between the 
Uniontown cutoff and Moscow.  QuilaVision Inc., 
Missoula, MT.  Online.  Availble: 
http://northwestmedia.net/us95/pdf-final/Final-Weed-
Report.pdf.  (Accessed 5/27/2008). 
 
Mafera D., Ochoco National Forest, Paulina Ranger 
District. 2008.  Personal communication. 
 
NatureServe. 2008. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.0. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available 
http://www.natureserve.o rg/explorer. (Accessed 
6/25/2008). 
 
Northam, F.E. and R.H. Callihan.  1986.  
Germination of four annual grass weeds at three 
temperatures.  Proceedings  of the Western Society of 
Weed Science.  39:173. 
 
Old, R.R. and R.H. Callihan.  1987.   Ventenata dubia 
in the Pacific Northwest.  Proceedings of the Western 
Society of Weed Science.  40:130 
 
Old, R.R.  2008.  Personal communication. 
 
Whitson, T.D. 1996. Weeds of the West.  5
th Edition.  
Western Weed Science Society. Pioneer of Jackson 
Hole, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.  pp. 498-499. 
  Prepared By 
Pamela Scheinost, 
USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA 
 
Mark Stannard,  USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA 
 
Tim Prather,  University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 
 
Species Coordinator 
Pamela Scheinost,  USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA 
 
Edited: sept1008tp; sept1508ms; oct0708jsp; oct1508ps  
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.