Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARROWWOOD VIBURNUM  
Viburnum dentatum  L. 
Plant Symbol = VIDE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Southern arrow-wood, roughish arrow-wood, 
southern arrowwood 
 
Uses 
The dense foliage, white flower clusters, and dark 
blue berries make arrow-wood viburnum an attractive 
shrub for landscaping.  Various cultivars have been 
selected for hardiness, shape  of the plant, fall foliage 
color (yellow or red to reddish purple), and 
abundance of fruit.   They can be used for borders or 
screens or as mass plantings and groupings to attract 
birds, which eat the fruit.  Cultivars have been 
selected for character istics of the foliage, 
compactness of habit, flower ing time, and persistence 
of fruits.  Many species of  Viburnum are cultivated 
(see Dirr 1997 and Floraguide 2000).   
 
Viburnum  species have been used for numerous 
medicinal purposes – see Alternative Medicine 
Foundation: HerbMed (2000) for notes and internet 
links on medicinal use and other health related topics    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General
: Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Native shrubs growing 1-3 meters tall, with arching 
branches forming an overall rounded crown, 
sometimes spreading up to 2.5 meters; twigs slender, 
ridged and angled.  Leaves deciduous, opposite, 
simple, oval to oblong, obovate, or elliptic, 4-10 cm 
long, with coarsely but regularly toothed margins, 
shiny dark green above, paler beneath, at least 
sparsely stellate-pubescent beneath and on the 
petioles, turning yellow to red or reddish-purple in 
late fall.  Flowers are 5-8 mm wide, white, in flat-
topped clusters 5-8 cm broad.  Fruits ovoid, berry-
like (drupes), 5-8 mm in di ameter, bluish-black.  The 
common name refers to the Native American use of 
the straight young stem s as arrow shafts.   
 © Hugh Wilson Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M University, Bioinformatics Working Group 
 
Variation within the species : Leaves of V. dentatum 
are stellate-pubescent in variable density on the lower 
surfaces and petioles.  Localized geographic variants 
are often evident over the range of the species, with 
leaf shape and size often more consistent on a local 
or regional level than the type of vestiture.  A number 
of varieties have been recognized – but these 
distinctions apparently have not been recognized 
among the horticultural forms.   
 
V. dentatum  var. deamii  (Rehd.) Fern. 
V. dentatum  var. venosum  (Britt.) Gleason    
V. dentatum  var. indianense  (Rehd.) Gleason  
V. dentatum  var. lucidum  Ait. (= V. recognitum  Fern.)    
V. dentatum var. scabrellum  Torr. & Gray (=  V. 
scabrellum  (Torr. & Gray) Chapm.)  
 
Viburnum recognitum has the leaves completely 
glabrous or sparsely strigose with simple hairs along 
the veins and petioles, commonly with tufts of soft, 
white hair in the vein axils of the lower surface.  
With V. dentatum , V. recognitum  ranges from Texas 
to New England, but  V. recognitum is the common 
form in the northern part of the range,  V. dentatum in 
the southern part.   Viburnum scabrellum  is a form 
with broader, rougher leaves  and primarily occurs in 
the southern part of the  V. dentatum range.   
 
Distribution 
The Viburnum dentatum  species complex is 
widespread in the eastern United States, from Maine 
to Florida and westward to Iowa and east Texas.  For

current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Adaptation  
Open woods and margins, streambanks.  Arrow-
wood viburnum prefers loamy, neutral to acid soil 
with ample moisture, but is adaptable to a range of 
conditions from dry to fairly wet soil.  Plants are salt-
tolerant in New England coastal areas.  The can grow 
in generally drier conditions than  V. acerifolium.  
They most commonly occur  in partial shade but can 
be grown in full sun.  Flowering May-June; fruiting 
August-November.  
 
Establishment 
Plants may begin to produce fruits by the third year.  
Fruits apparently are consistently formed every year.  
Like related species of  Viburnum, the seeds of V. 
dentatum  probably have a cold requirement for 
breaking embryo dormancy.  Vegetative reproduction 
is through short rhizomes and sprouts from the root 
crown.   
 
Management 
Plants of arrow-wood vibu rnum are propagated from 
cuttings or seed.  They are easily transplanted and 
free from serious problems of  disease or insect pests 
(with the caveat below).  Occasional pruning is 
helpful in rejuvenation and shaping.  Prune off basal 
suckers to restrict spreading if necessary.    
 
Viburnum leaf beetle :  The viburnum leaf beetle 
( Pyrrhalta viburni ), native to Europe and Asia, was 
first encountered in North America in 1947, perhaps 
arriving earlier from Europe on nursery plants.  It 
received little notice until 1978, when it caused 
severe defoliation of ornamental viburnums in 
Ontario and Quebec.  It has now reached western 
New York and Maine and become a concern in urban 
landscapes and nurseries.   
 
The adult and the larva “skeletonize” leaves by 
feeding on the leaves betw een the midrib and larger 
veins.  Plants, which have been defoliated for 2-3 
consecutive years, may be ki lled.  The preferred host 
is  Viburnum opulus  and its selections; lesser damage 
is caused to  V. lantana and V. rafinesquianum , V. 
dentatum , V. acerifolium , and V. lentago .  Other 
species, particularly  V. rhytidophyllum and V. 
carlesii, are relatively unaffected.   
 
The entire life cycle of the viburnum leaf beetle takes 
about 8-10 weeks.  Larvae  hatch in early May and 
feed on the viburnum leav es throughout the larval 
period, which lasts 4-5 weeks.  The larvae pupate in 
the soil.  The adults (4.5-6.5 mm long, brown) appear  by mid-July and continue eating the leaves, then mate 
and lay over-wintering eggs on the twigs.  Egg-laying 
holes are in a straight line on the underside of the 
current season's growth.   
 
Chemical control of the viburnum leaf beetle is best 
applied to young larvae, because adults will fly away 
or drop to the ground if disturbed.  If over-wintering 
egg sites are found, affected wood should be pruned 
and destroyed before the eggs hatch.  Examine upper 
and lower leaf surfaces for 
feeding larvae.  Potential 
biological control mechanisms are being studied.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Alternative Medicine Foundation: HerbMed 2000.  
Viburnum .  Web site.  
<www.amfoundation.org/herbs/Viburnum.htm> 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr's hardy trees and shrubs: An 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.    
 
Donoghue, M. 1980.   Flowering times in Viburnum .  
Arnoldia 40:2-22;  
 
Donoghue, M. 1983.   A preliminary analysis of 
phylogenetic relationships in Viburnum 
(Caprifoliaceae s.l.) .  Syst. Bot. 8:45-58.    
 
Egolf, D.R. 1962.  A cytological study of the genus 
Viburnum.  J. Arnold Arb. 43:132-172.   
 
Floraguide 2000.   Las especies de Viburnum 
cultivadas en España .  Floraguide web site.   
<http://www.guiaverde.com /arboles/Viburnum.htm> 
 
Friedlander, B.P., Jr. 1999.   Voracious viburnum leaf 
beetle munches into Ithaca area .  Cornell Chronicle.  
<http://www.news.cornell.ed u/Chronicles/6.17.99/lea
f_beetle.html> 
 
Hauser, E.J.P. 1965.   Characteristics and distribution 
of Viburnum (Caprifoliaceae) in Georgia .  Bull. Ga. 
Acad. Sci. 23:(11 pages).

Kessel, C. 2000.  Viburnum leaf beetle, Pyrrhalta 
viburni (Paykull), in the nursery and landscape .  
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Affairs, Ontario, Canada.  Web site.  
<http://www.gov.on.ca/OMAFRA/english/crops/facts
/vlb.htm>   
 
McAtee, W.L. 1956.   A review of the Nearctic  
Viburnum .  Published by the author, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.   
 
Texas A&M University 2000 .  Images of the 
Caprifoliaceae .  IN: Vascular plant image gallery .  
Bioinformatics Working Group, College Station, 
Texas.  21SEP2000. 
<http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/imaxxcpr.htm> 
 
Prepared By 
Guy Nesom  
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 17jan01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.