Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HIGHBUSH 
CRANBERRY  
Viburnum opulus  L. var. 
americanum  Ait. 
Plant Symbol = VIOPA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
American cranberrybush, cranberry tree, crampbark 
tree, guelder-rose, wild gu eldes-rose, gueldres-rose, 
cherry-wood, rose elder, red elder, marsh elder, water 
elder, white elder, gadrise, gaiter tree, gatten, love 
rose, May rose, pincushion tree, dog rowan tree, 
whitten tree, squaw bush, witch-hobble, witchhopple; 
synonyms: Viburnum trilobum Marsh.;  Viburnum 
opulus  ssp. trilobum  (Marsh.) Clausen 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The bark of highbush cranberry yields 
a powerful antispasmodic (whence the origin of one 
its American common names, crampbark).  The 
water-soluble preparation (containing a bitter 
compound called viburnine) has been used for relief 
of menstrual and stomach cramps and asthma.  The 
antispasmodic properties apparently were discovered 
independently by European, Native American, and 
Asian peoples.  The action of this agent from 
highbush cranberry closely resembles that of black 
haw ( Viburnum prunifolium ).   
 
Highbush cranberry is used as an ornamental plant 
and valued for its edible fruits.  The fruit is 
commonly gathered from wild stands in late August  or early September, best when picked slightly under-
ripe (and sour), and used in sauces, jellies, and juices.  
If picked after a heavy frost, the fruit are softer and 
more palatable but they develop a musty, somewhat 
objectionable odor during cooking.  The species has 
never developed into a commercial fruit crop. 
 
Wildlife
: The bright red fruits often persist on the 
plants throughout the winter, good for ornamental 
value but suggesting that they may not be especially 
palatable for wildlife.  Still, they are known to be 
eaten by deer, moose, f oxes, raccoons, chipmunks, 
squirrels, skunks, mice, rabbits, grouse, pheasants, 
robins, cedar waxwings, and other songbirds.  They 
are not normally eaten by birds until after they have 
frozen and thawed several times.   
 Viburnum opulus ©  Hugh Wilson Vascular Plant Image Gallery Texas A&M Univ., Bioinformatics Working Group 
 
The native (American) plants of this species (=  V. 
trilobum  = V. opulus  var. americanum , see below) are 
hardier as ornamentals, less susceptible to aphid 
attack, and have more intense fall color than the 
Eurasian plants, and they produce edible fruit.  Fruit 
of the European plants tends to be bitter, and 
cultivars derived from the European species are 
grown strictly as ornamentals.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description  
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae).  
Native shrubs to 4 m high, with upright, spreading, 
arching branches.  Leaves de ciduous, opposite, ovate, 
5-12 cm long, deeply 3-lobed, coarsely toothed, with 
1-6 large glands near the petiole apex, becoming 
yellow-red or reddish-purple in the fall.  Flowers 
white, in flat-topped clusters 7-10 cm broad, with 
flowers of two different types, those in the outer ring 
sterile, showy, with expanded corollas 1-2 cm broad, 
the inner flowers much smaller, fertile, with yellow 
anthers.  Fruit berry-like (a drupe), globose, bright 
red, 8-10 mm in diameter; stone single, strongly 
flattened.  The common name alludes to the 
resemblance in fruit between the highbush cranberry 
and the cranberry of commerce ( Vaccinium 
macrocarpon ).    
 
Variation within the species .

The North American plants have generally been 
recognized as the same species as the closely similar 
native of Europe, northern Africa, and northern Asia 
– V. opulus  L. [var. opulus].  Var.  opulus is said to 
differ from the American variety in its filiform-
attenuate stipules and petiolar glands mostly short-
pedicellate, round-topped to concave, and mostly 
wider than high.  Voss (1996) notes that “variation 
between vars.  opulus and americanum  is too great – 
and too continuous – to make clear distinctions.”  
Variants have not generally been recognized from 
within the American segm ent of the species, but 
horticultural selections have been made from plants 
of both continents, primarily for leaf color, fruit 
color, and growth habit.  The best known of these is 
the cultivated “snowball bush” ( V. opulus var. 
roseum ), a form developed from Old World plants, 
with spherical inflorescences of enlarged, completely 
sterile flowers (the "snowballs").   
 
The native variety (var.  americanum) is known to 
hybridize with cultivated or escaped ornamental 
forms of var.  opulus.  This may result in the gradual 
degradation or loss of the native genotype.     
 
Distribution : Var. americanum  is widely distributed 
across north-central No rth America, from 
Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and 
Quebec to British Columbia, and in the US from 
Maine to Pennsylvania and West Virginia, 
northwestward to Wash ington.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  The non-
native var.  opulus is frequently planted and 
sometimes escapes; it is recorded from Ontario and 
New Brunswick and various states in the northeastern 
quarter of the US – Maine to Virginia and West 
Virginia, westward to Wisconsin, Iowa, and 
Missouri.    
 
Adaptation  
Highbush cranberry grows in wet woods, along 
streams, and on moist wooded hillsides, requiring 
moist but well-drained sites for best development.  
Flowering (May-)June-July; fruiting August-
September.   
 
Establishment 
The seeds are difficult to germinate; in the wild, 
seeds don't germinate until the second spring 
following the ripening of the fruit. 
 
Management 
Highbush cranberry is easy to grow, adaptable to a 
variety of soil and acidity, but it does best in 
consistently moist but well-drained soil.  A yearly  application of compost or well-rotted manure will 
maintain growth and fruit yields  The plants are 
shade-tolerant, but flowering, fruiting, and foliage 
color will be best on plants in full sun.  Plants may 
require occasional pruning to keep them from 
becoming leggy and to encourage the production of 
new shoots; prune immediately after flowering.  
Highbush cranberry can be propagated through 
hardwood and softwood cuttings, layering, crown 
division and by seed.  Take softwood cuttings in mid-
June through early-July for easiest rooting.  
 
Var. 
americanum  is relatively  -free from insect and 
disease damage in cultivation although bacterial leaf 
spot, powdery mildew, shoot blight, tarnished plant 
bugs, stem borers, and thri ps will occasionally be a 
problem.    
 
Viburnum leaf beetle .  The viburnum leaf beetle 
( Pyrrhalta viburni ), native to Europe and Asia, was 
first encountered in North America in 1947, perhaps 
arriving earlier from Europe on nursery plants.  It 
received little notice until 1978, when it caused 
severe defoliation of ornamental viburnums in 
Ontario and Quebec.  It has now reached western 
New York and Maine and become a concern in urban 
landscapes and nurseries.   
 
The adult and the larva “skeletonize” leaves by 
feeding on the leaves betw een the midrib and larger 
veins.  Plants which have been defoliated for 2-3 
consecutive years may be killed.  The preferred host 
is  Viburnum opulus  and its selections; lesser damage 
is caused to  V. lantana and V. rafinesquianum , V. 
dentatum , V. acerifolium , and V. lentago .  Other 
species, particularly  V. rhytidophyllum and V. 
carlesii, are relatively unaffected.   
 
The entire life cycle of the viburnum leaf beetle takes 
about 8-10 weeks.  Larvae  hatch in early May and 
feed on the viburnum leav es throughout the larval 
period, which lasts 4-5 weeks.  The larvae pupate in 
the soil.  The adults (4.5-6.5 mm long, brown) appear 
by mid-July and continue eating the leaves, then mate 
and lay over-wintering eggs on the twigs.  Egg-laying 
holes are in a straight line on the underside of the 
current season's growth.   
 
Chemical control of the viburnum leaf beetle is best 
applied to young larvae, because adults will fly away 
or drop to the ground if disturbed.  If over-wintering 
egg sites are found, affected wood should be pruned 
and destroyed before the eggs hatch.  Examine upper 
and lower leaf surfaces for  feeding larvae.  Potential 
biological control mechanisms are being studied.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources.  Native plant cultivars with 
superior fruit and processing characteristics are 
available (for example: “A ndrews,” “Hahs,” “Hogg's 
Red,” “Manitou,” “Phillips,” and “Wentworth”).  The 
processed fruit is very similar to cranberry 
( Vaccinium macrocarpon ) and red currant (Ribes 
rubrum ). 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departmen t of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barton L.V. 1958.  Germination and seedling 
production of species of  Viburnum .  Pl. Propag. 
8:126-136.  
 
Donoghue, M. 1980.   Flowering times in Viburnum .  
Arnoldia 40:2-22.   
 
Donoghue, M. 1983.   A preliminary analysis of 
phylogenetic relationships in Viburnum 
(Caprifoliaceae s.l.) .  Syst. Bot. 8:45-58.    
 
Egolf, D.R. 1962.  A cytological study of the genus  
Viburnum .  J. Arnold Arb. 43:132-172.   
 
Felter, H.W. & J.U. Lloyd 2000.   Viburnum opulus.  
In King’s American Dispensatory.  Web site.  
<http://metalab.unc.edu/herbmed/eclectic/kings/samb
ucus.html>   
 
Ferguson, I.K. 1966.   The genera of the 
Caprifoliaceae in the southeastern United States .  J. 
Arnold Arbor. 47:33-59.  
 
Finn, C. 1999.   Temperate berry crops .  Pp. 324–334. 
IN: J. Janick (ed.),  Perspectives on new crops and 
new uses.  ASHS Press, Alexandria, Virginia.  
<http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings19
99/v4-324.html#cranberry> 
 
Friedlander, B.P., Jr. 1999.   Voracious viburnum leaf 
beetle munches into Ithaca area .  Cornell Chronicle.  
<http://www.news.cornell.ed u/Chronicles/6.17.99/lea
f_beetle.html> 
 
Giersbach J. 1937.   Germination and seedling 
production of species of  Viburnum .  Contr. Boyce 
Thompson Inst. Pl. Res. 9:79-90.  
  
Hauser, E.J.P. 1965.   Characteristics and distribution 
of Viburnum (Caprifoliaceae) in Georgia .  Bull. Ga. 
Acad. Sci. 23:(11 pages).   
 
Hillebrand, G.R. &D.E.  Fairbrothers 1969.  A 
serological investigation of intrageneric 
relationships in Viburnum (Caprifoliaceae) .  Bull. 
Torrey Bot. Club 96:556-567.  
 
Jones, T.H. 1983.   A revision of the genus Viburnum 
sect. Lentago (Caprifoliaceae) .  Ph.D. diss., North 
Carolina State Univ., Raleigh.  
 
Jones, E. & N.T. Wheelwright 1987 .  Seasonal 
changes in the fruits of Viburnum opulus, a freshly-
fruiting temperate-zone shrub .  Canad. J. Bot. 
65:2291-2296.  
  
Kessel, C. 2000.   Viburnum leaf beetle, Pyrrhalta 
viburni (Paykull), in the nursery and landscape .  
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Affairs, Ontario, Canada.  Web site.  
<http://www.gov.on.ca/OMAFRA/english/crops/facts
/vlb.htm>   
 
Krannitz, P.G. & M.A. Maun 1991.   An experimental 
study of floral display size and reproductive success 
in Viburnum opulus: importance of grouping .  Canad. 
J. Bot. 69:394-399.  
 
Krannitz, P.G. & M.A. Maun 1991.   Insect visitors to 
guelder rose, Viburnum opulus var. opulus 
(Caprifoliaceae) in London, Ontario .  Canad. Field-
Naturalist 105:13-17.  
 
Lubbock J. 1891.   On the form of the leaf of 
Viburnum opulus and  V. lantana .  J. Linn. Soc. Bot. 
28:244-247.  
 
McAtee, W.L. 1956.   A review of the Nearctic 
Viburnum .  Published by the author, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.   
 
Pixler, VA. 1950.   The Caprifoliaceae of West 
Virginia .  Castanea 15:80-91.  
 
St-Pierre, R. 1995.   The highbush cranberry - A 
multipurpose shrub .  Internet publication.   
<http://www.google.com/search?q=cache:www.ag.us
ask.ca/cofa/departments/hort/hortinfo/fruit/cranbery.h
tml+viburnum+trilobum&hl=en> 
 
Voss, E.G. 1996.  Viburnum.  Pp. 309-315.  IN: 
Michigan Flora, Part III .  Cranbrook Institute of 
Science Bull. 61.

Prepared By 
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised: 29jan03 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.