Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FAN PALM 
Washingtonia filifera  (L. 
Linden) H. Wendl. 
Plant Symbol = WAFI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternative Names 
California fan palm 
 
Use 
Ethnobotanic: Palm oases were important habitation 
sites for the Cahuilla and other tribes.  The fan palm 
provided abundant fruit that was relished by the 
Cahuilla.  It was eaten fresh or dried in the sun and 
then stored in ollas for future consumption.  The 
seeds and flour were pounded into a meal, mixed 
with other flours and water to a mush.  A beverage 
was made by soaking the fruit in water.  Additionally, 
the leaves were used for cl othing, sandals, thatching, 
and basketry materials, the  fruit stalks for fire drills, 
and leafstalks for household utensils.  The Cahuilla, 
Diegueno, and Luiseno of southern California used 
the leaves for matting, stuffing and in rough 
ropemaking. 
 
Wildlife : Hooded orioles nest in the tree canopies, 
constructing their nests of palm frond fragments.  The 
paper wasp often builds its nest on the underside of a 
palm leaf and the western yellow bat roosts in fan  palms.  Woodpeckers make their nests in dead palm 
trees, and their cavities become home to a myriad of  
birds in later years including house finches, 
American kestrels, and owls. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
Description 
General : Palm family (Arecaceae).  This tree has a 
thick, robust trunk and achieves a height up to 20 m.  
The large tufts of leaves ar e fan-shaped, fibrous, and 
gray green, and their spined petioles are 1-2 m.  The 
blades are 1-2 m and are divided nearly to the middle.  
The many white flowers are small and enclosed by a 
spathe.  The black fruits  are oblong or ovate. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution,  please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site . 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation : This plant is found below 1200 m in 
groves, alkaline spots of seep s, springs, and streams, 
on the west and north edge of the Colorado Desert, 
Turtle Mountains, the Sonoran Desert, southeastern 
Arizona, and northern Baja, California. 
 
Propagation by seed : One can improve seed 
germination by collecting seeds from coyote manure.  
Apparently germination is very high from seeds 
which have passed through the animals' digestive 
systems.  Plant the seeds in the spring in large pots, 
one-quarter inch apart in well-drained, friable soil 
such as a mixture of sand, loam, and peat moss or 
vermiculite and peat moss.  Be patient, as the seeds 
take from four to fifteen weeks to germinate.  At the 
first true leaf stage, plant the seedlings into separate 
one-gallon containers and hold until out-planting.  
Seedlings should be sheltered from winds and major 
temperature changes.  When planting fan palm in a 
permanent location, plant seedlings during the fall, in 
areas exposed to full sunlight.  Fall plantings must be 
watered during the following two summers if rainfall 
is low.

Management  
The dead leaves that form a skirt should be removed 
periodically.  Native Americans historically and 
prehistorically enhanced palm populations through 
firing palm stands and planting seeds.  Palm stands 
were burned to control infestations of the palm-
boring beetle (Dinapate wrightii ), to improve access 
to the palms and their fruit by clearing underbrush, 
and to increase the production and enhance the 
quality of fruit.  Furthermore, these fires encouraged 
seed production, increasing the density of palms on 
favorable sites.  Native Americans also acted as 
dispersal agents, carrying seeds of palms, which are 
small and easy to germinate, from one oasis to the 
next, extending the palm's range. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and plants of selected  Washingtonia cultivars 
are available from many nurseries.  It is best to plant 
species from your local area , adapted to the specific 
site conditions where the plants are to be grown.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Departm ent of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel 1972.   Temalpakh: Cahuilla 
Indian knowledge and usage of plants .  Malki 
Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Cornett, J.W. 1989a.   Desert palm oasis.  Palm 
Springs Desert Museum.  Companion Press, Santa 
Barbara, California.   
 
Cornett, J.W. 1989b.   The desert fan palm--Not a 
relict .  Abstract in C.A. Warren and J.S. Schneider 
(eds.)  Mojave Desert Quaternary Research Center.  
Third Annual Sympos ium Proceedings, San 
Bernardino County Museum Association. 
 
Cornett, J.W. 1987a.   Indians and the desert fan 
palm .  Masterkey 12-17. 
 
Cornett, J.W. 1987b.   A giant boring beetle.  
Environment Southwest.  No. 518:21-25. 
 
Cornett, J.W. 1985.   Reading fan palms.  Natural 
History 94(10):64-73. 
 
Mathewson, M.S. 1985 .  Threads of life: Cordage 
and other fibers of the California tribes.   Unpublished Senior Thesis.  Department of 
Anthropology, University of California, Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, California. 
 
McClenaghan, L.R. & A.C. Beauchamp
 1986.   Low 
genic differentiation among isolated populations of 
the California fan palm (Washingtonia filifera ).  
Evolution 40(2):315-322. 
 
McClintock, E. 1978.   The Washington fan palm .  
Fremontia 6:3-5. 
 
McClintock, E. 1993.   Arecaceae.  Page 1105 IN:  
The Jepson Manual: Higher plants of California.   
J.C. Hickman (ed.).  University of California Press, 
Berkeley, California. 
 
Nabhan, G.P. 1985.   The palm in our hands .  Pages 
20-34 IN: Gathering the Desert .  University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
Schmidt, M.G. 1980 .  Growing California native 
plants .  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Prepared By 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Wayne Roderick 
Former Director of the East Bay Regional Parks 
Botanic Garden, Berkeley, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 
Revised: 19jun0200 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.