Plant Guide
Common Beargrass  
            Xerophyllum tenax (Pursh) Nutt . 
                     Plant Symbol =XETE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National  Plants Data Team, 
Davis,  US Forest Service PSW Fire and Fuels Program, 
Redding,  California  and the Mississippi Choctaw Tribal 
Field Office  Choctaw , Mississippi 
 
 
Figure 1. Colony of common beargrass with overstory of Douglas fir and 
pine trees, western Klamath Mountains, Six Rivers National Forest, 
Orleans Ranger District, 2007. Photo by Frank K. Lake. 
 
 
Alternate Name   
Basket -grass, bear lily, elk -grass, fire lily, pine lily, 
western turkey- beard, white grass 
 
 
 
Uses  
Cultural : Common beargrass leaves were one of the most 
widely used and highly desirable materials for weaving 
baskets in northern California, the Pacific Northwest, and 
the Columbia Plateau and are still gathered today 
(Bowechop et al. 2012; Hummel et al. 2012; Anderson 
2009). Tribes in northern California, Oregon, Washington, 
Idaho, and Montana, and First Nations in British Columbia 
use the leaves for white overlay or decoration on basketry 
because the leaves are bleached nearly white when dr ied 
(Mason 1984:213). Storage baskets, trinket baskets, flour 
trays, cooking baskets, soup bowls, hats, infant carriers, 
hoppers, sifters, and dippers all carry its leaves  (Figure  2)   (Ackerman 1996; Lobb 1984; O’Neale 1995). Beargrass 
was the decorative material originally selected in making 
Columbia Plateau style “sally” bags and was later 
substituted with cornhusk (Figure 3) (Shawley 1975; 
Schlick 1994). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 .  Making a baby rattle  with beargrass leaves (white overlay 
design), woodwardia fern dyed  with alder bark (reddish overlay design), 
and with sandbar willow shoots (weft) and roots (warp). Photograph by 
Frank K. Lake, 2012.  
 
 
 
Common beargrass has been gathered in many habitats: 
Skokomish weavers gathered the leaves in the semi -shade 
of  Douglas -fir savannas after fires in the southeastern 
Olympic Peninsula in Washington (Peter and Shebitz 
2006); Quinault weavers harvested the new, fresh growth 
in the fire -maintained lowland wetlands of the Olympic 
Peninsula (Figure 4); the Wasco, Wishxam,  and Yakama 
weavers harvested beargrass in the northeastern Cascades;  
Maidu women used new leaves from burned over open 
ponderosa pine forests of the western Sierra Nevada; in the 
Klamath Mountains, the Takelma,  Tolowa,  Shasta, Karuk, 
Hupa,  Yurok  and Whilk ut harvested beargrass from burned 
sites at mid -to -higher elevation Douglas -fir mixed conifer 
forests.

Figure 3. Mary, Xaawapaanakuy, shown weaving a cornhusk bag at the 
Astoria, Oregon, Centennial, 1911. Courtesy of the Oregon Historical 
Society (ORHI  57468). Photographer is Wesley Andrews. Common 
beargrass is thought to be the original decorative material used in making 
bags and later cornhusk was substituted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Justine James, Quinault, standing in Moses Prairie, a wetland 
in traditional Quinault territory of the Olympic Peninsula, Washington 
that was formerly an important traditional gathering site for beargrass. 
Former Indian burning, kept wetlands like this one productive and 
biologically  diverse.  Without this vital disturbance, thes e wetlands are 
disappearing all over the Olympic Peninsula. Photograph by Kat 
Anderson, 2007.  
Leaves are pulled from the plant, selecting the longest 
blades (Nordquist and Nordquist 1983). In areas where 
little or none grew, such as in Makah territory, it  was either 
gathered beyond territorial boundaries or traded for. The 
Quileute delivered bundles of beargrass to the Makah by 
canoe (Archibald 1999).   
 
Leaves required elaborate processing prior to weaving. The 
leaves were checked for blemishes, mold, or ot her defects 
and the non- useable leaves were discarded. The choice 
leaves were dried in the shade or sun, sorted into different 
sizes and some tribes then braided bundles for storage 
(Figure 5) (Nordquist and Nordquist 1983). Certain tribes, 
particularly th ose in the interior Pacific Northwest and the 
Columbia Plateau dyed beargrass leaves for additional 
desired colors (Schlick 1994). Prior to use, the central rib 
was removed from each leaf with a sharp mussel shell knife 
or other tool, but today a knife is preferred. Other tribes 
flattened or scraped lightly the central ribs. The fibers were 
then sized into uniform widths of similar length, and blade 
taper. Other tribal practitioners sorted clean white from 
reddish brown- tinged leaves for different purposes.     
 
  Figure 5. Sundried and naturally bleached out bundles of beargrass to be 
stored for future Karuk weaving. Photograph by Frank K. Lake, 2012. 
Courtesy of Kathy McCovey (Karuk).  
Lela Mae Morganroth, Quileute, from western 
Washington, (pers. comm. 2005) describes how the leaves 
were dried and processed: “My grandmother would take an 
armload. She would separate the long ones from the short 
ones and then take a handful and braid them around the 
bundle and then hang it up in the sun or a warm place so 
that the water comes out and [the leaves] become bleached 
white. It takes about ten months to a year to get that color. 
After it’s dried and bleached, you have to scrape the back 
until it’s like silk. There’s no sharpness on there.”  
The tawny -colored bearg rass contrasts with western 
redcedar bark, black maidenhair fern stems and red alder -
dyed backgrounds and it adds texture to the basket’s 
surface. A clean white color was obtained by using the 
bleached leaves of beargrass but the leaves could also be

readi ly dyed other colors (Curtis 1913:62). The Klallam, 
Klikitat, Snohomish and many other tribes used barberry 
(also known as oregongrape) ( Mahonia nervosa and 
Mahonia aquilifolium ) bark or the root of sand dock 
( Rumex venosa ) to dye beargrass leaves yellow ( Colville 
1984). A favorite yellow dye for beargrass in northern 
California is derived from a tree lichen ( Evernia vulpina). 
The black color in Quileute baskets came from burying 
material in a bed of blue clay or mud for
 a few weeks  (Lela 
Mae Morganroth, Qu ileute, pers. comm. 2005).  
 
Figure 6. Makah basketmaker at Neah Bay, Makah Reservation, using 
beargrass and western redcedar bark weaving materials circa 1936. 
Courtesy of the National Archives and Records Administration, 
Sandpoint, Seattle, WA.  
Some of the tribes that used beargrass in their basketry 
include the Achomawi, Atsugewi, Chimariko, Hupa, 
Karuk, Lassik, Maidu, Nongatl, Shasta, Sinkyone, Tolowa, 
Wailaki, Whilkut, Wintu, Wiyot,  Yana, Yokuts, Yuki, and 
Yurok of northern California (Merril l 1923); the Chinook, 
Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde, Coquille, and 
Warmsprings Tribes of Oregon; the Chehalis, Cowlitz, 
Quileute, Hoh, Klallam, Klikitat, Makah, Quinault, 
Skokomish, Snohomish, Spokane, and Yakama of 
Washington (Figure 6) (Gunther 1973; Jones 2012; Ross 
1998; Schuster 1998; Wray 2012); the Wasco and Wishram 
of the Oregon -Washington border (French and French 
1998); and the Hesquiat, Lilllooet, Nitinaht, and 
Okanagan -Colville of Washington and British Columbia 
(Kennedy and Bouchard 19 98; Turner and Efrat 1982; 
Turner et al 1980; 1983). The Nez Perce along the Snake 
River in Idaho, the Coeur d’Alene of northern Idaho, and  the tribes of Montana such as the Blackfeet, Cree, Crow, 
Kootenai and
 Northern Cheyenne also used common 
beargrass l eaves in basketry (Blankenship 1905; Johnston 
1987).  Ceremonial regalia of many tribes also incorporated 
beargrass for different decorative or structural elements. 
Northwestern Cali fornia and southwestern Oregon T ribes 
stuffed men’s ceremonial head rolls w ith beargrass leaves 
and hair ornaments, necklaces and dance aprons worn 
during ceremonial dances are adorned with braids or wraps 
of beargrass (Lake personal observation/use; Moser 1989). 
Quinault spruce root rain hats had decorative elements of 
beargrass . Quivers incorporated beargrass as well as the fur 
of river otter, mink, fisher and pine martens. T he Makah 
kept harpoon points, used in killing whales, in a case made 
of cedar bark and decorated at one end with beargrass 
(Olson 1936; Densmore 1939:50). T he Shasta and Takelma 
of southern Oregon made snares from beargrass leaves. 
These snares were placed in small openings fences and 
used in conjunction with burning to directionally force and 
ensnare deer.   
 
Figure 7. Demonstrating the typical northwestern California tribal way to 
harvest beargrass—pulling out individual leav es or the smallest central 
whorl , taking a few leaves per plant. If cut down to the roots, the wrong 
manner of harvest, the plant often will not grow back. August 2007, 
Klamath Mountains
,USFS -Orleans Ranger District. Photograph by 
Frank K. Lake.  
Powell and Morganroth (1998:22) describe the importance 
of common beargrass to the Quileutes in western 
Washington: “The Quileutes considered it to be the most

valuable weaving material. Each family had one or more 
patches that they would exploit and locations would often 
be kept secret. The grass was picked after June, and then 
dried by hanging in bundles about three feet four inches 
wide with the top quarter tied in an overhand knot.”  
Most tr ibes with a history of beargrass use continue to use 
it today. Common beargrass  is still harvested  by weavers 
in June, July, or August (Figure 7) (Anderson 2009; 
Nordquist and Nordquist 1983). They use it in baskets and 
regalia, as well as in necklaces, earrings, and other pieces 
of jewelry because it provides a glossy, golden -brown 
patina. However, development, habitat destruction, and 
commercial harvesting have severely depleted the 
resource. Additionally, fire suppression, and tree 
densification, plantations, have reduced access to 
harvesting sites.  
Florists and nurserymen also admire the sleek, delicate 
lines of common beargrass and thus the leaves have 
become a popular part of prepackaged bouquets and 
customized floral arrangements. Commercial harvester s 
compete with native gatherers, cutting thousands of pounds 
of the plant to sell for floral arrangements in the United 
States, Europe, and Asia (Hummel et al. 2012).  
Wildlife :  Deer, elk, bighorn sheep, and Rocky Mountain 
goats feed on common beargrass flo wer stalks and/or 
leaves and dense mats of beargrass provide feeding habitat 
for pocket gophers and other small mammals (Young and 
Robinette 1939; Wick et al. 2008; Hemstrom et al. 1982; 
Crane 1990). Black bears eat the softer leaf -bases in early 
spring and grizzly bears use beargrass leaves as a nesting 
material in their winter dens (Clark 1998; Almack 1986). 
Beargrass flowers are pollinated by various species of flies, 
beetles, and bees (Vance et al. 2004). In one study, 138 
insect foragers from these thr ee insect orders were 
observed upon beargrass flowers (Hummel et al. 2012).   
Status
  
Development, habitat destruction, commercial harvesting 
and absence of traditional land management have depleted 
some common beargrass colonies.  Please consult the 
PLANTS  Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
 
 
Description
   
General : A member of the Melanthiaceae, but sometimes 
class ified in the Liliaceae, common beargrass is an 
herbaceous perennial with flowering stalks up to 1.8 m tall. 
It has hundreds of small, fragrant, creamy white flowers on 
terminal racemes and has a thick woody rootstock with 
short rhizomes. The flowers bloom  from spring to early 
summer. The numerous, linear leaves are grass -like, 
evergreen, tough, and up to 90 cm long. The finely toothed  edges of the leaves can cut unprotected hands (Piper and 
Beattie 1915:102; Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973:696; 
Pojar and MacKi
nnon 1994:112).   
 
Distribution : The plant is found as far north as British 
Columbia and south to California and east into Idaho, 
Montana, and Wyoming. It occurs from sea level on the 
Olympic Peninsula to 2300 m elevation in the Rocky 
Mountains (Utech 2002) .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Karuk basketweaver LaVerne Glaze gathering beargrass, 
USFS Orleans Ranger District in July 2005, with the Passport in Time -
Follow the Smoke project. Photograph by Frank K. Lake.  
 
 
 
 
Habitat:  It is moderately shade tolerant and it appears in 
clumps in clearings, prairies, bogs, ridge tops, rocky slopes 
and open woods from sea level to 2300 m (Utech 2002). It 
grows in association with many kinds of conifers including 
Douglas -fir ( Pseudotsuga me nziesii), grand fir (Abies 
grandis ), Pacific silver fir ( Abies amabilis), subalpine fir 
(Abies lasiocarpa), mountain hemlock ( Tsuga 
mertensiana), western hemlock ( Tsuga heterophylla), 
western white pine ( Pinus monticola) and lodgepole pine 
( Pinus contorta) . It can be found in all soil types, but 
prefers xeric to subxeric and su bmesic sites (Wick et al. 
2008).

Adaptation  
Studies show saw palmetto not only thrives in a fire -prone 
environment, but is also activated reproductively by fire. 
Saw palmetto has  waxy, evergreen leaves that are quite 
flammable.  After fire, the plant resprouts from root crowns 
and rhizomes and grows rapidly (Abrahamson 1984; 1999; 
Van Deelen 1991; Schmalzer and Hinkle 1992). Winter -
burned stands recover faster than summer -burned st ands 
(Abrahamson 1984). However, seedlings grow slowly, 
especially on nutrient -poor soils, and they have a limited 
ability to recolonize former habitats (Abrahamson 1995).  
 
 
 
Figure 9. USDA Forest Service,  Six Rivers National Forest, Orleans 
Ranger Distri ct, prescribed cultural burn in the mixed conifer forest of 
the western Klamath Mountains to enhance beargrass for tribal 
basketweavers. October 2005. Photograph by Frank K. Lake.  
 
 
 
Establishment  
Beargrass can be propagated by seeds.  Collect the light tan 
seeds in late August to early September when the capsules 
turn tan and open. Beargrass seeds need 14 weeks of cold 
stratification prior to planting and sixteen weeks if gathered 
at high elevations (Shebitz et al. 2009a; Smart and Minore 
1977). Seeds germ inate best in vermiculite (Crane 1990). 
In a greenhouse experiment, Shebitz et al. (2009a) found 
that beargrass seed germination rates significantly 
increased when the seeds were exposed to smoke -water 
prior to undergoing cold stratification. If sowing the  seeds 
outdoors, clear all debris and expose the bare mineral soil   
before  planting (Shebitz et al. 2009a). Offshoots of 
beargrass collected from the wild do not readily establish 
in containers. For more detailed methods of propagation, 
see Wick et al. (20 08).  Management
 
Common beargrass is tended by the use of harvest methods 
that ensured the survival of individual plants. Rosie Black 
(Quileute) told Muriel Huggins that “You're supposed to 
pull the beargrass leaves, never cut them. And do not pull 
up the ones with the blossoms. By pulling one at a time 
you’re going to have more in the next years. You’ve got to 
preserve it.” By harvesting the leaves in this way, Indians 
stimulated new growth and maintained plant vitality 
(Figure 8). Bea Charles (Klallam, pers. comm. 2006) 
noted: “You never over -take anything from any of the 
plants and trees. We want them to live and have a long life. 
You’ve got a certain beargrass that you leave in the ground 
because that replenishes. That keeps replenishing that 
bush. And t here are [only] certain straws that you pull 
out…it makes room [for the plant] to make more [leaves].”  
   
Untended clumps can become very messy and clogged 
with dead leaves. Regular harvest prevents or reduces this 
accumulation of dead material. Many active  basketweavers 
claim that it is good for the plants to remove the young 
shoots almost every year so that they can’t cause 
congestion. Ethnobotanists Nancy Turner and Sandra 
Peacock made the following observation about the Nuu -
chah -nulth on Vancouver Island : “Plants like basket sedge 
[ Carex obnupta], bear -grass ( Xerophyllum tenax ), cattail, 
[ Typha latifolia ] tule (Schoenoplectus acutus ), and stinging 
nettle ( Urtica dioica ), sought for their leaves or stems as 
weaving and cordage materials, were cut in the  late 
summer when the plants were at full maturity. Since these 
plants are perennials and their root systems were not 
impacted in harvesting, they would continue to grow the 
following year, and some people say they are even more 
prolific with cutting or pru ning” (Turner and Peacock 
2005:122).  
 
Some harvesters for the floral trade cut whole plants to the 
roots and as a result, the beargrass doesn’t grow back 
(Anderson 2005; 2009). The demand for common 
beargass, however, has motivated at least one tribe to gr ow 
it for traditional uses and the commercial market. 
According to Powell and Morganroth (1998:22): “Since 
1996, the Skokomish tribe has cultivated long gardens of 
beargrass under electric transmission wires that cross their 
traditional lands and have succ essfully assured tribal 
weavers of a supply of grass and an income from selling 
the flowers and grass.”  
 
Burning: Beargrass cannot thrive in full shade. While it 
thrives in full sunlight, the best quality beargrass leaves 
grow in light shade under an open canopy (Vance et al. 
2001; Shebitz 2006).There is evidence that common 
beargrass was burned in the forests of northern California 
and western Washington, to enhance the material for 
basketry, as well as to improve the habitat (Anderson 2005; 
2009; Peter an d Shebitz 2006; Shebitz 2006; Shebitz et al. 
2009b). The Yurok, Karuk, Hupa, Chilula, and other tribes 
in northern California burned beargrass clumps in the 
mixed evergreen forests in the outer Coast Ranges and

western Klamath -Siskiyou mountains of norther n 
California periodically from July to early fall, before the 
rains began and the new green leaves that sprout after a 
burn are more easily picked and worked, as they are 
stronger, thinner, and more pliable (Goddard 1903- 4; 
Gibbs 1853; Harrington 1932; Kroeber 1939; O’Neale 
1995; Rentz 2003).  In the late 1920s Lila O’Neale (1995) 
spent time among Karuk and Yurok basketweavers in 
northern California and recorded that “older weavers of the 
idyllic days knew just where to set their annual fires and a 
fine gro wth of long -strand grass would result.” A recent 
publication of the Coquille in Oregon, Ethnobotany of the 
Coquille Indians (Fluharty et al.
 2010:19) instructs the 
reader that beargrass “patches need to be burned every 
three years in early fall when vegeta tion is dry for 
harvesting the following spring.”  
 
 
 
  Figure 10. U.S. Forest Service Fire Crew conducting a cultural burn on 
September 30, 2003 in Olympic National Forest with the goal of restoring 
historic beargrass savannas important to the Skokomish. P hotograph by 
Daniela Shebitz.
 
 
Ecotones at the margins of prairies and wetlands in western 
Washington were often ideal locations, generating 
excellent basketry material for weavers, but the ecotones 
had to be periodically burned to maintain their semi -open , 
partly shaded character. Chet Pulsipher, a Skokomish 
elder, informed Justine James, Quinault, and ( pers. comm. 
2005) that “there was burning in the Moses Prairie for 
beargrass.” Beatrice Black, a Quileute basketweaver, also 
confirmed burning on Moses Pra irie in interviews with 
James. According to James (pers. comm. 2005), Black 
gathered beargrass leaves on Moses Prairie in July and her 
family burned it right before they left, in late July or 
August.   
 
Daniela Shebitz learned from Bruce Miller, a Skokomish  
elder and master basketmaker, that the Skokomish  formerly burned the prairies with care of the beargrass 
resource in mind. “The Skokomish maintained a network 
of prairies and rotated the burning so that each burned 
every two to three years,” relates Shebi
tz. “Burning was 
conducted in autumn and varied in size from a few meters 
to hectares. He [Miller] described that beargrass occurred 
in the savanna -like border between prairie and forests” 
(Shebitz 2005:62).  
   
Through Skokomish oral tradition, historical d ocuments, 
tree -ring analysis and other evidence, ecologists David 
Peter and Daniela Shebitz (2006) have uncovered a former 
indigenous fire -maintained landscape in the Southeastern 
Olympic Peninsula of widely spaced Douglas -fir trees with 
an understory of c ommon beargrass. With the ceasing of 
indigenous burning in the 1800s, forests have grown up in 
the openings, requiring prescribed burning to restore this 
anthropogenic ecosystem (Peter and Shebitz 2006).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Beargrass cultural burn, conducted b y USFS Fire Crew on 
the Happy Camp Ranger District, Klamath National Forest, 2010. Photo 
by Todd Drake . 
 
 
By burning to foster the plants and habitat and gathering 
the leaves judiciously, Native Americans were practicing 
conservation. Scientists have documented that beargrass 
flowering is enhanced in forest openings created by 
disturbances such as fire, and fl owering becomes less 
frequent or non -existent as the forest canopy recloses. By 
maintaining these open habitats, Indians were therefore, 
benefiting the over 100 species of native flies, bees, and 
beetles that pollinate beargrass flowers. Hummel et al. 
(201 2) concluded that: “Given the length of time Native 
Americans have been burning in some beargrass regions 
and habitats, the extent and frequency of burns, and the 
genetic response of plants to such disturbance, this species 
may belong to an anthropogenic f ire-dependent ecosystem 
inherently unstable now that management practices have 
changed.” Beargrass savannas on the Southeastern 
Olympic Peninsula may qualify as such human -made 
ecosystems, because in the absence of Indian -set fires they

lose their character, shifting to more densely forested 
vegetation (Peter and Shebitz 2006).   
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 . Quinault Indian Nation Fire Crew burning an ecotone to 
restore beargrass plants and habitat, September 2004. Photograph by 
Daniela Shebitz.  
 
 
 
 
a number of national forests, including Klamath , Six Rivers 
and  Plumas  National Forests in California, Willamette 
National Forest in Oregon, and Olympic National Forest in 
Washington, partne r with tribes to conduct cultural 
burnings to restore and enhance common beargrass 
populations and main tain open habitat (Figures 9 ,  10  and 
11) (Hunter 1988; Lee 2000; Parker 2007; Shebitz 2005). 
Furthermore, tribes are directly bringing back the 
tradition al ways of their ancestors, by conducting burns for 
culturally significant plants on their reservations (Figure 
12). Given that indigenous people have maintained a 
variety of ecosystems where beargrass thrives with fire, it 
behooves restoration practitione rs to consider both natural 
and anthropogenic disturbance in their conservation 
strategies (Charnley and Hummel 2011). The staffs of 
various national forests are now recognizing that 
traditional and local ecological knowledge can make 
significant contributions to the conservation of ecosystem 
diversity (Charnley and Hummel 2011; Hummel et al. 
2012).  
 
 
 
 
 
Cultivars, I
 Cultivars, Improved, and Selected 
Materials (and area of origin)  
Seeds of common beargrass are widely available from 
native plant nurseries.  
 
 
  References
  
Ackerman, L.A. (ed.). 1996. A Song to the Creator: 
Traditional Arts of Native American Women of the 
Plateau. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.  
Almack, J. 1986. Grizzly bear habitat use, food habits, and 
movements in the Selkirk Mountains,  northern Idaho. 
Pages 150 -157 in: Grizzly Bear Habitat Symposium April 
30, 1985 Proceedings. G.P. Contreras and K.E. Evans, 
compilers. Missoula, MT. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT -207. 
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research  Station.  
 
Anderson, M.K. 2005. Tending the Wild: Native American 
Knowledge and the Management of California's Natural 
Resources. University of California, Berkeley.  
 
______________. 2009. The Ozette Prairies of Olympic 
National Park: Their Former Indigeno us Uses and 
Management. Final Report to Olympic National Park, Port 
Angeles, WA.  
 
Archibald, L. 1999. There was a Day: Stories of the 
Pioneers. Printed by Olympic Graphic Arts, Inc., Forks, 
WA.  
 
Blankenship, J.W. 1905. Native Economic Plants of 
Montana. Mo ntana Agricultural College Experimental 
Station Bulletin 56, Bozeman.  
 
Bowechop, J., V. Charles -Trudeau, D. Croes, C. Kalama, 
C. Morganroth III, T. Parker, V. Riebe, L. Shale, and J. 
Wray. 2012. Pages 170- 177 in: From the Hands of a 
Weaver: Olympic Peninsu la Basketry Through Time. J. 
Wray (ed.). University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.  
 
Bradley, A.F. 1984. Rhizome morphology, soil 
distribution, and the potential fire survival of eight woody 
understory species in western Montana.  Thesis. University 
of Montana,  Missoula.  
 
Charnley, S. and S. Hummel. 2011. People, Plants, and 
Pollinators: The Conservation of Beargrass Ecosystem 
Diversity in the Western United States.  
 
Clark, L. 1998. Wild Flowers of the Pacific Northwest. J.G. 
Trelawny (ed.). Harbour Publishing, Madeira Park, BC 
Canada.  
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997. A Field Guide to the Common Wetland 
Plants of Western Washington and Northwestern Oregon. 
Seattle Audubon Society, Seattle.  
 
Colville 1984. Plants used in basketry. Pages 199- 214 In: 
Aboriginal American Indian Ba sketry: Studies in a Textile 
Art without Machinery. Otis Tufton Mason, author. 
Reprint of the Annual Report of the Board of Regents of 
the Smithsonian Institution, June 30, 1902. Report of the 
U.S. National Museum. The Rio Grande Press, Inc. 
Glorieta, New Mexico.

Crane, M.F. 1990. Xerophyllum tenax . In: Fire Effects 
Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory. Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [2011, February 18].  
 
Curtis, E.S. 1913. The North American Indian: The Indians 
of the United States, the Dominion of Canada, and Alaska. 
Volume 9. Reprinted by Johnson Reprint Corporation, 
New York, N.Y.  
 
Densmore, F. 1939. Nootka and Quileute music. 
Smithsonian  Institution Bureau of American Ethnology 
Bulletin 124. United States Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C.  
 
Fluharty, S., D. Hockema, and N. Norris. 2010. 
Ethnobotany of the Coquille Indians: 100 Common 
Cultural Plants. Coquille Indian Tribe, Cultur al Resources 
Program.  
 
French, D.H. and K.S. French. 1998. Wasco, Wshram, and 
Cascades. Pages 360 -377 in: Handbook of North American 
Indians Vol. 12: Plateau. D.E. Walker, Jr. Volume Editor. 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.  
 
Gibbs, G., 1853. Journ al of the expedition of Colonel  
Redick McKee, United States Indian agent, through North -
Western California. Pages 99 -177 in: Historical and 
Statistical Information Respecting the History, Conditions 
and Prospects of the Indian Tribes of the United States. 
Vol. 3: Information Respecting the History, Condition, and 
Prospects of the Indian Tribes of the United States. H.R. 
Schoolcraft (ed.). Lippincott, Grambo, Philadelphia.  
 
Goddard, P.E. 1903- 4. Life and culture of the Hupa. 
University of California Publicat ions in American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 1(1):1- 88. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973. Ethnobotany of Western Washington: 
The Knowledge and Use of Indigenous Plants by Native 
Americans. Seattle: University of Washington Press.  
 
Harrington, J.P. 1932. Tobacco among the K aruk Indians 
of California. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 94. 
Washingtion, D.C.  
 
Hemstrom, M.A., W.H. Emmingham, N.M. Halverson, 
and others. 1982. Plant association and management guide 
for the Pacific silver fir zone, Mt. Hood and Williamette 
National Forests. R6 -Ecol 100- 1982a. Portland, OR: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Region.  
 
Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 
Pacific Northwest: An Illustrated Manual. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press . 
 
Hummel, S., S. Foltz Jordan, and S. Polasky. 2012. Natural  and Cultural History of Beargrass 
(Xerophyllum tenax). 
USDA Forest Service, PNW Research Station General 
Technical Report (PNW -GTR -864), Portland, OR.  
 
Hunter, J.E. 1988. Prescribed Burning for Cultural 
Resources. Fire Management Notes 49(2)8 -9.  
 
Johnston, A. 1987. Plants and the Blackfoot. Lethbridge 
Historical Society, Lethbridge, Alberta.  
 
Jones, J.M. 2012. Quinault basketry. Pages 78 -91 in: From 
the Hands of a Weaver: Olympic Peninsula Basketry 
Through Time. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.  
 
Kennedy, D. and R.T. Bouchard. 1998. Lillooet. Pages 
174- 190 in: Handbook of North American Indians Vol. 12: 
Plateau. D.E. Walker, Jr. Volume Editor. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, D.C.  
 
K roeber, A.L. 1939. Unpublished field notes of the Yurok. 
University Archives, Bancroft Library. University of 
California, Berkeley.  
 
Kruckeberg, A. 2003. Gardening with Native Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest. Universit y of Washington Press, 
Seattle.  
 
Lee,  J.T. 2000. Emphasis on the regeneration of the bear 
grass ( Xerophyllum tenax ) within the Wolf Timber sale. 
Technical Fire Management Proposal TFM- 14. USDA 
Forest Service Region 5 Plumas National Forest Mount 
Hough Ranger District.  
 
Lobb, A. 1984. Indian Ba skets of the Pacific Northwest and 
Alaska. Graphic Arts Center Publishing Co. Portland, OR.  
 
Mason, O.T. 1984. Aboriginal American Indian Basketry. 
The Rio Grande Press, Inc. Glorieta, New Mexico. 
Previously published in 1902 under the title Aboriginal 
Ind ian Basketry as part of the Annual Report of the Board 
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, Report of the 
U.S. National Museum.  
 
Merrill, R.E. 1923. Plants used in basketry by the 
California Indians. University of California Publications in 
American  Archaeology and Ethnology 20(13):215- 42. 
 
Moser, C.L. 1989. American Indian Basketry of Northern 
California. Riverside Museum Press, Riverside, CA.  
 
Nordquist, D.L. and G.E. Nordquist. 1983. Twana Twined 
Basketry. Acoma Books, Ramona, CA.  
 
Olson, R.L. 1936. The Quinault Indians. University of 
Washington Press, Seattle.  
 
O’Neale, L.M. 1995. Yurok -Karok Basket Weavers. 
Phoebe Apperson Hearst Museum of Anthropology, 
University of California, Berkeley.

Parker, V. 2007. Bear grass burn planned for Plumas 
Nationa l Forest. Resource Policy Report. Roots and 
Shoots. Newsletter 49:6 of the California Indian 
Basketweavers Association.  
 
Peter, D. and D.J. Shebitz. 2006. Historic 
anthropogenically- maintained beargrass savannas of the 
southeastern Olympic Peninsula. Restoration Ecology 
14(4):605- 615. 
 
Piper, C.V. and R.K. Beattie. 1915. Flora of the Northwest 
Coast. Press of the New Era Printing Co. Lancaster, PA.  
 
Pojar, J. and A. MacKinnon, (eds.). 1994. Plants of the 
Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia & Alaska. Vancouver, B.C.: Ministry of Forests 
and Lone Pine Publishing.  
 
Powell, J. and C. Morganroth III. 1998. Quileute Use of 
Trees & Plants: A Quileute Ethnobotany. Prepared for 
Quileute Natural Resources, LaPush, Washington.  
 
Rentz, E. 2003. Effects of Fire on Plant Anatomical 
Structure in Native Californian Basketry Materials. MS 
Thesis, San Francisco State University.  
 
Ross, J.A. 1998. Spokane. Pages 271- 282 in: Handbook of 
North American Indians Vol. 12: Plateau. D.E. Walker, Jr. 
Volu me Editor. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.  
 
Schlick, M.D. 1994. Columbia River Basketry, Gift of the 
Ancestors, Gift of the Earth. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle.  
 
Schuster, H.H. 1998. Yakima and neighboring groups. 
Pages 327 -351 in: Han dbook of North American Indians 
Vol. 12: Plateau. D.E. Walker, Jr. Volume Editor. 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.  
 
Shawley, S.D. 1975. Hemp and cornhusk bags of the 
Plateau Indians. Indian America 9(1):25 -29, 48- 49. 
 
Shebitz, D.J. 2005. Weaving t raditional ecological 
knowledge into the restoration of basketry plants. Journal 
of Ecological Anthropology 9:51- 68. 
 
___________. 2006. The Historical Role and Current 
Restoration Applications of Fire in Maintaining Beargrass 
( Xerophyllum tenax  (Pursh) Nutt.) Habitat on the Olympic 
Peninsula, Washington State. Ph.D. Dissertation College of 
Forest Resources.  
 
Shebitz, D.J., K. Ewing, and J. Gutierrez. 2009a. 
Preliminary observations of using smoke -water to increase 
low elevation beargrass Xerophyllum tenax  germination. 
Native Plants Journal 10(1):13 -20.  
 
Shebitz, D.J, S.H. Reichard, and P.W. Dunwiddie. 2009b. 
Ecological and cultural significance of burning beargrass  habitat on the Olympic Peninsula, Wash
ington. Ecological 
Restoration  27(3):306-319. 
 
Smart,  A.W., and D. Minore. 1977. Germination of 
beargrass ( Xerophyllum tenax  [Pursh] Nutt.). The Plant 
Propagator 23(3):13- 15. 
 
Turner, N.J. and B.S. Efrat 1982. Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island. British Columbia 
Provincial Museum, Victoria.  
 
Turner, N.J. and S. Peacock. 2005. Solving the perennial 
paradox: ethnobotanical evidence for plant resource 
management on the Northwest Coast. Pages 101 -150  in: 
Keeping It Living: Traditions of Plant Use and Cultivation 
on the Northwest Coast of North  America. D. Deur and 
N.J. Turner (eds.). University of Washington Press, Seattle.  
 
Turner, N.J., R. Bouchard, and D.I.D. Kennedy. 1980. 
Ethnobotany of the Okanagan- Colville Indians of British 
Columbia and Washington. British Columbia Provincial 
Museum, Vi ctoria. 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson, and R.T. Ogilvie. 
1983. Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of Vancouver 
Island. British Columb ia Provincial Museum, Victoria.  
 
Utech , F.H . 2002. Xerophyllum . Pages 71-72 in: Flora of 
North America North of M exico Vol. 26.  Magnoliophyta: 
Liliidae: Liliales and Orchidales. Flora of North America 
Editorial Committee (eds.). Oxford University Press, New 
York, N.Y.  
 
Vance, N.C., M. Borsting, D. Pilz, and J. Freed. 2001. 
Special Forest Products: Species Informatio n Guide for the 
Pacific Northwest. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Portland, OR.  
 
Vance, N.C., P. Bernhardt, and R.M. Edens. 2004. 
Pollination and seed production in Xerophyllum tenax  
(Melanthiaceae) in t he Cascade Range of Central Oregon. 
American Journal of Botany 91(12):2060- 2068. 
 
Wick, D., J. Evans, and T. Luna. 2008. Propagation 
protocol for production of container Xerophyllum tenax  
(Pursh) Nutt. Plants (160 ml containers); USDI NPS —
Glacier National Park, West Glacier, Montana. In: Native 
Plant Network. URL: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org. 
Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Research Nursery.  
 
Wray, J. (ed.). 2012. From the Hands of a Weaver: 
Olympic Peninsula Bas ketry Through Time. University of 
Oklahoma Press, Norman.  
 
Young, V.A. and W.L. Robinette. 1939. A Study of the 
Range Habits of Elk on the Selway Game Preserve. Bull. 
No. 9. University of Idaho, School of Forestry. Moscow, 
ID.

Prepared By: M. Kat Anderson , USDA NRCS National 
Plants Team, Frank K. Lake, fire ecologist with Pacific 
Southwest Research Station, and Tim Oakes, USDA 
NRCS Liaison -Conservation Program Analyst to the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.  
 
 
Citation  
Anderson, M.K., F.K. Lake, and T. Oakes 2015. Plant 
Guide for common beargrass ( Xerophyllum tenax). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, National Plants 
Team. Davis, CA 95616.  
 
 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conser vation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.   
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or a vailability 
of other Web sit es. 
 
Non - Discrimination Statement  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination against its customers. If you believe you 
experienced discrimination when obtaining services from 
USDA, participating in a USDA program, or participating 
in a program that receives financial assistance from 
USDA, you may file a complaint with USDA. Information 
about how to file a discrimination complaint is available 
from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.  
USDA prohibits dis crimination in all its programs and 
activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, 
disability, and where applicable, sex (including gender 
identity and expression), marital status, familial status, 
parental status, religion, sexual orientation, political 
beliefs, genetic information, reprisal, or because all or part 
of an individual’s income is derived from any public 
assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.)To file a complaint of discrimination, complete, 
sign and  mail a program discrimination complaint form, 
available at any USDA office location or online at 
www.ascr.usda.gov,  or write to:   USDA   
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights  
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W.  
Washington, D.C. 20250 -9410  Or call toll free at (866) 632
-9992 (voice) to obtain 
additional information, the appropriate office or to request 
documents. Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or 
have speech disabilities may contact USDA through th e 
Federal Relay service at (800) 877 -8339 or (800) 845- 6136 
(in Spanish). USDA is an equal opportunity provider, 
employer and lender.  
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for 
communication of program information (e.g., Braille, large 
pri nt, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET 
Center at (202) 720- 2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
Published: September 4, 2015   
Edited:  August, 2015  M.K. A. and T.W.O.   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER