Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ADAM’S NEEDLE 
Yucca filamentosa L. 
Plant Symbol = YUFI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Needle palm, bear grass,  bear’s thread, Christmas 
bells, Confederate flax, cu rly hair, Eve’s darning 
needle, Eve’s thread, gr ass cactus, our-Lord’s-
candles, silk grass, soap root, soap week, Spanish-
dagger, spoon leaf yucca, thread-and-needle 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Catawba, Cherokee, Nanticoke 
and other Native American tribes used  Yucca 
filamentosa  for a variety of purposes including food, 
medicine, cordage and even soap.  The roots, which 
contain saponin, were prepared by boiling and 
pounding for use as soap.  Roots were beaten into a 
salve or poultice that woul d then be used to treat  sprains or applied to sores on the skin.  The roots 
were used to treat gonorrhea and rheumatism.  Skin 
diseases were treated by ru
bbing the roots on the skin 
and by taking a decoction of the roots.  The plant was 
used as a sedative to induce sleep.  An infusion of the 
plant was used to treat diabetes.  The flowers were 
eaten both raw and cooked.  The pounded roots were 
thrown into fishing waters  to “intoxicate fishers” 
allowing for easier catch.   The green leaves are easily 
split into long strips that can be plied into cord.  The 
leaves have long, very strong fibers, a type of sisal, 
which were twisted into strong thread used as 
cordage for binding and to construct baskets, fishing 
nets, fishing lines and clothing.  The leaves of  Yucca 
filamentosa  contain the strongest fibers native to 
North America.   
USDA, NRCS @ PLANTS 
 
Wildlife : Hummingbirds visit the flowers.  Yuccas 
are pollinated by sma ll, white Yucca moths 
( Tegeticula yucasella  and related species) with which 
they have a special plant-insect mutualism.  At night, 
the fragrant flowers attract the female moth that feeds 
on the nectar.  She then ro lls pollen from the flowers 
into a ball that is three tim es the size of her head and 
carries the pollen ball to the next flower.  There, she 
first lays eggs inside the immature ovary and then 
deposits the pollen on the flower’s stigma insuring 
that seeds will form to feed her progeny.  Because the 
larvae mature before they are able to consume all of 
the seeds (60 to 80% of the seeds remain viable), the 
plants are able to reproduce as well.   
 
Other : The flowers are used for corsages. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Agave Family (Agavaceae).  Adam’s needle 
is an native, evergreen, pere nnial shrub.  The plants 
have long, thick underground stems and rarely have 
an above ground stem.  The grayish green leaves 
appear from a rosette at or near the ground.  The 
leaves are stiff an d sword-shaped (30 to 76 cm long 
and 2.5 cm wide) with sharp, pointed tips and long, 
curly, filamentous threads at the margins.  The bell-
shaped flowers (5 to 8 cm wide) are a creamy white 
to pale yellow or green with broadly ovate petals (4-5 
cm).  The flowers, which a ppear in late spring and

summer, hang loosely in clusters from a large, central 
spike (1 to 4 m tall) that emerges from the rosette.  
The fruits are capsules that contain 120 to 150, small 
black seeds that are dispersed by wind.   
 
Distribution: Adam’s needle is native to the 
Southeastern United States and Mexico.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Adam’s needle is adapted to hot, dry regions 
in areas that are protected from  fire.  It occurs in dry, 
sandy soils along the coast, rocky and sandy places, 
bluffs, thin woods, oldfields and other open areas.   
 
Establishment 
Yucca filamentosa  does well in garden plantings as 
well as in areas of high heat and light, such as 
parking lots.  The plants have striking foliage that 
adds interest to borders, rock gardens and xeriscapes.  
The plants are long-lived and very drought resistant.  
The thick, rhizomous roots are storage organs that 
allow the plants to thrive in many soils, even in areas 
of pure sand.  The plants can spread through this 
underground root system to form small clumps (1 to 
1.5 m wide) with multiple crowns or offshoots.  They 
can tolerate both cold and moderate wetness, making 
the species one of the most hardy of the genus.  The 
plants may be propagated by dividing the offshoots 
from the parent plant.  The plants may also be 
propagated through root cuttings and seeds, which 
sprout readily.  Care should be taken in site selection, 
as the roots of mature plants can grow large and 
extend deep into the ground, making removal 
difficult.  For more temporary sites, the plants may be 
grown in containers.  For  garden plantings space the 
plants about 1meter apart  in a sunny, well-drained 
location of low to medium fertility.  Water the plants 
well for the first year as the roots establish.  Because 
of the sharp, pointed leaves  they should not be placed 
near playgrounds or other areas where children play.   
 
Management 
The flower stalk should be removed once the flowers 
have dropped.  Otherwise, these plants are durable 
and require very little maintenance.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
In areas of poor drainage, the leaves may be sensitive 
to leaf spot or blight.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil  Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.  
Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Banks, W.H. 1953.   Ethnobotany of the Cherokee 
Indians .  Master of Science Thesis, University of 
Tennessee, Tennessee.  216 pp. Brown, R.C. 1994.  
Florida’s first people: 12,000 years of human history . 
Pineapple Press, Inc., Sara sota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Chapman, A.W. 1883.  Flora of the Southern United 
States: Flowering Plants and Ferns .  Second Edition.  
J. Wilson and Son, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  698 
pp. 
 
Coffey, T. 1993.   The history & folklore of North 
American wildflowers.   Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 
MA.  356 pp.   
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers in the United States and Canada .  
Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, New York.  
322 pp.  
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997.   Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
illustrated encyclopedia .  Timber Press, Portland, 
Oregon.  493 pp. 
 
Duncan, W.H. & L.E. Foote 1975.   Wildflowers of 
the Southeastern United States.   University of 
Georgia Press, Athens, Georgia.  296 pp. 
 
Flint, H.L. 1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America .  Second Edition.  John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp. 
 
 
Halfacre, R.G. & A.R. Showcroft 1979.   Landscape 
plants of the Southeast .  Sparks Press, Raleigh, North 
Carolina.  325 pp. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York.  500 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp.

Moerman, D.E. 1999.  Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(21 June 2001). 
 
Ottensen, C. 1995.  The native plant primer.  
Harmony Books, New York, New York.  354 pp. 
 
Rogers, D.J. & C. Rogers 1991.   Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora .  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Taylor, L.A. 1940.   Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes .  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Taylor, K.S. and S.F. Hamblin 1963.   Handbook of 
wild flower cultivation .  The Macmillan Company, 
New York, New York.  307 pp.   
 
Whitcomb, C.E. 1983.   Know it and grow it, II: A 
guide to the identification and use of landscape 
plants .  Lacebark Publications, Stillwater, Oklahoma.  
740 pp. 
 
Whitthoft, J. 1947.   An early Cherokee 
ethnobotanical note  (Communicated by W.N. 
Fenton).  Journal of the Washington Academy of 
Sciences 37(3): 73-75. 
 
Wyman, D 1949.   Shrubs and vines for American 
gardens.   The Macmillan Company, New York, New 
York.  442 pp. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.