Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHAPARRAL YUCCA
Yucca whipplei Torr. 
Plant Symbol = YUWH 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & UC Davis Arboretum 
 
Alternate Names 
Hesperoyucca whipplei  (Torr.) Baker; our lord’s 
candle, Whipple’s yucca 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The apical meristem, young flower 
stalks, flowers, and tender immature pods were eaten  by many tribes in southern California including the 
Tubatulabal, Cahuilla, Luiseno, Diegueno, Kawaiisu, 
and Western Shoshone and are still gathered today.   
 
According to the Kawaiisu, traditionally in the early 
spring, the apical meristem or "heart" was removed 
with the aid of an oak or a juniper shaft.  It was then 
roasted in a pit for a lengthy period.  While green and 
tender the flower stalk that grows out of the apical 
meristem was cut or broken off by hand.  These 
stalks were cut into sections and roasted in fire or in 
ashes and coals.  It is reputed to have a sweet taste.  
The flowers are edible and can be boiled and eaten. 
The Diegueno tribe harvested 
the flowers before they  
 Alfred Brousseau © Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos 
opened and boiled them twice to remove the 
bitterness before eating. 
 
Chaparral yucca was also an important fiber plant.  
The Diegueno and Cahuilla used the fibers for 
sandals while the Chumash and the Gabrielino used it 
for fishing line.  Whole or split yucca leaves were 
also utilized for rough tying of bundles of firewood, 
house frames, and for basketry.  To retrieve and 
prepare the fibers, the leaves were immersed in water 
until the epidermal sheath and the connecting round 
tissue rotted away.  The leaves may also have been 
pounded with a wooden mallet to facilitate the 
process.  The fibers are then buried in mud to whiten 
them, washed and combed.  
 
Wildlife : The seeds and fruits are eaten by the 
antelope ground squirrel and hummingbirds consume 
the nectar. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General : Agave Family (Agavaceae).  This shrub is 
simple and acaulescent with no evident trunk.  The 
leaves are slender, stiff an d gray-green.  They are 3-8 
dm long and radiate from a central base and have 
needle-like tips.  The plant  has a single flower stalk, 
which is covered with fragrant, creamy white 
flowers.  Night-flying moths pollinate the flowers.  
The fruit is a capsule containing numerous black 
seeds.  After fruiting the pl ant dies.  Some plants 
reproduce vegetatively through offsets.

Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  This plant is found in chaparral, coastal sage 
scrub, creosote bush scrub and the desert at 
elevations below 2500 m.  It grows in southern 
California, northwestern Arizona, and Baja, 
California. 
 
Establishment 
Seeds: Plant the seeds in the fall in deep, one-gallon 
pots in well-drained soil.  Lay the seeds on top of the 
soil and sprinkle soil over the seeds until they are 
covered.  Then cover the soil with one quarter-inch of 
gravel.  Keep the pots damp through the first year.  
The plants need sharp drainage and space.  Plant the 
young seedling the following fall outside.  This yucca 
needs full sun, excellent drainage, and is intolerant of 
frequent summer water.  It can endure cold 
temperatures to about 10 degrees F. 
 
Cuttings : Cut off yucca leaves at the point of origin 
in the spring.  Reduce the length of the leaves to six 
inches, exposing bare stem tissue.  Stick the cuttings 
in a pot with well-drained soil and water the soil, 
keeping it slightly moist.  Place the pot in partial 
shade.  Plant the seedling outdoors in full sun, in 
well-drained soil in the fall.  Continue to water the 
plant for three years until it gets established. 
 
Management 
Prune back dead or diseased leaves periodically in 
the autumn. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is available  from native plant nurseries 
within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bean L.J. & K.S. Saubel. 1972 .  Temalpakh: 
Cahuilla Indian knowledge and usage of plants .  
Malki Museum Press, Morongo Indian Reservation, 
Banning, California. 
 
Hedges, K. & C. Beresford. 1986.   Santa Ysabel 
ethnobotany .  San Diego Museum of Man Ethnic 
Technology Notes No. 20.  San Diego Museum of 
Man, San Diego, California. 
 
Kroeber, A.L. 1909.   Notes on Shoshonean dialects 
of Southern California.  University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and 
Ethnology 8(5):235-269. 
 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson. 1951.   
American wildlife and plan ts: A guide to wildlife food 
habits .  Dover Publications, New York, New York. 
 
Mathewson, M.S. 1985.   Threads of life: Cordage 
and other fibers of the California tribes .  
Unpublished Senior Thesis.  Department of 
Anthropology.  University of California, Santa Cruz. 
 
McKinney, K.K. & J.C. Hickman 1993.   Yucca.  
Page 1210  IN:   The Jepson manual: Higher plants of 
California .  J.C. Hickman (ed.).  University of 
California Press, Berkeley. 
 
Mielke, J. 1993.   Native plants for southwestern 
landscapes .  University of Texas Press, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
Voegelin, E.W. 1938.   Tubatulabal ethnography .  
Anthropological Records 2(1):1-90. 
 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981.   Kawaiisu ethnobotany.  
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Science Department, University of California, Davis, 
California 
 
Warren Roberts 
UC Davis Arboretum, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 07dec00 jsp; 04jun03 ahv; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.