Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
PRICKLYASH  
Zanthoxylum americanum  P. 
Mill. 
Plant Symbol = ZAAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Northern prickly ash, toothache tree; this genus is 
incorrectly spelled  Xanthoxylum in much of the 
literature.   
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Alabama, Cherokee, Chippewa, 
Comanche, Creek, Delaware, Iroquois, Oklahoma, 
Menominee, Meskwaki, Ojibwa, Pawnee, and 
Potawatomi were among the Native American tribes 
that used common pricklyash for many, mostly 
medicinal purposes.  An infusion of the bark was 
used as a wash to treat itching skin and to treat 
swollen joints.  Infusions of the bark were taken 
internally for back pain, cramps, pulmonary 
problems, to treat fevers, and as a cold and cough 
remedy.  Infusions, made from the crushed roots, 
were also used to treat fevers.  A poultice made from 
the inner bark was used to treated rheumatism and 
sharp pains.  Placing the inner bark in the throat 
treated sore throats.  The bark was boiled into a 
decoction that was taken to induce miscarriages.  The 
plant was used to treat pain after childbirth.  Bark 
infusions were taken to treat worms in adults.  The 
bark of the roots was used to treat colic, rheumatism,  and gonorrhea.  An ointment, made my mixing the 
plant with bear grease, wa
s applied to ulcers and 
sores.  Infusions of the berries were used to spray on 
the chest and throat to tr eat bronchial diseases, to 
wash sores, and to flavor medicines.  The bark and 
the berries were used to treat hemorrhages, to make 
cough syrup, as an exp ectorant, and to treat 
tuberculosis.  Children who were weak were washed 
with a decoction of the bark to make their legs and 
feet strong.  The bark was used in different forms to 
alleviate toothaches.  Smoking the bark treated 
toothache.  Bark, either beaten or powdered was 
packed in and around an achin g tooth.  Pieces of the 
bark were chewed to help breakup a tooth that was to 
be remove.  The plant was an ingredient in 
compounds that were used for kidney trouble, to 
strengthen convalescing patients, and to induce 
vomiting.  An infusion of the bark was, at least once, 
placed on a dog’s nose to improve its scenting 
capabilities during hunting.  The fruits were 
administered as diuretics  to horses.  Young men of 
the Omaha tribe used a perfume made from the fruits.  
The plant is probably still used today for various 
purposes by various Native American tribes. 
 ©John Kasmer  Northeastern Illin ois University 
 
Wildlife: The fruits are eaten by a variety of birds and 
small mammals including bobwhite quails, vireos, 
pheasants, cottontails, and eastern chipmunks.  Bees 
are attracted to the flow ers.  Giant swallowtail 
butterflies lay their eggs on the plants leaves.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Rue Family (Rutaceae).  It is an aromatic, 
native, perennial tree or shrub that can grow from 1 
to 8 meters tall.  The branches are dark brown and 
armed with 8 to 13 mm-long prickles.  When broken, 
the twigs have a strong odor reminiscent of crushed 
lemon peel.  The leaf buds (1mm long) are red and 
woolly.  The leaves (1 to 30 cm long) are composed 
of 5 to 11 ovate, pinnately arranged leaflets (4 to 8 
cm long).  The dark green and lustrous leaves are 
dotted with translucent glands.  The lower portion of 
the leaf is a lighter pubescent green beneath.  The 
greenish-yellow flowers (3 to 3.5 mm wide) appear in 
the spring before the leav es.  The small fruits are 
capsules (0.5 to 0.6 cm).  Each fruit contains one

seed.  The fruit ripens in late summer, turning from 
green to reddish brown.  When the seeds mature, they 
hang exposed from the split capsules.   
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: This plant occurs along riverbanks and in 
moist ravines, thickets, and woods.  It is also found in 
somewhat drier areas such as upland rocky hillsides, 
bluffs, and open woods. 
 
Establishment 
Common pricklyash is a very hearty tree or small 
shrub that does well in poor soils.  Although easily 
grown, the plants are not generally used for landscape 
purposes as ornamentals.   Because of the plants small 
yet sharp thorns and suckering habit, they can make 
an efficient barrier planting.  The plants do well in 
partial shade to full sun.  Seeds, suckers, and root 
cuttings may propagate pricklyash.  The seeds may 
be gathered from the plants when the capsules are 
open.  Unopened capsules will open upon drying.  
The seeds will require scar ification to germinate, 
unless they are sown in the fall immediately after 
collecting them.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common pricklyash has no serious insect or disease 
problems.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are not  readily available from 
commercial sources.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.   Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada .  Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1998.   Manual of woody landscape plants.  
Fifth Edition.  Stipes Publishing, Champaign, Illinois.  
1187 pp. 
 
Dutton, B.E. 1996.   Zanthoxylum americanum  Mill.  
[Online].  Available:  
http://www.bbg.org/research/nymf/encyclopedia/rut/z
an0010.htm.  (25 June 2001).   
 
Flint, H.L. 1997.   Landscape plants for Eastern 
North America .  Second Edition.  John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, New York.  842 pp. 
 
Hamel, P.B. & M.U. Chiltoskey 1975.   Cherokee 
plants and their uses: A 400-year history .  Herald 
Publishing Company, Sylva, North Carolina.  65 pp. 
 
Herrick, J.W. 1995.   Iroquois medical botany .  
Syracuse University Press,  Syracuse, New York.  278 
pp. 
 
Kasmer, J. 1998 .  Biology 498: Zanthoxylum 
americanum .  Northeastern Illinois University, 
Chicago, IL.  Accessed: 27sep01.  
<www.neiu.edu/~jkasmer /Biol498/species.htm>. 
 
Missouri Botanical Garden 2000.   Kemper Center for 
Home Gardening: Zanthoxylum americanum.  
[Online].  Available:  
http://www.mobot.org/hort/p lantfinder/Code/M/M90.
htm.  (25 June 2001).   
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany .  
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1999.   Native American Ethnobotany 
Database: Foods, drugs, dyes and fibers of native 
North American Peoples.  The University of 
Michigan-Dearborn.   [Online].  Available: 
http://www.umd.umich.edu/cgi-bin/herb
(25 June 2001). 
 
Oklahoma Biological Soci ety Survey 1999.  
Zanthoxylum americanum  P. Mill.  [Online].  
Available:  
http://www.biosurvey.ou.edu/shrub/zante-
ame.htm.  (25 June 2001).  
 
Sayre, L.E. 1925.   The botanical features of the new 
United States pharmacopoeia.   American Journal of 
Pharmacology April 1925: 185-271. 
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora.  
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Swanson, R.E. 1994.   A field guide to the trees and 
shrubs of the Southern Appalachians .  John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.  399 pp. 
 
Swanton, J.R. 2000.   Creek religion and medicine .  
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska.  
684 pp.

Taylor, L.A. 1940.  Plants used as curatives by 
certain Southeastern Tribes .  Botanical Museum of 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
88 pp. 
 
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1992.  Seeds of woody 
plants in North America.  Dioscorides Press, 
Portland, Oregon.  407 pp.   
 
Prepared By 
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 27sep01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.