MEADOW 
DEATHCAMAS  
Zigadenus venenosus  W. Watson  
Plant Symbol =  ZIVE 
 Meadow deathcamas. Photo by Eve Warren, USDI BLM.  
 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:   meadow death camas, grassy death 
camas  
 
Scientific Names:  Z. intermedius Rydb ., Z. salinus A. 
Nelson , Z. gramineus Rydb . 
 
Caution: This plant can be toxic . 
Uses  
Livestock:  Deathcamas is toxic to all classes of livestock 
and wildlife. Sheep and cattle are most commonly 
affected, but  occasional losses of horses and domestic 
chickens have also been reported (Burrows and Tyrl 
2001). Marsh et al. (1915) reported the loss of 500 sheep 
in a single event.   
 
Pollinators : Deathcamas  has been promoted for pollinator 
plantings; however its use by bees is limited to a few 
specialist species due to the toxicity of the pollen (Cane et 
al 2004).  
Ethnobotanical : The toxic nature of meadow deathcamas 
was well known to Native Americans (Burro ws and Tyrl 
2001; Chestnut 1902; Turner 1980). Several tribes applied   
 mashed bulbs externally to heal bruises, sprains and boils 
(Chestnut 1902; Blankinship 1905). 
Stat us 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for  this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
Meadow deathcamas may be considered weedy in some 
regions or habitats (Whitson et al. 1996). Consumption of 
deathcamas has been linked to deaths of livestock and 
humans (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
infor mation is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  
General :  Meadow deathcamas is a perennial bulbous 
native forb in  the lily family (liliaceae). The plants are 1 
to 2 feet tall with linear grass -like leaves mostly arising 
below the stem middle. The flowers are born in panicles 
with flower bearing stems 1/4 to 1 inch in length. The 
petals are creamy white, 1/4 inch long , with a large gland 
at the base. The fruit is a capsule which dries and splits at 
maturity releasing the seed (Welsh et al. 2003). There are 
approximately 130,000 seeds per pound (Vance 2010). 
The common name refers to the toxicity of the plant and 
its si milarity in appearance to camas ( Camassia  
quamash).  
Distribution :  
Meadow deathcamas occurs in western North America 
from Saskatchewan to British Columbia and south to Baja 
California and New Mexico (USDA NRCS 2014). For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Habitat :  Meadow deathcamas  is commonly found in 
moist meadows to dry rocky hillsides in ponderosa pine, 
mountain shrub, wet grasslands and prairie communities 
at elevations from 1,400 to 8,000 feet (Hickman 1993; 
Welsh et al. 2003).  
Adaptation  
Meadow deathcamas is adapted to sandy to rocky soils 
(Hauser 2006) in areas receiving 12 to 20 inches annual 
precipitation. It is shade intolerant (Klinka et al 1989). 
This species is well adapted to areas prone to wildfire. 
The tops of the plants are killed, but the bulbs survive and 
Natural Resources Conservation Service  Plant Guide

deathcamas is among the first plants to regenerate after 
fire (Volland and Dell 1981).  
Establishment  
Deathcamas is not recommended for rangeland plantings. 
See “Seed and Plant Production” for more information on 
plant propagation.  
Management  
Meadow deathcamas is t ypically very sparse on the 
landscape but can become prominen t on overgrazed sites 
(USDA FS 1937 ). It greens up early in the spring and 
offers tempting forage. The best way to avoid problems is 
to keep livestock away from heavily infested areas 
(USDA FS 19 37). A proper grazing regimen is 
recommended to prevent deathcamas from increasing on 
rangelands.  The likelihood of consumption increases 
following fire as deathcamas regenerates quickly from 
underground bulbs.  
 
Deathcamas species contains a wide range of toxic 
alkaloids with meadow deathcamas having the most 
diverse group of alkaloids in the genus (Burrows and Tyrl 
2001). A lethal dose is estimated to be 1% of body weight 
of green plants in sheep, but severe illness can occur with 
dosages as low as 0.2 to 0.5% body weight (Panter and 
James 1989). Cattle are more susceptible to illness from 
deathcamas ingestion, but sheep are at greater risk 
because they are more likely to eat the plants (Marsh et al. 
1915).   
Signs of poisoning can begin several hours to a d ay after 
ingestion. Indications include frothy salivation and strings 
of saliva hanging from the mouth (Burrows and Tyrl 
2001). Depression, vomiting, and grinding of the teeth are 
also signs. In severe cases, loss of appetite, loss of 
coordination, weaknes s and death follow. 
Treatments for deathcamas poisoning include atropine for 
relief of the cardiovascular effects and picrotoxin to 
counteract depression (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Deathcamas has been mistaken for other edible bulbous 
plants such as wild onion, sego lily and camas, especially 
when flowers are lacking (Cronquist et al. 1977). Eating 
o ne or two bulbs is enough to cause severe illness in 
children, and 4 or 5 can cause death depending on the 
species (Burrows and Tyr l 2001). 
 
Environmental Concerns  
Meadow deathcamas is highly toxic. It has been linked to 
the deaths of thousands of sheep and other livestock. It 
increases with overgrazing.    
Control  
Spraying deathcamas with 2,4 -D in early spring when 
plants are in th e 3 to 5 leaf stage provides fair control 
(Hyder and Sneva 1962).   Please contact your local agricultural extension speci
alist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety  instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effect ive. 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Insect pollination is required for seed production in 
deathcamas (Cane et al 2004; Moldenke 1976).  Pollen 
and nectar of foothills death camas ( V. paniculatus ) was 
found to contain  the same toxins as are found in the 
vegetati ve plant parts.  Adults of the generalist solitary 
bee,  Osmia lignaria (Megachilidae), were paralyzed and 
soon after died when fed biologically relevant doses of 
deathcamas toxins ; larval progeny eating dosed provision 
masses likewise died . Similarly, polle n of meadow 
deathcamas shaken into sugar water killed 89% of the 
bees that fed on it within 16 hours (Hitchcock 1959).  
This high mortality rate  probably explains the absence of 
the  50+ native bee species from this potential host  (Cane 
et al 2004) . The solitary bee,  Andrena astragali , is known 
to use death camas pollen to feed itself and its progeny.  
 
Seed falls easily from mature capsules and can be cleaned 
with a hammermill and airscreen cleaner. Seeds placed in 
cold/moist stratification for 90 days re sulted in 90% 
germination compared to 0% germination from the non -
stratified control (Bartow 2003). All portions of the plant, 
including the fruit and seed are toxic and should be 
handled with care.  
Plants can also be propagated by division and bulb 
offsho ots (Hauser 2006).  
Cultivars,  Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no releases of meadow deathcamas. Common 
seed harvested from native stands is available in limited 
quantities.    
 
References  
Bartow, A.L. 2003. Propagation protoc ol for production 
of container Zigadenus  venenosus  S. Watson plants; 
USDA NRCS Covrallis Plant Materials Center. In: 
Native Plant Network. URL: 
http;//www.nativeplantnetwork.org.  
Blankinship, J.W. 1905. Native economic plants of  Montana. Montana Agricultur al College 
Experimental Station. Bulletin 56.  
Burrows. G.E. and R. J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic Plants of North 
America. Iowa State Press. Ames, IA. 1342p.

Cane, J.; Weber, M.; Yost, M.; Gardner, D. 2004. Alkaloids and old lace: pollen toxins exclude 
generalist po llinators from death camas 
( Toxicoscordion  [= Zigadenus ] paniculatum) 
(Melanthiaceae). [Abstract]. Salt Lake City, UT. 
http://www.2004.botanyconference.org/engine/search
/index.php?func=detail&aid=1128. (January 2014).  
Chestnut, V.K. 1902. Plants used by th e Indians of 
Mendocino County, California. Contributions from 
the U.S. National Herbarium. 7: 295 -408.  
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L.  Reveal, and P.K. Holmgren. 1977. Intermountain 
Flora. Vol. 6. The monocotyledons.  Columbia Univ. 
Press, NY.  
Hauser, A.S. 2006. Zigadenus venenosus . In: Fire Effects 
Information System, [Online]. US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(Producer).  Available: 
http;//www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/  
Hickman, J.C., editor.  1993.  The Jepson manual: higher  plants of California.  Univ. of California Press, Ltd. 
Los Angeles. 1400p.  
Hitchcock, J.D. 1959. Poisoning of honey bees by death  camas blossoms. Ameri ca Bee Journal. 99: 418-419.  
Hyder, D.N., and F.A. Sneva, 1962. Chemical control of  foothill deathcamas. J. Range Manage. 15:25 -27.  
Klinka, K. Krajina, V.J., Ceska, A. and A.M. Scagel.  1989. Indicator plants of coastal British Columbia. 
Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia 
Press. 288p.  
Marsh, C.D., Clawson, A.B and H. Marsh. 1915.  Zygadenus, or death camas. USDA Bull 125.  
Panter, K.E. and L.F. James. 1989.Death camas -early 
grazing can be hazardous. Rangelands. 11: 147 -149.  
Turner, N.J., Bouchard, R . and I.D. Dorothy. 1980. 
Ethnobotany of the Okanagan -Colville Indians of 
British Columbia and Washington. British Columbia 
Provincial Museum.  
[USDA FS] USDA Forest Service. 1937. Range Plant  Handbook. Washington DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Variously paginated.  
[USDA NRCS] USDA Natural Resources Conservation  Service. 2014. The PLANTS Database, version 3.5. 
URL: http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 21 Jan 2014). 
Baton Rouge (LA): National Plant Data Center.  
Vance, Nan C. 2010. Evaluation  of native plant seeds and 
seeding in the east -side central Cascades ponderosa 
pine zone. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW -GTR -823. 
Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 85 p.  Volland, L.A. and J.D. Dell. 198
1. Fire effects on Pacific 
Northwest forest and range vegetation. Portland, OR: 
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Region, Range Management and 
Aviation and Fire Management. 23p.  
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S. and L.C.  Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University. Provo, UT. 912p.  
Whitson, T.D. (ed.) et al. 1996. Weeds of the West . 
Western Society of Weed Science in cooperation 
with Cooperative Extension Services, University of 
Wyoming. Laramie, Wyoming.  
 
Citat ion 
D. Tilley and L. St. John, L. 2013.  Plant guide for 
meadow deathcamas ( Zigadenus venenustus). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 83210.  
Published  February 2014 
Edited: 29Jan2014jab; 29Jan2014ls  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plan t-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov . 
 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping People Help the Land  
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER