Plant Guide  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COONTIE 
Zamia pumila  L. 
Plant Symbol = ZAPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Warning:  The roots of coontie are toxic when taken 
internally, without sufficient preparation.   
 
Alternate Names 
Seminole bread, Florida arrowroot, sago cycas, 
comptie, contis, comfortroot, wild sago, white-root, 
white bread-plant 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic : The Seminole, Alabama, and many 
other Native American trib es in the southeastern 
United States used the fruits and roots of coontie for 
food.  Some people still prepare it today.  The starchy 
stems and roots were the main source of flour for the 
Seminoles and many indigenous people of central 
and southern Florida.  These peoples are attributed 
with increasing the plant’s distribution.  The plant 
parts contain central nervous system toxins, which 
must be removed before consumption.  To make 
flour, the roots are first  chopped into pieces.  They 
are then pounded with a mortar and pestle.  The pulp 
is then washed with water and the starch is allowed to 
settle to the bottom.  Then the water is drained and 
the remaining paste is left to ferment for several days.  
At the end of the fermentation process, the starch is 
set in the sun to dry.  When dry, the powdery, 
cornmeal-like flour is then baked into bread.   
 
Wildlife:   Coontie cones reportedly provide food in 
exchange for pollination services for two species of 
beetles in Florida,  Pharaxonotha zamiae  and 
Rhopalotria slossoni .  The seeds are a source of food 
for mockingbirds, blue jays, and many other birds as 
well as insects and small mammals.  Butterfly larvae 
feed on the leaflets. 
 
Status 
 @ PLANTS 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General : Cycad Family (Zamiaceae).   Zamia is one 
of only a few primitive or  ‘relict’ genera, commonly 
called cycads that are living remnants of plants that 
were abundant about 325 million years ago.   Zamia 
pumila  is the only species of this genus that grows in 
the United States.  Coontie is a fern-like evergreen, 
perennial shrub (.5 to 1 m in height) with a thick (10 
cm in diameter), sometime s branched, trunk that is 
either very short (to 15 cm) or submerged.  The trunk 
is starchy, which is the reason for the name 
“Seminole bread”.  Dark green fronds grow from the 
top of the trunk and have 2 to 13 pairs of stiff, 
leathery leaflets that are 4-9 dm long.  Leaf-widths 
vary among plants.  Fronds are from 40 to 80 cm 
long.  Green to dark reddish brown cones grow atop 
stalks, from the center of the top of the trunk.  Male 
plants bear slender, cylindrical cones that are about 
10 cm long and 2-3 cm in diameter.  The cone-like 
reproductive structures on female plants, called 
“megasporophytes,” are 12 to 13 cm long, 5 cm in 
diameter.  Cones appear in mid-to late summer.  The 
red to red-orange seeds are 1cm to 2 cm long.   
 
Distribution : Z. pumilia  is endemic to central and 
southern Florida.   Zamia pumila is now rare, not only 
because of its very small geographic range, but also 
because people dig up plants  in the wild to plant in 
their gardens.  For current  distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
These plants grow in dry, sandy pinelands and 
hammocks.  Although salt tolerant, they rarely occur 
in sandy coastal dunes.

Establishment 
The plants will grow from seed, but one must be 
patient as the seeds may take several months to 
several years to germinate.  Plants may be propagated 
by division.  Coonties can grow in full sun to deep 
shade, but require warm weather.  They are drought-
tolerant and like well-drained soils.  The plants are 
salt-tolerant and are therefore excellent for coastal 
landscapes.  They make lovely additions to the 
garden as shrubs or ground covers.  Coonties make 
beautiful specimen plants and grow well in 
containers, either indoors or outdoors.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)   
These plant materials are readily available from 
commercial sources.  Because this plant is threatened 
by harvesting, be sure to inquire whether the plants 
were propagated from seed and not taken from the 
wild.  Contact your local Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation 
Service) office for more information.  Look in the 
phone book under ”United States Government.”  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service will be 
listed under the subheading “Department of 
Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Bailey, L.H. & E.Z. Bailey 1976.  Hortus Third: A 
concise dictionary of plants cultivated in the United 
States and Canada . Simon and Schuster Macmillan 
Co., New York, New York.  1290 pp. 
 
Broome, T. 2001.   The coontie of Florida.  Articles 
http://cycadjungle.8m.com/cycadjungle/articles.html 
(12 June 2001). 
 
Brown, R.C. 1994.   Florida’s first people: 12,000 
years of human history . Pineapple Press, Inc., 
Sarasota, Florida.  262 pp. 
 
Hann, J.H. 1986.   The use and processing of plants 
by Indians of Spanish Florida . Southeastern 
Archaeology 5(2):91-102. 
 
Hill, K. 1998.   The Cycad Pages: Zamia integrifolia.   
http://plantnet.rbgsyd.gov.au/cgi-
bin/taxon.pl?name=Zamia+integrifolia.  (12 June 
2001). 
 
Moerman, D.E. 1998.   Native American ethnobotany . 
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.  927 pp. 
 
Rogers, D.J. & C. Rogers  1991.  Woody ornamentals 
for Deep South gardens . University of West Florida 
Press, Pensacola, Florida.  296 pp.  
 
Small, J.K. 1933.   Manual of Southeastern flora . 
University of North Caro lina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina.  1554 pp. 
 
Prepared By:  
Diana L. Immel 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, 
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department, 
University of California, Davis, California 
 
Species Coordinator:   
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Department, University of California, 
Davis, California 
 Edited: 21June2001 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.