DESERT ZINNIA 
Zinnia acerosa  (DC.) A. Gray 
Plant Symbol =ZIAC    Figure 
1: Desert zinnia (Photo by Mary Hershdorfer, USDA-NRCS. 
Tucson Plant Materials Center) 
 
Alternate Names 
Common Names:   dwarf zinnia, wild zinnia, and spiny 
leaf zinnia 
Scientific Names:  Zinnia pumila 
Description  
General :  Desert zinnia is a small, shrub-like, native, 
perennial forb.  The flowers consist of 5 to 7 off-white ray 
flowers and 8 to 13 yellow disc flowers.  The ray flowers 
are lightly dentate (toothed) at the tips.  Desert zinnia may 
flower from spring to fall when moisture is available .  It 
may grow up to 10 inches in height (Shreve and Wiggins, 
1964; Kearney and Peebles, 1969; Torres, 1963). 
 
Distribution :  
Desert zinnia is found in Arizona, New 
Mexico, Texas, Sonora, Chihuahua, Zacatecas, Nuevo 
Leon and San Luis (Torres, 1963) .  
For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  Habitat
:  Desert zinnia is common in dry mesas and arid, 
rocky slopes at elevations ranging from 2,500 to 6,500 
feet (Kearney and Peebles, 1969 ; Havens et al.,  1982
). 
Adaptation 
De sert zinnia is adapted to calcareous or alkaline soils 
with high soil pH (Kearney and Peebles, 1969).  It does 
well on loose slopes.   
It will endure full sun or part shade.  
 
Uses 
Desert zinnia may be used in restoration of disturbed 
areas, wildlife and pollinator habitat improvement, and to 
increase plant diversity on adapted areas (Garner and 
Hershdorfer, 2008; USDA-NRCS, 2012). 
 
Ethnobotany 
Zinnia acerosa  has been reported to have medicinal use as 
an external antirheumatic aid . 
 A crushed plant paste 
mixed with salt is used to alleviate swelling or aches 
(Swank, 1932). 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered :  No   
Wetland indicator:   Obligate Upland -UPL. (USDA-
NRCS, 2014).  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
( http://plants.usda.gov/ )
 and your State Department of  Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
Planting Guidelines 
Desert zinnia may be direct seeded by broadcasting or 
drill seeding.  It may also be propagated in plugs or pots 
and transplanted.  Desert zinnia has approximately 
760,000 seeds per pound.  Seed is produced from summe
r 
to fall, but more consistently in the fall.  The broadcast 
seeding rate is 2.2 PLS (pure live seed) pounds per acre.  
The drill seeding rate is 1.1 PLS pounds per acre (USDA-
NRCS, 2012; USDA-NRCS, 2004). 
 
Seed should be planted onto a firm, weed-free seedbed.  
Broadcast seeding should be followed with a cultipacker 
or harrow to provide seed with a shallow covering of soil.  
When used as part of a mix, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percentage of the mixture (USDA-
NRCS, 2004; USDA-NRCS, 2012). 
 
Desert zinnia should be propagated in containers filled 
with a well-drained soil mix.  Seed sowed into containers 
should be covered with approximately ½ inch of soil 
(USDA-NRCS, 2012).

Management 
Desert zinnia may be mowed, and it seems to tolerate 
burning.  Pre-emergent herbicide such as oryzalin may be 
used to control weeds in production fields.  The plants 
benefit from light fertilization.  Irrigation should be 
applied sparingly and only when the plants are actively 
growing.  It may be killed by applying glysophate when 
foliage is actively growing (USDA-NRCS, 2012). 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Desert zinnia has no serious pest problems.  It may be 
consumed by rabbits or ants when young.  It is adapted to 
arid conditions and is thus susceptible to root rot if over 
watered.  During periods of high rainfall, it may also be 
infected by the flower blight. (Colbaugh et al., 2001). 
Environmental Concerns 
Zinnia acerosa does not appear to have any negative 
impacts that could become an environmental concern. 
 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Desert zinnia may be produced under typical crop 
conditions.  When harvesting with a flail-vac brush seed 
stripper it may be necessary to space rows to allow the 
flail-vac to get close to the ground.  This may be 
accomplished by skipping a row where the edge of the 
flail vac will pass or by using wide spacing on beds.  Seed 
loss may be a concern when harvesting with a flail vac. 
Other harvest methods may prove more efficient (USDA-
NRCS, 2012). 
 
Although desert zinnia flowers from spring to fall, the 
most productive seed harvest is in the fall.  Desert zinnia 
is a prolific seed producer.  Seed produced under crop 
conditions seem to have appreciably higher percent 
germination than those collected from the wild (Garner 
and Hershdoerfer, 2008; USDA-NRCS, 2012). 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Batamote Germplasm desert zinnia was developed by the 
Tucson Plant Materials Center for use in Major Land 
Resource Area 41 (EPA Level 3 Ecoregion 79) of 
southeastern Arizona.  It is a composite of 9 accessions 
collected from native desert zinnia stands in southeastern 
Arizona (Garner and Hershdoerfer, 2008; USDA-NRCS, 
2012). 
 
Literature Cited 
Colbaugh, W.A., W.A. Mackay and S. George. 2001. 
Alternaria alternata flower blight of Zinnia 
acerosa in Texas. Plant Disease. 85: 228. 
Garner, E.R., and M. E. Hershdoerfer. 2008.  Notice 
of Release of Batamote Germplasm Desert 
Zinnia.  USDA-NRCS, Tucson Plant Materials 
Center.  Tucson, AZ 85705. 
Havens Y. H., J.S. Horton, M.S. James, C.W. 
Renney, A. P. Thatcher, and  E. M. Shmutz. 
1982. Landscaping with Native Arizona Plants. 
Soil Conservation Society of America, Natural 
Vegetation Committee, Arizona Chapter, the 
University of Arizona 
Kearney, T.H., and R.H. Peebles.1969. Arizona flora. 
Univ. of California Press, Berkeley. , CA. 
Shreve, F., and I. L. Wiggins. 1964. Vegetation and Flora 
of the Sonoran Desert. Vol. 2. Stanford Univ. Press. 
Stanford, California. 
Swank, George R. 1932. The ethnobotany of the Acoma 
and Laguna Indians. Master’s Thesis. University of 
New Mexico.  Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131  
Torres, A M. 1963.  Taxonomy of zinnia.  Brittonia.  
15(1)1-25. 
USDA-NRCS.  2004.  Field Office Technical Guide, 
Section IV: Range Planting - Code550. Conservation 
Practices Standards and Specifications for Arizona. 
USDA-NRCS. 2012. Conservation Plant Release for 
Batamote Germplasm desert zinnia (Zinnia acerosa 
(D.C.) A. Gray). Tucson Plant Materials Center, 
Tucson, AZ 85705. 
USDA-NRCS. 2014. The PLANTS Database. Available 
at http://plants.usda.gov, (verified 9 July 2014). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401-
4901 USA. 
 
Citation 
Garner, E.R., and M.E. Hershdorfer. 2014. Plant Guide 
for desert zinnia (Zinnia acerosa). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Tucson Plant Materials 
Center. Tucson, AZ 85705. 
Published September 2008 
 
Edited:  10Jul2014 mr 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 
Helping People Help the Land 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER