Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIG SAGEBRUSH 
Artemisia tridentata Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = ARTR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Livestock: The leaves are high in protein but the bitter 
resinous taste prevents extensive grazing by cattle.  
Sheep will eat young plants and new growth readily 
when other forages are dry.  They will also make 
considerable use of the plant in the winter. 
 
Wildlife : Sage grouse are the heaviest users of 
sagebrush.  As much as 70 to 75 percent of their diet 
is made up of foliage and flower clusters of the plant.  
Antelope eat substantial amounts of sagebrush 
throughout the year, and mule deer feed heavily on 
the plant during late fall, winter, and spring, 
particularly if other foods are covered with snow.  
Sharp-tailed grouse, jackrabbits, elk, and many 
species of small mammals eat sagebrush sparingly 
during various times of the year.  Sagebrush provides 
nesting cover for sage grouse, and to a lesser extent 
pheasants and several species of prairie sparrows.  It 
provides loafing and escape cover for sage grouse, 
chukar, sharp tailed grouse, gray (Hungarian) 
partridge, pheasants, quail, jackrabbits, and deer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
 Charles Webber © California Academy of Sciences @ CalFlora 
 
Description 
Big sagebrush and its subspecies, are tall, rounded, 
U.S. native shrubs with short branched, woody 
trunks.  The height is normally about 4 feet, but 
varies from 2 feet in arid conditions to as high as 15 
feet on favorable sites.  The winter persistent leaves 
are wedge to fan-shaped and  are usually three-lobed 
at tips.  They are strongly aromatic.  Buds form about 
June with flowering and seed  formation in the fall.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Big sagebrush is drought tolerant but cannot stand 
excessive sub-moisture.  It grows on moderately 
shallow to deep, well drained, sandy to silt loam soils 
of neutral to slightly alkaline reaction.  Big sagebrush 
occurs on practically all range except meadows and 
at high elevations. 
 
Big sagebrush is distributed throughout the western 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
This has not been a factor to date since its value 
hasn’t been considered gr eat enough.  Control has 
been more important.  It is a good seed producer and 
increases rapidly when soil is disturbed in its natural 
habitat.  Livestock over-grazing can also promote the 
increase of big sagebrush populations. 
 
Management  
Control is accomplished by chemical sprays, fire, 
railing, chaining, and beating.  Good range 
management of deep-rooted perennial grasses is a 
control measure. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant has no serious pests.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None recommended at this time. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.