Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWITCH CANE 
Arundinaria gigantea  Muhl. 
ssp. tecta  (Walt.) McClure 
Plant Symbol = ARGIT8  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
giant cane, mutton grass,  Arundinaria tecta 
 
Uses  
Switch cane is a good forage plant and is grazed by 
all livestock.  It is grazed mostly in the summer 
months in the northern part of range and is highly 
valued as winter forage in the southern Coastal Plain 
and along the Gulf of Mexico.  The robust rhizomes 
of switch cane bind the soil and protect it from 
erosion.  In southern Mississippi, switch cane is 
called mutton grass, because of its value as sheep 
forage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Switch cane is a native, 
warm-season, robust, rhizomatous and woody 
perennial grass.  The height is between 4 and 10 feet.  
The leaf blade is lance-shaped; the underside is 
usually hairy.  The leaf sheath is commonly as long 
as internodes; ring of short, stiff hair across collar.  
The stem is round, hollow, and woody.  The 
rhizomes in the air cana ls in the periphery  
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
continue through nodes.   The inflorescence is a 
raceme produced on top of leafless or nearly leafless 
stems. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
The leaves along the stem  are within easy reach of 
most livestock.  They sometimes "ride down" large 
plants to get the terminal leaves.  Removing more 
than 50 percent of green l eaves weakens the plant.  
This is particularly true  in August when plant food 
reserves are lowest. 
 
Establishment 
Switch cane grows all year if conditions are 
favorable.  The leaves are produced from buds at 
nodes along the stems and it produces seedheads in 
early fall.  It reproduces  primarily from rhizomes.  
Air canals in the rhizomes may help the grass plant 
adapt to waterlogged soils or frequently flooded sites.  
It grows in pure stands on most sites and grows best 
in swampy woods and sandy flood plains. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.