Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE THREEAWN
Aristida oligantha Michx. 
Plant Symbol = AROL  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
  
Warning: Can be mechan ically injurious to 
livestock. 
 
Alternate Names 
oldfield three-awn,  oldfield 3-awn 
 
Uses  
Prairie threeawn has little value as a forage grass.  
After maturity, seeds get in the wool of sheep and in 
the eyes of both cattle and sheep if they graze areas 
with a dense stand.  This grass establishes easily 
under adverse conditions and protects soil against 
erosion until more desirable grasses take over.  It is 
an indicator of deteriorated range condition. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Prairie threeawn is a native, cool-season, annual 
grass.  The height is between 6 and 20 inches.  The 
leaf blade is flat, about 1/4 inch wide, and rolls 
inward during hot, dry weather.  The leaf sheath is 
mostly basal.  The seedhead is a loose, open panicle; 
glumes have three awns about 1-1/2 to 3 inches long 
that curve at the base. 
 © Larry Allain USGS National Wetlands Research Center @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Range reseeding with perennial grasses is the most 
practical and economical way to reduce this grass and 
improve ranges for livestock production. 
 
Establishment 
Prairie threeawn growth st arts in early spring from 
seed.  The life cycle is one month to 6 weeks.  Prairie 
threeawn is a good seed  producer.  The seedlings are 
vigorous.  It grows readily on areas, such as old 
abandoned fields, oil-well locations, and cattle 
round-up grounds. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.