Plant Fact Sheet
SITKA ALDER  
Alnus viridis (Chaix) DC. ssp. 
sinuata  (Regel) A. Löve & D. Löve  
Plant Symbol = ALVIS  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon
 
1   Susan McDougall @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database  
 
Alternate names   
Synonyms include Alnus sinuata, Alnus sitchensis, 
and Alnus crispa  subsp. sinuata.  Other names 
include green alder, mountain alder, slide alder, and 
wavy -leaf alder.   
  
Uses   
Sitka alder is a valuable species for stabilizing 
drastically disturbed, nutrient poor sites such as 
eroded streambanks, landslide chutes, steep rocky 
slopes, ar eas of flood deposition and scour, and 
exposed mineral soils following glacial retreat, 
avalanches, and massive soil slumping.  It is also 
suitable for reclaiming acid, coal, and copper mine 
spoils and other soil enriching, revegetation efforts 
where a nit rogen fixing shrub (via bacteria in its root 
nodules) is desired.  At the proper densities, the 
species may also be useful in improving forest site 
productivity as a companion or nurse shrub in young 
conifer plantations.     
  
The palatability of Sitka alde r is considered poor and 
forage value low for most ungulates, but others 
report that it is one of the most palatable of the 
native alders, especially for sheep. Moose, elk, and  certain deer will browse young shoots, leaves, or 
twigs, as will rabbits, snows
hoe hares, and squirrels. 
The seeds, buds, or catkins are an important source 
of food in winter for numerous song and game birds. 
Beavers eat the bark and use the stems to build 
lodges and dams. Thickets provide thermal and 
hiding cover for big game and ot her wildlife, as well 
as nesting habitat for many small birds.   
  
Native Americans used the bark and its extracts to 
make a red -brown dye, cure several internal 
ailments, and treat skin wounds, itching, and 
swelling, including poison oak.  Leaves and roots  
were used medicinally as well. The wood was 
preferred by some tribes for smoking salmon, 
woodworking, and making bows, baskets, and 
snowshoes.   
  
Description   
Sitka alder is a deciduous shrub or small tree that 
grows to height of 3 to 20 ft, occasionally taller.  
The form is upright, multi -stemmed, and freely 
branching at the base with a rounded crown. Male 
flowers are in the form of long catkins that begin 
opening in late winter. Found separately on the same 
plant are the female flowers which are cone- like 
(short catkins called strobiles) and bloom in early 
spring when the leaves appear. The seeds are winged 
nutlets that mature in autumn or early winter within 
t he egg shaped woody cones.  The leaves are broadly 
oval, 1 to 5 in. long, shiny above, wavy and finely 
toothed on the margins, and slightly scented and 
sticky beneath when young.  Nodules containing 
nitrogen fixing bacteria form on the strong fibrous 
roots .  The bark is smooth and grey. Twigs form a 
zigzag branch pattern.     
  
Status   
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as state noxious and wetland 
indicator values.   
  
Adapt ation  
Sitka alder is a pioneer species that prefers full sun 
to partial shade and soils that range from mineral to 
rich, humus covered substrates, acid to neutral pH 
(3.8 to 7.5), and coarse to medium texture (gravelly,