Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PACIFIC 
SERVICEBERRY  
Amelanchier alnifolia  (Nutt.) 
Nutt. ex M. Roemer var. 
semiintegrifolia  (Hook.) C.L. 
Hitchc. 
Plant Symbol = AMALS  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Uses 
History: Pacific serviceberry was used by native 
populations and early settlers of the Pacific 
Northwest.  The berries we re eaten raw or cooked or 
dried and stored.  Cakes of dried berries were a 
common trading item.  The wood is hard and was 
used for combs, digging sticks, arrows, tool handles, 
hoops, and spreaders.  Deco ctions of stems and twigs 
(bark) were used as medicine. 
 
Ornamentals : Pacific serviceberry may be used in 
naturalized plantings and as hedges in urban areas.  
Several cultivars of saskatoon serviceberry 
( Amelanchier alnifolia ) are available for ornamental 
plantings and commercial fruit production. Many of 
these cultivars and ecotypes originated in western 
Canada and the northern region of the United States.  
 
Wildlife : Deer, moose, and other mammals browse 
Pacific serviceberry, and its fruit are relished by  several species of song and game birds. These shrubs 
are often used as cover fo
r small mammals and birds. 
 
Streambank and Riparian Restoration : Pacific 
serviceberry is an excellent candidate for streambank 
and riparian restoration as it suckers readily and 
tolerates many types of soils. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
 Theresa Flessner Corvallis Plant Materials Center Corvallis,Orgeon
Pacific serviceberry occurs west of the Cascade and 
Sierra Nevada Mountain ranges, from British 
Columbia south to central California.  It may be 
found in open woods, along  canyons, or on hillsides, 
from near sea level to subalpine altitudes.  This 
species is a thicket-forming shrub or small tree 3-12 
meters tall with smooth brown bark, slender 
branches, and oblong leaves coarsely toothed along 
the upper edge.  A typical plant is comprised of long 
shoots and short shoots; only  short shoots bear fruit.  
Floral buds are formed in  the first season, but fruit 
develops the following season.  Clusters of perfect 
white flowers appear in spring before leaves, and 
dark purple to black berrylike fruits are produced in 
mid- or late summer.  It is self pollinated or cross-
pollinated via insects.  The fruit contains 4-10 dark 
brown seeds with leathery se ed coats.  This species 
may not flower and reproduce before 10 years or 
longer, especially on harsh sites. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Pacific serviceberry tolerates many soil types and 
suckers profusely.  It was reported to increase in 
frequency following fire, although canopy cover 
decreased, in one study.  It is found on open, dry 
rocky slopes to partially shaded sites with moist, deep 
soils but prefers moist, well-drained, acid soil and 
full sun or partial shade.  Plants can even be grown in 
granitic mine spoil and produce reasonable growth, 
but not on pyritic spoil.  It is not tolerant of saline 
soils and high water tables. 
 
Pacific serviceberry is distributed throughout the 
western coast of the Unite d States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website.

Establishment 
Seeding: Seed propagation can result in variability in 
select traits of 20-30%.  Many growers use open-
pollinated seedlings from named cultivars for 
commercial orchard establishm ent as the serviceberry 
is difficult to vegetatively propagate by conventional 
means.  It is important to note that usually a large 
percentage of seed collected from wild populations is 
infertile and insect-infested.  Seeds per pound can 
range from 36,000 to 113,000 or a mean of 61,000.  
Air-dried seed may be stored in sealed containers 
with little decline in viability for 5 years.  In the 
nursery, Pacific serviceberry is seeded at the rate of 
25 pure live seeds per foot of row.  This seeding rate 
may be reduced to obtain desired or original 
composition on sites being restored or improved.  
Unstratified seed is planted in late fall, and moist, 
pre-chilled seed is planted in spring, at a depth of 
0.25 inches. 
 
Cuttings: Reports of rooting success using softwood 
cuttings are variable. Timing of cutting and stage of 
growth of the mother shrub are important factors in 
rooting success.  Transplant s or containerized stock 
should be planted in early spring (harsh, cold sites) or 
fall.  Moist soil, mulch, and partial shade enhance 
survival and growth.  Bare-root stock may be planted 
in early spring.  Two-year-old seedlings may be lifted 
in fall and stored at 33
O F till planting.  Seedlings 
may be planted in rows; between row and within row 
spacing should be a minimum of 12 feet and 6 feet, 
respectively. 
 
Management  
For orchards and ornamental specimens, branches 
that are more than 4 year s old should be pruned out 
for better fruit production and longer life span.  
Yearly fertilization with  100 pounds per acre of 
ammonium nitrate will improve color, size, and 
quality of fruit in older stands.  Weed control 
(chemical and mechanical ) and irrigation also 
enhance fruit production.  Well-maintained orchards 
can produce fruit for 20 years. 
 
For streambank or ripari an restoration, Pacific 
serviceberry (2-year-old stock) should be planted on 
the upper bank.  Weed co ntrol and supplemental 
irrigation during the first growing season enhance 
survival and growth.  Moderate browsing can 
increase twig production.  Spring burns on high 
elevation rangeland can cause mortality but also 
significantly increase twig production in Pacific 
serviceberry. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This species is susceptible to several pathogens 
including those that cause rust, witches broom, fire 
blight, powdery mildew, leaf blights or spots, fruit 
rot, dieback, canker, root rot, and wound rot.  It is 
also host to several insects including leaf miners, 
borers, mites, sawflies, scale, root aphids, tent 
caterpillars, and apple curculio (Tachypterrellus 
quadrigibbus ).  Of these pests, rust, fire blight, and 
leaf blights cause the greatest losses; the apple 
curculio greatly reduces  fruit yields.  Pacific 
serviceberry is capable of producing toxic levels of 
hydrogen cyanide  (prussic acid).  This is toxic to 
ruminants such as deer and cattle, although prunasin 
concentration in new growth (leaves) varies with 
subspecies or variety.  Higher levels of this toxin are 
present in leaves and twigs during bloom stage and 
rapidly decline thereafter. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Currently, no cultivars of Pacific serviceberry have 
been developed.  The development of saskatoon 
serviceberry cultivars has been slow, occurring over 
many years.  The most important of these cultivars 
have been selected from wild populations.  Notable 
cultivars and improved materials include ‘Smoky’ 
(Alberta), ‘Pembina’ (Alberta), ‘Forestberg’ 
(Alberta), and ‘Northline’ (Alberta), ‘Thiessen’ 
(Saskatchewan), ‘Honeywood’ (Saskatchewan), and 
‘Regent’ (MN). 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Theresa Flessner , Conservation Agronomist 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.