Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREEN SILKYSCALE
Anthaenantia villosa (Michx.) 
Beauv.  
Plant Symbol = ANVI4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Name 
green silkyscale  
 
Uses 
Green silkyscale is seldom abundant enough to be a 
key management species but it adds variety to 
livestock diet.  Cattle graze it readily during summer, 
fall, and early winter.  It is an indicator of good range 
condition.  Adapts to well-drained upland soils. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Green silkyscale is a native, warm-season, 
rhizomatous perennial grass.  The height is between 2 
and 4 feet.  The leaf blade is
 4 to 12 inches long; light 
green; a distinct fringe of silky hair along edge; and 
twists and curls particularly when young.  The leaf 
sheath is chiefly basal, rounded, and with an obscure 
collar.  The ligule is ridge-like membrane with a 
dense ring of short hair.  The stem is round and 
slender.  The seedhead is a slender panicle, pale 
green with oval spikelets  covered with short, stiff 
hairs. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass decreases when  closely grazed throughout 
its growing season.  To maintain this species in the 
plant community, defer grazing 70 to 90 days every 3 
to 4 years during the growing season.  Foliage can be 
burned if done during the dormant season and no 
more than every 2 to 3 years.  Grazing should be 
deferred 90 days during the spring growing season 
following a burn. 
 
Establishment 
Green silkyscale growth starts slowly in spring and 
becomes more prominent during summer.  It forms 
loose colonies, forms seedheads in the fall, and 
becomes dormant in the  fall and winter.  The 
seedstalks break off and disa ppear in the winter.  It 
grows throughout the South from the 30-inch rainfall 
belt eastward and is adapted to well-drained upland 
soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.