Plant Fact Sheet
PRAIRIE SAGEWORT  
Artemisia frigida  Willd.  
Plant Symbol = ARFR4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program and the Upper Colorado Environmental Plant 
Center  
Figure 1:  Prairie sage wort, (Artemisia frigida ) photo ©Al 
Schneider,  www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with 
permission.  
Alternative Names  
Common Alternate Names :  Fringed sage, fringed 
sagebrush,  sagebrush, p rairie sagebrush, sagewort, pasture 
sage, sweet sage, northern wormwood.  
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  N/A 
Uses  
Prairie sage wort is a pioneer shrub resistant to browsing 
and animal impact by certain livestock and wildlife 
species  and has an  application for stabilizing disturbed 
sites.  
 
Forage:   Prairie sage wort varies considerably in its value 
as forage for livestoc k.  It has been considered to be both 
an adequate forage  species and a nuisance species , and 
may play an important role on winter pastures.  For cattle, 
palatability varies from “unpalatable” to “fairly good .”  It  is rated “good” to “fair” for domestic sheep and “fair” to 
“poor” for horses
. 
 
Landscape:  Prairie sagewort is  drought tolerant and  ideal  
for the xeriscape landscape.  The thin, silver -gray  leaves 
have a pleasant herb al scent and remain semi -evergreen in 
mild climates.  
 
Ethnobotanical : Prairie sagewort has a rich history of 
utilization by Native American tribes. Uses range from 
preser vatives for meat, horse feed , insect repellent 
(through burning of the plant) ,  medicinal decoctions to 
alleviate  toothache, headache, coughing, lung ailments, 
heartburn, and as a cold remedy. Early settlers used 
prairie sage  to make a bitter tea which they  believed was a 
tonic and remedy for typhoid fever.  A.   frigida  is listed as 
a source of camphor although it has not been recognized 
by the U.S. Pharmacopoeia f or this purpose. 
Pollinators:  Even though the small flowers are  wind-
pollinated , Artemisia  species are used as food plants  by 
the  larvae  of a number of Lepidoptera  species and other 
insects . 
 
Wildlife:  Big game  such as elk, mule de er, bighorn 
sheep, and pronghorn tend to  utilize prairie sagewort  in 
spring,  autumn , and winter  months .  Sage-grouse and 
greater prairie- chickens utilize prairie sage wort (although 
other sage species may be preferred) as both adults and 
juveniles , and  chicks consume insects associated with  the 
plants .  Prairie  sagewort  is also important to small game 
and nongame mammals including, in part,  white -tailed 
jack rabbits, desert cottontails, and black -tailed prairie 
dogs.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
Figure 2: Eucosma ragonoti, moth on prairie sagewort. Photo 
by Christine Taliga, Colorado Plant Materials Program.

status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant   displaces desirable vegetation in poorly 
managed  rangel and.   Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site .  
Please consu lt the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information.   
Description  and Adaptation 
General:  Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  
Pr airie sage  is a mound- forming , spreading  sub-shrub 
with flowering stalks reaching  4 -16 in ches tall.   Covering 
the plant is an abundance of silvery hairs giving it a silky 
grey- green appearance. The leaves are  round in outline 
and 3 to 5 times divided, abundant, clustered toward the 
base , and scattered along the stem. The lower leaves are 
stalked  (petiolate) 0.5 in long, with the upper leaves 
becoming sessile (no stalk). Flower clusters are a quarter 
inch in diameter and made up of numerous tiny disk 
flowers . The plant is strongly aromatic .  Prairie sagewort 
blooms  from July to August.
 
 Figure 3:  Prairie Sage,   distribution from USDA -NRCS 
PLANTS Database.  
 
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Artemisia  species can be propagated by seeds, by division 
of the rootstock, or by cuttings taken in t he early summer.  
Germination is improved with a cold treatment and seed 
should be broadcast or planted shallowly ( 1/8 inch deep).  
 
Pests an d Potential Problems  
None known at this time .  Environmental Concerns
 
Due to p rairie sagewort ’s drought and grazing resistant  
nature , it may  increase rapidly and become dominant.  
 
Figure 4:  Prairie Sage, ( Artemisia frigida)  photo ©Al 
Schneider,  www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with 
permission.  
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions fo r each control method.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Prairie sage is available through your local native plant 
nursery within its range . 
Prepared By   
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist, Denver, 
Colorado.  
 
Steve Parr ; Manager, Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center , Meeker, Colorado . 
 
Citation  
Taliga , Christine E. and S. Parr, 2012. Plant  fact sheet for 
Prairie sage  (Artemisia frigida ). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service,  Denver State Office. Denver, 
Colorado.  
 
Published  September , 2012  
Edited:  19Sep2012jab, 19Sep2012cga  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov .
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER