Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KOAI‘A 
Acacia koaia  W. Hillebrand  
Plant Symbol = ACKO2  
 
Contributed by: Traditional Tree Initiative 
 
 
 J.B. Friday 
 
The following information has been abstracted from 
the full treatment at  http://www.traditionaltree.org
. 
Please consult the full treatment for more information 
including genetics, associated species, establishment, 
plantation design, and agroforestry management. 
 
Alternate Names 
dwarf koa, koaie, koaoha, koai‘e, koaia 
 
Uses 
The wood is much harder than koa and was used by 
early Hawaiians for tools,  fishhooks, spears, and 
canoe parts.  When the trees were readily available, 
they were used for durable fence posts.  Today, the 
rare wood is used for gun stocks, knife handles, 
bowls, and artwork.  The tr ee is also grown as an 
ornamental. 
 
With its short size and dome d canopy, koai‘a can be 
used as a hedge tree, though a uniform hedge can not 
be expected.  Secondly, pruning is not recommended 
due to the risk of increasing the plant’s susceptibility 
to insect or disease attack. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
  Description and Adaptation 
Koai‘a is a close relative of koa native to the 
Hawaiian Islands.  These two are so closely related 
that there is controversy among taxonomists as to 
whether they are different species. 
 
Koai‘a is much more compact in size than koa, often 
having a bushy, gnarled, or even horizontal growth 
habit.  Koai‘a grows well in harsher conditions than 
koa.  Koai‘a is a small tree, rarely taller than 5 m (16 
ft) with a domed canopy that is usually about as wide 
as the tree is tall when grown in the open.  The 
phyllodes are generally narrower, shorter, and 
straighter than those of koa.  The inflorescence is 
similar to koa, but the seedpods are narrower with 
seeds longitudinally arranged instead of transversely 
as in koa. 
 
Distribution
: Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Koai‘a is propagated from seed using methods 
identical to those used for koa,  It is best to use seeds 
from adjacent populations.  Growing koai‘a seedlings 
is very similar to many other nitrogen-fixing tree 
species, requiring pre-germination treatment 
(scarification) to break through the hard, 
impermeable seed coat, inoculation with appropriate 
rhizobia bacteria, and special  nutrient requirements.  
Trees should be inoculated in the nursery within 4 
weeks of germination.     
 
Management  
Full sun is best for rapid growth and plant vigor, 
though they do well in partial sun.  Koai‘a requires 
freely draining soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The major pests affecting koai‘a are koa wilt, fungi, 
and twig borers.  Twig borers damage branches and 
may kill young seedlings.  Livestock readily consume 
small seedlings and can qui ckly cause catastrophic 
damage to young trees.  Seed predators include seed 
weevils and the koa seed  worm.  The koa moth may 
cause defoliation and in some  cases may kill trees.  
Rusts are common on phyllodes, but are usually not 
serious problems.  Banana poka ( Passiflora 
tarminiana ), a vigorous climbing vine, has 
overgrown and suppressed stands of koai‘a.  Koai‘a 
is susceptible to root-knot nematodes, especially 
when grown in grassy areas at low elevations.

Environmental Concerns 
Koai‘a has a strong lateral root system, which is often 
partially exposed on the surface, especially in rocky 
soils.  Any kind of traffic can injure the roots and 
stress the plant.  It is best to plant the tree in areas 
with limited or no traffic.  Herbicide use under the 
tree should be avoided.  Instead, mulching or living 
ground cover of herbaceous  plants are ideal for use 
under koai‘a trees. 
 
Full treatment:  Elevitch, C.R., K.M. Wilkinson, and 
J.B Friday. 2006. Acacia koa  (koa) and Acacia koaia 
(koai‘a), ver. 2.2. In: C. R. Elevitch (ed.). Species 
Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry. Permanent 
Agriculture Resources (PAR), H ōlualoa, Hawai‘i. 
<http://www.traditionaltree.org>.  
 
Edited: 090609 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.