Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE FIR 
Abies concolor  (Gord. & 
Glend.) Lindl. Ex Hildebr.  
Plant Symbol = ABCO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Timber: It is cut for lumber, boxes and crates, 
planning mill products, sashes, doors, and general 
mill work and pulpwood.  It is light in weight, easy to 
work, and relatively free from splitting when nailed; 
it holds nails only moderately well. 
 
Ornamental : White fir makes an excellent Christmas 
tree for it has a delightful aroma, retains its needles 
well after cutting, and has strong sturdy branches that 
hold their shape.  It is highly regarded as an 
ornamental or specimen tree in colder, moister 
climates. 
 
Wildlife : White fir seed is eaten by squirrels and other 
rodents.  Seedlings are often browsed extensively by 
deer.  Porcupines will gnaw the bark, and grouse will 
feed on the buds and needles. White fir makes good 
winter roosting trees for grouse. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 © W.L. Wagner Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Description 
Abies concolor  (Gord. & Glend.) Lindl. ex Hildebr., 
white fir, is a large forest tree from 60 to 200 feet in 
height that can live up to 300 years or more.  Its 
leaves or needles are 2 to 3 inches long, silvery-blue 
to silvery-green, extending at nearly right angles 
from all sides of the twig or more or less obscurely 2-
ranked; flattened, stomatiferous above and below, 
rounded or acute at the apex.  The upright cones are 2 
to 5 inches long, oblong, olive-green to purple; bracts 
shorter than the scales,  with short, broad erose 
shoulders, and spikelike tips.  The bark is 4 to 7 
inches thick on old trunks, ashy gray and divided by 
deep irregular furrows in thick, horny flattened 
ridges; young stems with conspicuous resin blisters. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
White fir is found in areas characterized by a 
moderately humid climate with long winters and 
moderate to heavy deposits of snow.  It is found 
principally where precipitation exceeds 20 inches; 
however, best development is in areas where  
precipitation is 35 to 75 inches annually. Most white 
fir is found at elevations of 4,000 to 10,000 feet along 
the western Sierra Nevada. White fir grows on soils 
from a wide variety of parent materials, including 
andesite, basalt, granite, pumice, sandstone and shale. 
Deep and permeable soils ar e best for growth when 
supplied with adequate moisture. Soils on which 
white fir is frequently found include the Aiken, 
Holland, Hugo, Olympic, Sheet Iron and Sites series. 
Most soils on which white fir occurs are moderately 
to strongly acid, friable, granular and clay loam. 
 
White fir is distributed primarily throughout the 
western United States.  Fo r a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website.

Establishment 
White fir may be regenerated by natural seeding, 
direct seeded, or planted.  Cones begin to disintegrate 
and shed seeds in late September or early October, 
and there is a good seed crop about every 2 to 5 
years.  The seed germinates in the spring but usually 
less than 50 percent of the seed germinate.  White fir 
is generally rated as tolerant to very tolerant of shade 
so that selective (partial) cutting tends to favor this 
species.  Initial growth rate is usually very slow up to 
about 30 years, then growth accelerates markedly.  In 
planting white fir 2 to 4 year old stock is 
recommended.  In direct seeding 10 to 15 seeds per 
spot is recommended.  To ensure adequate stocking 
of natural seedings, clear cutting strips 130 to 200 
feet wide or patches up to 250 feet across the largest 
dimension is recommended.  At least 10 seed trees 
per acre should be left if larger areas are clear cut 
when adequate seedlings are not present. 
 
Management  
On better sites fully stocked, unmanaged stands of 
white fir may yield up to  150,000 board feet per acre 
at age 100.  Thinning white fir stands periodically 
will salvage trees which would be lost to natural 
mortality.  Pruning is not ordinarily recommended for 
white fir because of its tendency for epicormic 
sprouting and unless the tree is being grown for 
veneer or finish lumber, there is not need for this 
practice. 
 
Young trees are easily killed by fire and must be 
protected from this hazard.   Young sapling and pole 
sized trees are subject to sunscald when exposed 
suddenly, and thinnings should be light because of 
this.  White fir is more prone to windthrow than 
ponderosa pine because of its more shallow, wide 
spreading root system, and care should be taken in 
partial cuttings to leave buffer strips against the wind 
and to thin conservatively. 
 
White fir Christmas trees require 6 to 9 years to 
produce a 6 foot tree.  They need cultivation or other 
treatment to prevent excessive competition from 
grass.  Excessive leader growth will need to be 
controlled by basal pruning, basal scarring or pruning 
of the terminal shoot.  Leader growth should be kept 
to about 12 inches. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Some of the more important enemies of white fir are 
the spruce budworm, Douglas-fir tussock moth, many 
different bark beetles, mistletoe and heart rot fungi.  
Needle rusts may be a serious problem in producing 
Christmas trees, and white fir is one of the conifers 
most sensitive to sulphur dioxide. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
White pine seed can be purchased at most 
commercial seed sources in the west.  Seedlings can 
also be purchased from pine nurseries in the western 
part of the country. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.