Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIG BLUESTEM 
Andropogon gerardii Vitman 
Plant Symbol = ANGE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Erosion control: Big bluestem is a top choice for 
erosion control plantings on sites with moderately 
well drained to excessively well drained soils.  
Generally, it is planted in combination with other 
warm season grasses on these sites. 
 
Livestock : Big bluestem is one of the most palatable 
warm season grasses and is preferred over 
switchgrass by livestock.  Therefore, in pastures, it 
should be planted alone for best management, 
especially where continu ous or extensive grazing 
practices are used.  It can be mixed with other species 
for intensive, rotational grazing. 
 
Wildlife : Birds and mammals use big bluestem for 
nesting and escape cover in summer and winter.  It 
resists lodging under snow cover almost as well as 
switchgrass, thereby contributing to spring nesting 
habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Andropogon gerardii , big bluestem, is a native, 
perennial, warm season grass that occurs from the 
short grass prairie region to the Atlantic Ocean.  It is 
tufted, forms sod, and has short, scaly rhizomes.  Big  
bluestem  is tall, reaching a height of 6 to 8 feet on 
most sites where it is protected from grazing.  It is 
very leafy at the base, with some leaves carried up on 
the stem.  The seed heads  normally have 3 spikelets 
that appear like a ‘turkey foot.’ 
 
 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS 1995 Northeast Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Big bluestem is climatically adapted throughout the 
Midwest and Northeast on moderately well drained 
through excessively well drained soils.  It is adapted 
to a range of other soil limitations such as shallow 
depth, low pH, and low fertility. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Big bluestem should be seeded as early in the spring 
as possible.  Conventional tillage  should be used  
where practical.  Where no-till must  be  used due to 
slope, stoniness, or other  reasons, the sod control 
should be performed in the fall to permit early spring 
planting.  The seeding rate for broadcast or no-till 
methods should be 7 to 12 pounds PLS per acre.  
When drills are used to plant, debearded seed must be 
utilized unless the drill has a chaffy seed box.  When 
the seed is broadcast, a packer should  be utilized to 
firm the seedbed  and incorporate the seed 1/4 to 1/2 
inch (3/4 inch on very droughty sites) as if alfalfa 
was being planted.  No nitrogen fertilizer should be 
applied during the establishment year unless no weed 
competition is expected.  If pH is below 5.5, lime is 
recommended during site preparation or the fall prior 
to no-till plantings. 
 
Management  
No harvest of bluestem during the establishment 
season should be allowed.  During the second 
growing season, harvesting by controlled pasturing or 
haying is possible on good stands.  The first harvest 
should not commence until the bluestem is 20 inches 
tall.  It should be grazed (5 days maximum duration) 
or cut no lower than 8 inches and then protected from 
use until 20 inches in height is reached again.  No 
cropping should occur below 8 inches or within 1 
month of anticipated frosts.  After a killing frost, the

area may be grazed to 8 inches, but forage quality is 
greatly reduced and supplementation is recommended 
for growing animals. 
 
Big bluestem has relatively weak seedling vigor 
compared to weeds and cool season grasses; 
therefore, control of competition is necessary for 
successful stand establishment.  High mowing (above 
the bluestem seedlings) is a common method of  weed 
control.  Selected herbicides may have application 
when forage harvests are  not anticipated during the 
year.  Grazing of competing cool season grasses after 
frost in the fall and before the bluestem is 1 inch tall 
in the spring is desirable, unless soil conditions are 
too wet. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are several cultivars av ailable as certified seed, 
i.e. ‘Bison’ (ND), ‘Bonilla’  (SD), ‘Champ’ (NE, IA), 
‘Kaw’ (KS), ‘Earl’ (TX), ‘Niagara’ (NY), ‘Pawnee’ 
(NE), and ‘Rountree’ (IA). 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.