Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WRIGHT’S 
THREEAWN  
Aristida purpurea  Nutt. var. 
wrightii  (Nash) Allred  
Plant Symbol = ARPUW  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Warning: This species may be 
mechanically injurious to livestock. 
 
Alternate Names 
Wright three-awn, wright threeawn,  Aristida wrightii 
 
Uses 
Wright’s threeawn is grazed readily early in the 
spring.  After seedheads form, it becomes less 
palatable.  Cattle and horses graze it more readily 
than sheep and goats.  If it greens up at the base late 
in the fall after other warm-season grasses have 
matured, cattle and horses graze it again. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Wright’s threeawn is a 
native, warm-season, weak, short-lived and perennial 
bunch grass.  The height is between 10 and 20 inches.  
The leaf blade is rolled; threadlike; tufted, and 
twisting.  The leaf sheath is mostly basal, rounded 
and open.  The ligule is a row of short hair.  The 
seedhead is a narrow pani cle 6 to 8 inches long, 
purplish at first, turning straw yellow after maturity; 
the seeds are covered with stiff barbs. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass is never a key management species and 
most ranchers want to get rid of it.  Close grazing in 
the spring will reduce it.  Summer grazing deferments 
allow more vigorous warm-season grasses associated 
with it to dominate.  Seed collects in the wool and 
mohair of sheep and goats that graze this grass during 
summer. 
 
Establishment 
Wright’s threeawn is one of the first warm-season 
grasses to start growing in the spring.  The seedheads 
appear within 30 days after  growth starts.  It becomes 
dormant in the summer a nd greens up again in the 
early fall.  It reproduces  mostly from seed and is a 
prolific seed producer.  It grows best on calcareous to 
neutral sandy loam soils, but also grows on clay 
loams. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
 © Robert Soreng Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 25june02 ahv; jul03 a hv; 21sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.