Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN YARROW 
Achillea millefolium L. var. 
occidentalis  DC. 
Plant Symbol = ACMIO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bridger Plant 
Materials Center 
 Alternate Name 
Woolly yarrow 
 
Uses 
Conservation: It is an early successional species that 
readily establishes on disturbed sites.  Western 
yarrow is recommended for adding species diversity 
in native seed mixtures for rehabilitation of disturbed 
sites such as rangelands, minelands, roadsides, park 
and restoration areas, prairi e reconstruction projects, 
and farm bill program conservation plantings.  
Secondary use is for ornamental application in 
pollinator friendly, low maintenance, or naturalized 
landscapes. 
Forage:  It is a food source for bighorn sheep, 
pronghorn antelope, and deer.  Sage grouse, 
especially chicks, and other  upland birds rely heavily 
on the foliage of western yarrow as a food source.  
Domestic sheep and goats derive a fair amount of 
forage value from western yarrow, while cattle and 
horses mostly graze the flower head.  The volatile 
oils, alkaloids, and glycosid es are considered toxic, 
but the plant is seldom  overgrazed by foraging 
animals. 
Ethnobotanic:  Native Americans used western 
yarrow for many purposes, such as a tea to cure 
stomach ailments, a poultice on infected wounds, and 
as a mosquito repellant.         
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Western yarrow is not to be confused with the 
introduced, invasive plant, common yarrow ( Achillea 
millefolium  var. millefolium ).  Common yarrow has 
origins in Eurasia, the European continent, and the 
islands of Scandinavia.  This introduced species is 
considerably different from western yarrow in that it 
has a much taller stature, aggressive vigor and 
weediness characteristics, and initiates a later 
sequence of flowering and seed ripening.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Servi ce office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 Susan R. Winslow USDA NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center 
Description  
Western yarrow is a native, herbaceous perennial in 
the Aster Family.  It is a very common wildflower 
that grows erect from creeping rootstocks, to a height 
mostly 10 to 36 in. (25 to 90 cm) tall.  The leaves of 
western yarrow are densely hairy, and lacy and fern-
like in appearance, as they are finely dissected into 
numerous, short and narrow divisions not over 0.04 
in. (1 mm) wide--millefolium means a thousand 
leaves in Latin.  Common yarrow leaves, in 
comparison, are smooth or only sparsely hairy; and 
the leaf segment is longer , more rounded, and lance-
shaped.  The somewhat rounded terminal clusters of 
flower heads of western yarrow are normally white to 
cream-colored and have an extended bloom period 
from May to September.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Western yarrow is one of th e most widely recognized 
and adaptable wildflowers in the western United 
States.  Its range of di stribution includes many 
habitats across Canada, the Great Plains, and the 
western United States.  Western yarrow is very 
drought-tolerant and exhibits good survival in 
droughty conditions on gravelly loam and thin or 
sandy soils.

Establishment 
Seed of western yarrow is non-dormant and readily 
germinates when spring planted at a very shallow 
depth.  It tends to be less competitive in early 
development and becomes more so with age.  
Western yarrow produces very few flowers the 
establishment year, but will easily set seed in 
subsequent years.  It is moderately rhizomatous, 
developing as a scattered colony that maintains a 
semi-evergreen state when dormant.    
 
Management  
New seedings may need protection from trampling 
and some weed control du ring establishment.  
Western yarrow vigor, esthetics, and stand 
persistence after establishment may be sustained with 
properly timed grazing or  defoliation of associated 
species.   
  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Inflorescences that are harv ested for seed production 
often contain small quantities of insect larvae and 
numerous live insects.  There  is no apparent short- or 
long-term effect on the seed in any way.  Many 
beneficial and pollinating insects, such as minute 
pirate bug ( Orius), big-eyed bug ( Geocoris), 
hoverflies (Syrphidae), and several tachnid flies 
( Archytas apicifer , Gymnosoma, Tricopoda pennipes, 
Cylindromia ) are known to frequent yarrow plants.  
Pest insects include common leaf bugs ( Lygus.) and 
flea beetles (Chrysomelidae).  Root rot and mildew 
may occur in poorly drained soils.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
This plant is a common component of such 
ecological sites as shallow, silty, shallow to gravel, 
and silty steep.  Associated species include western 
wheatgrass ( Pascopyrum smithii ), bluebunch 
wheatgrass ( Pseudoroegneria spicata ), prairie 
Junegrass ( Koeleria macrantha ), Sandberg bluegrass 
( Poa secunda), common gaillardia ( Gaillardia 
aristata), big sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata), and 
prairie coneflower ( Ratibida columnifera ).  Western 
yarrow is a pioneer species and considered an 
increaser where the forage resource has been over 
utilized.  It is seldom regarded as a problem weed 
except on heavily disturbed, arable sites with 
favorable environmental conditions.  Western yarrow 
should be considered noninvasive when used within a 
diverse plant community in  its anticipated area of 
adaptation.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Great Northern Germplasm is a selected class release 
of western yarrow originally collected in 1988 in 
Flathead County, Montana.  This 2004 release was 
selected for top performance in vigor, height, 
seedhead production, and survival from among 29 
accessions of native yarrows from Montana and 
Wyoming.  It is adapted for use in northern Idaho, 
and all of Montana and  Wyoming, except the Red 
Desert and Bighorn Basin.  G
1 seed (analogous to 
Foundation seed) will be maintained by the USDA-
NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center and is 
available to commercial growers through the 
Foundation Seed Program at Montana State 
University-Bozeman and the University of Wyoming 
Foundation Seed Service at Powell, Wyoming.  
Commercial production is limited to two generations 
beyond G
1.       
 
Yakima Germplasm is a source-identified, composite 
release of western yarrow from 27 collection sites on 
the U.S. Army Yakima Training Center in Yakima, 
Washington.  Yakima Germplasm western yarrow is 
intended for use in the rehabilitation and restoration 
of western rangelands.  The USDA-ARS Forage and 
Range Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah, will 
maintain G
1 seed and it will be made available to 
growers through the Utah Crop Improvement 
Association.  Seed through the G
4 generation will be 
eligible for certification.      
 
Prepared By:  
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, 
Montana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bridger, 
Montana 
 Edited: 2Sept2005 RLN; 08dec05 jsp; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.