Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLORIDA 
THREEAWN  
Aristida rhizomophora  Swallen
Plant Symbol = ARRH 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Warning: This species may be 
mechanically injurious to livestock. 
 
Alternate Name 
Florida threeawn 
 
Uses  
Florida threeawn is graze d by livestock from early 
spring until May or June.  Palatability decreases 
sharply after May.  It can be used for winter grazing 
following a spring burn, but a protein supplement 
should be fed also. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Florida threeawn is a 
native, warm-season, rhizomatous perennial grass.  
The height is between 2 and 
3 feet.  The leaf blade is 
1/16 inch wide, may be 18 inches long, dark green on 
upper side, and lighter green on underside; 
characteristic spiral or tw ist.  The leaf sheath is 
smooth, rounded, and open.  The ligule is absent or 
minute.  The stem is round, smooth, and usually has 1 
to 3 nodes 2 to 4 inches above ground.  The seedhead 
is a slender panicle 7 to 14 inches long with awns 
about 1/2 inches long of equal length. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass withstands burning every 2 years in 
January if the ground is wet and grazing is deferred 
until mid-March.  After March, it should be grazed 
moderately until June. 
 
Establishment 
Florida threeawn growth st arts in late January or 
February.  The leaf blades are at a maximum length 
by May.  On burned areas,  plants produce seed stalks 
in May and again in September and on unburned 
areas, only once in August or September.  It 
reproduces largely from well-developed, scaly 
rhizomes.  It also forms a dense sod and is adapted to 
poorly drained deep sandy so ils that are strongly to 
slightly acid. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.