Plant Fact Sheet
SPLITBEARD 
BLUESTEM  
Andropogon ternarius M ichx. 
Plant Symbol = ANTE2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 
  
 Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center  
Alternat ive Names  
  Some alternate names include: silvery beardgrass, split 
bluestem, and feather bluestem.  
 
Uses   
Livestock:  Splitbeard bluestem is readily grazed by cattle 
in spring shortly after growth starts. If used as winter 
forage, cattle should be fed a protein supplement.   
 
Ornamental Landscaping: Because of its silvery, fluffy 
seedhead, splitbeard bluestem is used as an  ornamental in 
native landscapes.   
 
Erosion Control : Splitbeard bluestem grows in poor or 
sandy soils. 
 
 
Wildlife:  Birds and mammals utilize this grass for cover.  
  Status 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
 
Description and Adaptation  
Splitbeard bluestem  is a warm season, native, perennial 
bunchgrass. This grass is a member of the 
Andropogoneae  tribe of grasses. Splitbeard bluestem 
grows to mature height of 0.7 to 1.2 meters tall (2 to 4 
feet). The upper half to 2/3 of the plant is branching in 
appearance. The stems are usually long, slender, and 
erect. They are often purplish to reddish green with green 
upper sheaths. The flat leaves are 20 -45 cm long (8- 18 
inches) and 2 -4 mm wide (1/16- 5/32 inches). Both the 
leaves and sheaths are often densely hairy and  have a 
waxy silver appearance. The inflorescence has three to six 
pairs of racemes about 2 inches long with a white tuft at 
the base. The seedhead is a showy silvery –  white that 
contrasts with the green foliage and stems of the plant. 
Splitbeard bluestem  begins growing in April and 
continues through the summer. The plant produces seed 
from September to November.  
 
 
Distribution of Andropogon ternarius Michx. from PLANTS database  
 
Splitbeard bluestem is distributed from Delaware to 
Kentucky and Kansas and south to Florida and Texas. It is 
especially wide spread in the eastern half of Texas. This 
plant grows on medium and coarse textured soils with a 
pH ranging from 4 to 7.5. Splitbe ard bluestem prefers 
open woods or woodland pastures on sandy soils. This 
grass is moderately shade tolerant, but seldom dominates 
a plant community.