Plant Fact Sheet
SWAMP MILKWEED 
Asclepias incarnata  L. 
Plant Symbol = ASIN  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS , Norman A. Berg National 
P lant  Materials  Center , Beltsville, MD   
 
Jennifer Anderson.  IA, Scott Co., Davenport, Nahant Marsh.  January 
2, 2002  
Alternate Names  
Rose milkweed  
Pleurisy Root 
White Indian  hemp 
Warning: Swamp milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally without sufficient preparation.  
Uses  
Conservation:  Swamp milkweed is a native, colonizing, 
perennial wildflower use ful for wetland rehabilitation . It 
is  a good component of a  wildlife seed mixture whe n 
seeded with  native grasses and wildflowers . It prefers 
moisture retentive to damp soils in full sun to p artial 
shade . 
Wildlife:  Swamp milkweed is a favored food of monarch  
butterfly  (Danaus plexippus ) larva (shown in  the picture 
above ). Swamp milkweed is also an important food 
source for the queen butterfly ( Danaus glippus) larva. 
Various  other butterflies a nd hummingbirds consume 
nectar from the flowers.    
  Ethnobotanical:
 The Chippewa and Iroquois have used an 
infusion of the roots externally to strengthen the body and 
heal babies’ navels. The Iroquois and Meskwaki have also 
used a decoction of the roots and /or aerial portions of the 
plant as an emetic, diuretic, and anthelmintic (de-
worming agent). The common name, Pleurisy Root, 
comes from its once common use to treat lung problems.  
Swamp milkweed is toxic when taken in large doses .  The 
tough stringy s tem fibers have been used to make twine , 
rope  and rough textiles .  
The  downy parachutes (comas) that are attached to each 
seed  are six times more buoyant that cork and five times 
warmer than wool . Large quantities of m ilkweed were 
grown  for use as stuffing  in  pillow s and lifejacket s during 
World War II.    
Landscape:  Swamp milkweed is a tall plant with fragrant, 
showy clusters of pink and light purple flowers. It does 
well in landscape plantings with moist soil and in 
plantings ne ar bodies of water . Unlike m any ornamentals, 
swamp milkweed  tolerate s heavy clay soils  and  is very 
deer -resistant . It is a more cultivated alternative to 
common milkweed that  is also attractive  to egg -laying 
Monarchs .    
Livestock:  The bitter leaves of swamp milkweed do not 
appeal to livestock; sheep are especially susceptible to the 
poisonous compounds in swamp milkweed, and sheep 
fatalities have been reported after consuming the plant.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and  your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
 
Swamp milkweed  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Databas e.