Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
UTAH 
SERVICEBERRY  
Amelanchier utahensis  Koehne
Plant Symbol = AMUT 
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental  
Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado 
 
 Steve Parr, Upper Colorado Environmental Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Serviceberry, juneberry, shadbush, and sarvis. 
 
Uses 
Utah serviceberry can be used for food and cover to 
improve wildlife habitat. Le aves and small branches 
are used by big game and livestock and berries are 
consumed by birds and small animals. It also 
provides nesting and cover for birds. Utah 
serviceberry can be used for reseeding big sagebrush 
and pinyon-juniper sites and is also beneficial for 
conservation plantings on rangeland and mined land. 
The plant can be used for landscaping and 
beautification and as a component of windbreaks and 
shelterbelts. The berries are  also a source of food for 
Native Americans. Berries persist longer on the bush 
than Saskatoon serviceberry and provide a food 
source over a longer period  of time, especially when 
the ground may be covered with snow. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Rose Family. Considerable variation occurs in the 
native shrubs or small trees that are generally 2 to 4  meters tall. Deciduous leaves are simple, alternate, 
and usually serrate-dentate 
from the middle to the tip. 
Flowers form in clusters in early May with five 
showy white petals and the ovary is 2 to 5 celled. The 
persistent purplish – black pome can remain dry and 
pulpy. The plant is accustomed to rocky slopes, 
canyons, and stream banks at elevations of 5000 to 
9000 feet from Montana to Oregon, south to New 
Mexico, and California. It has a deep spreading root 
system and is found on sites with 12 to 20 inches of 
annual precipitation with soils that are coarse to 
medium textured and well drained. It is not tolerant 
of high water tables or saline soils. Considerable 
variation occurs when it is found on sites with 
Saskatoon serviceberry where natural hybrids are 
sometimes found. It generally occupies drier sites 
than Saskatoon serviceberry.  
 
Establishment 
Utah serviceberry can be established with seed 
planted about ¼ of an inch deep in the fall months or 
with container grown plants set in the ground in early 
spring when soil moisture is present. Sprouting does 
occur but is not as common  as the occurrence in the 
more northern ecotypes of Saskatoon serviceberry. 
Establishment can be slow, especially if soil moisture 
is low, but the plant can survive on drier sites than 
Saskatoon serviceberry. New plantings can require 
several years (8 to 10) for flowering and seed 
production. Protection from browsing and plant 
competition along with the use of mulch will reduce 
the time required for establishment. 
 
Management  
After seeding or planting live plants, controlled 
browsing will be important for maintaining vigorous 
growth. Reducing plant competition is also necessary 
for rapid plant growth. Controlled browsing will be 
important for berry production. Once established, the 
plant can withstand moderate to heavy browsing in 
years with average to a bove average precipitation. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The plant is host to Apple- cedar rust when growing 
in close proximity to junipe rs. The rust affects leaves 
and berries. No other serious diseases or pests are 
known. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
The plant is not known to be aggressive, invasive, or 
difficult to control when used  in areas where adapted.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Long Ridge Germplasm Utah serviceberry is the only 
release of the species. Seed and plants of Long Ridge 
Germplasm are available from Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center (UCEPC), Meeker, 
Colorado. 
 
Prepared By:  
Gary L. Noller , Upper Colorado Environmental  Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado  
 
Species Coordinator:  
Gary L. Noller , Upper Colorado Environmental  Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado  
 
Edited: 080826 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.