Plant Fact Sheet

CRESTED 

WHEATGRASS 

(DESERTORUM TYPE) 
Agropyron desertorum (Fisch. 
ex Link) J.A. Schultes 
Plant Symbol = AGDE2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
© Robert Soreng Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
standard crested wheatgrass, crested wheatgrass 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Crested wheatgrass is 
commonly recommended for forage production. It is 
palatable to livestock and wildlife and is a desirable 
feed in spring, and in the fall if it re-grows enough. It 
is used for cattle and horse winter forage, but protein 
supplements are required to ensure good animal 
health.  It withstands heavy grazing pressure (65% 
use and greater) once stands are established. The 
best forage types in order are Siberian, desertorum, 
and Hycrest. 
 Erosion control/reclamation: Crested wheatgrasses 
are useful for soil stabilization.  They compete well 
with other aggressive introduced grasses, but because 
of this trait, they are not compatible in mixes with 
native species.  Their drought tolerance, fibrous root 
systems, and good seedling vigor make these species 
ideal for reclamation in areas with 8 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover and to stabilize ditchbanks, 
dikes, pipelines, powerlines and roadsides. 
Wildlife: Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds; deer, antelope and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall. Upland and song birds 
utilize stands for nesting. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Crested wheatgrasses Agropyron cristatum, 
Agropyron desertorum, and Siberian wheatgrass 
Agropyron fragile are perennial grasses commonly 
seeded in the western United States. They are long-
lived, cool season, drought tolerant, introduced 
grasses with extensive root systems.  Crested 
wheatgrass grows from 1 to 3 feet tall and seed 
spikes may be 1.5 to 3 inches long. Spiklets flattened, 
closely overlapping, located divergent (flatwise) at a 
slight angle on the rachis flower stem. The lemmas 
generally narrow to a short awn and glumes are firm, 
keeled, tapering into a short bristle. Culms are erect, 
in a dense tuft and leafy. Leaves are flat, smooth 
below, slightly coarse above and vary in width from 
2 to 6 mm. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Crested wheatgrasses are adapted for non-irrigated 
seedings where annual precipitation averages 8 
inches or more and where the frost free period is 
generally less than 140 days.  The desertorum type is 
adapted to the Northwest, Intermountain and Great 
Plains regions with at least 8 inches of annual 
precipitation below 6500 feet elevation.  It does well 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

on shallow to deep, moderately course to fine 
textured, moderately well to well drained and weakly 
acidic to moderately alkaline soils.  Under saline 
conditions, vigor and production are reduced.  The 
desertorum type is more saline tolerant and equal to 
or more productive than other crested wheatgrass 
types.  All wheatgrasses are cold tolerant, can 
withstand moderate periodic flooding in the spring, 
and are very tolerant of fire.  They will not tolerate 
long periods of inundation, poorly drained soils or 
excessive irrigation. 
Crested wheatgrass is distributed throughout much of 
the West and Midwest. For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.   
Establishment 
Crested wheatgrass should be seeded with a drill at a 
depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine textured 
soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured soils.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for all 
crested wheatgrasses are 5 to 7 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) or 20 to 30 PLS per square foot.  If used 
as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired.  For critical areas, increase the seeding rate 
to 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  Mulching and light 
irrigations on highly disturbed areas are beneficial for 
stand establishment.  
Best seeding results are obtained in very early spring 
on heavy to medium textured soils and in late fall on 
medium to light textured soils.  Late summer (August 
to mid September) seedings are not recommended 
unless irrigation is available. If weed control is 
needed, application of 2,4-D should not be made until 
plants have reached the four to six leaf stage.  Mow 
weeds that are beginning to bloom to reduce weed 
seed development. New stands may also be damaged 
by grasshoppers and other insects; pesticides may be 
required. 
Management 
Crested wheatgrasses produce leaves in the spring 
about 10 days after bluegrass species and about 2 to 3 
weeks earlier than native wheatgrasses.  New stands 
of crested wheatgrass should not be grazed until they 
are firmly established and have started to produce 
seed heads.  Six inches of new growth should be 
attained in spring before grazing is allowed in 
established stands.  Three inches of stubble should 
remain at the end of the grazing season to maintain 
the long term health of the plant.  
Crested wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants; 
however, spring/fall deferment or grazing rotations 
are recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  Crested 
wheatgrass can be used for hay production and will 
make nutritious feed, but is more suited to pasture 
use.  Light, infrequent applications of nitrogen (25 
pounds/acre) and irrigation will increase total 
biomass production and lengthen the green period. 
Environmental Concerns 
Crested wheatgrasses are long-lived, spread primarily 
via seed, but may also spread via rhizomes in the case 
of the cristatum types.  They are not considered 
&#34;weedy&#34; or invasive species.  Most seedings do not 
spread beyond original plantings, or if they do 
spread, the rate of spread is not alarming. They will 
cross with each other, but do not cross with native 
species. Crested wheatgrasses resist winter annual 
competition better than native species because they 
germinate earlier and grow more rapidly at colder 
temperatures.  Due to commonly being planted in 
monocultures (single species) stands in the past, 
some feel crested wheatgrasses are not ecologically 
appropriate.  It is important to consider multiple 
species mixes to avoid this conception. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Nordan’ (central Asia/former USSR) has good 
seedling vigor and seed quality and long term forage 
yields are as good or better than other types. 
‘Summit’ (former USSR) is considered very similar 
to ‘Nordan.’ Agropyron cristatum x Agropyron 
desertorum (Hycrest type) is a hybrid between the 
cristatum and desertorum types which results in a 
plant with excellent seedling vigor.  ‘Hycrest’ 
(central Asia/former USSR) is easier to establish than 
either of its parents and is more productive during the 
establishment period than either parent. Long term 
productivity exceeds the cristatum type and is equal 
to the desertorum type.  
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political

beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.