Plant Fact Sheet
SHOWY MILKWEED  
Asclepias speciosa Torr.  
Plant Symbol = ASSP 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Corvallis Plant  Materials 
C enter,  Corvallis,  OR, and Great Basin Plant Materials 
Center, Fallon, NV  
 
Photo by E. Eldredge, NRCS, Fallon, NV, 2011 . 
Alternat ive Names  
Alternate  Common Names: showy butterfly weed, creek 
milkweed, Greek milkweed  
Alternate  Scientific Names: Asclepias giffordii  Eastw., 
Asclepias douglasii  Hook.  
Warning:  Without sufficient preparation, m ilkweed 
can  be toxic when taken internally.  
Uses  
Pollinators : The abundant nectar of m ilkweed flowers 
attract s hummingbirds , butterflies , honey bees,  native 
bees, and other  beneficial  insects.  Accordingly, this is a 
wonderful horticultural plant for butterfly  garden s, 
borders, meadows,  or  native plant landscaping .  M ilkweed 
plants  ( Asclepias  spp.)  are the  only larval  host for 
m onarch butterflies  ( Danaus plexippus ).  It is important to  
have large , dense clumps of milkweeds  for  monarch  
caterpillars .  Monarch, queen  (Danaus gilippus ) and 
v iceroy butterflies  ( Limenitis archippus ) get  c hemicals 
from the milkweed plant that  make them distasteful  to 
predators , and all have similar orange and black patterns 
to  warn  predato rs. 
Restoration : Showy milkweed 's tough, extensive root 
system , drought tolerance , and minimal nutrient  requirements
 make it  a good species for stabilizing and 
restori ng degraded or disturbed sites.  
Ethnobotany : Peo ple have used milkweed  plants  for fiber, 
food, and medicine.  The young shoots, stems, flower 
buds,  flowers,  and  immature fruits  of showy milkweed 
were eaten  raw  or  boiled as a vegetable by indigenous 
groups of North  America.   The most common use for the 
plant among tribes of  California was  as cordage.  The 
sticky white sap was  also made into a type of chewing 
gum  by  heating it  until it became solid, and  mix ing it  with  
salmon fat or deer grease.  
The sap of showy milkweed  was us ed by some desert 
tribes  to heal  sores  and cuts, and to  cure warts and 
ringworm.  The ripe seeds  were ground and made into a 
salve for sores.  Seeds were boiled and the liquid used to 
draw the  venom from  rattlesnake bites.  T ea made from 
the r hizome s was a remedy  for  measles or coughs.  It was 
also  used as a wash to cure rheumatism.  The rhizomes , 
mashed with water, w ere used as a poultice to reduce 
swelling.  
Fiber : S tem  fiber s of milkweed  are used by Native 
Americans  to make course cloth , string, cords, and ropes.  
At Zuni,  NM, the silky seed floss  is spun into yarn and 
woven into a special fabric for dancers.   Hybrids of A. 
speciosa  and  A. syriaca  are being tested for commercial 
seed  floss  production  as a hypo-allergenic  substitute for 
goose down.  
Toxic ity: Milkweed contains  toxic  alkaloids and 
cardenolides , which can cause nausea and  vomiting in 
low doses , and death in high doses.  A nimals avoid 
milkweed  if  other  forage is available.  
Status 
Showy milkweed is  listed  as a  threatened species in  Iowa.  
In most regions showy milkweed is considered a 
facultative species, meaning it is equally likely to occur in 
wetlands or non- wetlands.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Weediness  
Due to its vigorous vegetative growth,  showy milkweed 
may become weedy  and  outcompet e or displac e other  
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult yo ur 
local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource  office, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at  http://plants.usda.gov .