Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH ALDER 
Alnus serrulata (Ait.) Willd. 
Plant Symbol = ALSE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS. 1989 Midwestern Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
hazel alder 
 
Uses 
Smooth alder is used predominantly for streambank 
stabilization and wetland restoration.  It is also a 
critical cover component of woodcock habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Smooth alder is a nitrogen-fixing, thicket-forming 
shrub or small tree with dark, green foliage.  It is a 
U.S. native.  It is suitable for streambank stabilization 
because of its flexible stem s and fibrous root system.  
A mature height of 8-12 feet may be reached in 10 
years.  Seed is produced in small cones with pollen 
contributed by birch-like catkins which bloom in 
mid-to late March.  Compared to other alder species,  smooth alder is more densely branched and produces 
more seed.  Alders produce nitrogen for themselves 
by the activity of nitrogen-fixing bacteria located in 
root nodules. For this r
eason, it is not recommended 
for planting in areas where additional nitrogen might 
add to water quality problems.  Smooth alder has 
about 400,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Smooth alder is native to the northeast.  It occurs 
from southern Maine to northern Florida, west to 
southeastern Oklahoma, Missouri, and Illinois.  It 
grows best in wet bottomlands and stream margins, 
however it will also grow in well-drained upland 
areas.  It is moderately shade and acid tolerant, but is 
weak-wooded and susceptib le to wind and ice 
damage. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
For streambank stabilization, smooth alder is best 
established as a bare-root or containerized seedling 
planted two feet apart within  rows with rows two feet 
apart.  It may be in corporated into a soil 
bioengineering system by planting at the toe of the 
bank just above any toe st abilization measures such 
as rip-rap, coir (coconut) logs, or fascines.  On non-
erosive streambanks it may be planted in two rows to 
provide toe protection.  If this alder is planted for 
wildlife habitat improvement or wetland mitigation, 
planting should be done at a 5-10 foot spacing to 
allow for crown development and to optimize seed 
production. 
 
Management  
Very little maintenance is needed except replacing 
dead plants and keeping debris from inhibiting 
growth.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
At present only common smooth alder is available 
from commercial and state nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.