Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAND BLUESTEM 
Andropogon hallii Hack. 
Plant Symbol = ANHA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Kansas Plant 
Materials Center 
  
 ©W.L. Wagner Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution Dept. of Systematic Biology-Botany
 
Alternate Names 
Sand hill bluestem, Hall's bluestem, Hall's 
beardgrass, prairie bluestem, and turkey-foot 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Sand bluestem is often 
recommended for erosion control plantings on sites 
which are sand, loamy sand or sandy loam.  
Generally, it is planted as part of a mixture with other 
warm season grasses. 
 
Conservation Practices:  Sand bluestem, because of 
its growth habit, is used with certain conservation 
practices; however, conservation practice standards 
and specifications vary by state.  By going to the e-
FOTG website for your state you can read if this 
grass is applicable to your needs.  However, for  localized county data it is best to consult the local 
NRCS Field Office.  NRCS
 practices include the 
following:  575-Animal Trails and Walkways; 327-
Conservation Cover; 342-Critical Area Planting; 647-
Early Successional Habitat Development-
Management; 386-Field Border; 393-Filter Strip; 
603-Herbaceous Wind Barriers; 543 and 544-Land
 
Reconstruction, Abandoned/Current Mined Land; 
512-Pasture and Hay Planting; 338-Prescribed 
Burning; 550-Range Planting; 643-Restoration 
Management of Declining Habitats; 645-Upland 
Wildlife
 Habitat Management; 601-Vegetative 
Barriers
. 
 
Livestock : Sand bluestem is a good to excellent 
forage due to its palatability and high yield.  Under 
continued heavy grazing pressure it will die out and 
be replaced by other less desirable plants.  It is an 
important component of many native hay meadows.  
The nutritive value of sand bluestem rises and falls 
with the growing season.  It is high in crude protein 
and palatability until just prior to seedhead formation. 
After seedheads are formed the nutritive value and 
palatability decreases significantly. 
 
Wildlife : Sand bluestem is good to excellent forage 
for all browsing wildlife species.  Upland birds eat 
the seeds.  Because it frequently grows in large 
clumps and retains an upright vegetative structure 
throughout the winter it makes an excellent nesting 
habitat for many upland birds and small mammals. 
 
Ornamental Landscaping:   As xeric landscaping 
becomes more popular the use of sand bluestem has 
increased in yard plantings.   Because of its height and 
growth form many consider it an excellent plant for 
lawn and flower bed borders. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sand bluestem is a native, perennial, warm season 
bunch grass.  It is tufted, forms sod, and has well-
developed rhizomes reaching lengths of 4 to 8 inches.  
Sand bluestem is tall, reaching a height of 7 feet 
under best conditions.  Sand bluestem has a J-shaped 
stem base, and the culms  are solid, grooved on one

side.  The leaf blades have none to few hairs and 
have prominent midribs.  Most leave are found near 
the base, with some leaves carried up on the stem.  
The seedheads generally have 2 to 6 digitate racemes, 
commonly 3 which produces the 'turkey foot' 
appearance, hence the common name. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sand bluestem is climatically adapted throughout the 
Great Plains Region on sandy, loamy sand or sandy 
loam soils.  It occurs predominantly west of the 
Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains and from 
Canada to Mexico.  Cons ult the PLANTS Web site 
for additional distribution information and Plant 
Characteristics. 
 
Establishment 
Sand bluestem should be seeded in the spring just 
prior to the start of the growing season.  A drill 
specifically built for seeding native grasses should be 
used.  It is best if the grass is seeded into a weed free 
standing cover crop.  The seeding rate is about 6 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  The local  
NRCS Field Office should be consulted prior to 
ordering any seed to ensure the right amount and 
planting mixture is used.  Broadcast seeding will 
result in significantly fewer viable seedlings as 
opposed to drilling.  Broadcasting should only be 
done on small acreages where drilling is not 
physically feasible.  Applying commercial fertilizers 
to native grass seedings is more likely to result in 
competitive weed growth rather than improve grass 
establishment.  If the pH is below 5.5, lime should be 
incorporated into the soil prior to planting.  When 
possible, a named variety suitable for your growing 
area should be used.  If this is not possible, a seed 
source closer than 400 miles to the South, 150 miles 
to the North or an elevation increase of 1,500 feet 
should be used if a stand is  to be successfully grown. 
 
Management 
No harvest of bluestem during the establishment 
season should be allowed.  During the second 
growing season, harvesting by controlled pasturing or 
haying is possible on good stands.  The first harvest 
should not commence until the bluestem is 20 inches 
tall.  It should be grazed (5 days maximum duration) 
or cut no lower than 8 inches and then protected from 
use until 20 inches in height is reached again.  No 
cropping should occur below 8 inches or within 1 
month of anticipated frosts.  After a killing frost, the 
area may be grazed to 8 inches, but forage quality is 
greatly reduced and supplementation is recommended 
for growing animals. 
 
Sand bluestem has relatively weak seedling vigor 
compared to weeds and cool season grasses; 
therefore, control of competition is necessary for 
successful stand establishment.  High mowing (above 
the bluestem seedlings) should be done when the 
weeds reach a height of 6 to 8 inches.  Herbicide 
applications for weed control should be considered 
when weeds create more than 50 percent or more of 
the canopy.  All pesticides used must be Federally 
and locally registered and must be applied in  
accordance with authorized registered uses, 
directions on the label, and other Federal or State 
policies and requirements. 
 
Prescribed burning can help remove weed mulch 
from small seedlings and warm the ground up in the 
early spring.  It is recommended a prescribed burning 
plan be made with your local NRCS Field Office 
prior to any actual burn.    
 
Grazing of competing cool season grasses after frost 
in the fall and before the bluestem is 1 inch tall in the 
spring is desirable, unless soil conditions are too wet. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are 4 cultivars availa ble as certified seed, i.e. 
‘Elida’ (NM), ‘Garden’ (NE), ‘Goldstrike’ (NE), 
‘Woodward’ (NM). 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Patrick J. Broyles,  Soil Conservationist  
USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 
 14jan2004 jsp; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.