Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TALL OATGRASS 
Arrhenatherum elatius  (L.) 
Presl.  
Plant Symbol = AREL3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
Uses 
Erosion control: Tall oatgrass is a useful 
conservation grass for cover and forage on surface 
mined lands and marginal pastureland.  
 
Livestock : Tall oatgrass can be used for livestock 
forage beginning in its second growing season; 
however, it is not recommended as a major 
component of forage seedings as other grasses are 
superior for this purpose. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Arrhenatherum elatius , tall oatgrass, is a perennial, 
cool-season bunchgrass generally grown in Europe 
where it once was a component of the  grasslands.  
Culms are erect, from 3 to 5 feet tall.  Leaf blades, 
from 3/8 to 3/4 inches wide, are flat and rough to the 
touch.  Seed heads are narrow panicles 6 to 10 inches 
long with long, twisted, angled, exposed awns. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Introduced from Europe in the early 1800s, tall 
oatgrass has  become naturalized in meadows, fields, 
open ground, waste places, and roadsides from 
Newfoundland to British Columbia, south to Georgia, 
Louisiana, New Mexico, and California.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
 
Joseph D. Ruffner USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center Beltsville,Maryland
 
Establishment 
Tall oatgrass is easily established, adapted to 
excessively drained low fertility soils, and  compatible 
with legumes.  A firm, weed-free seedbed is 
necessary for good stands.  Spring seedings produce 
best results as the seedlings are not winter hardy.  
Seeding rates should range from 5 to 8 pounds pure 
live seed using hulled seed.  Seed should be planted 
approximately 1/4 inch deep and cultipacked. 
 
Management  
Apply lime and fertilizer according to soil test results 
when seeding and for mainte nance. Use of herbicides 
in the establishment year to control broadleaf weeds 
will improve success of the planting.  Mow or graze 
for control in subsequent years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Tall oatgrass is highly resistant to disease and insects. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seed is available from co mmercial seed producers. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program  Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.