Plant Fact Sheet
BLACK MANGROVE 
Avicennia germinans (L.) L   
Plant Symbol = AVGE  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Golden Meadow, Louisiana  
 
Garret Thomassie, USDA NRCS   
Alternate Names 
Avicennia  
  nitida 
 
Uses  
Erosion control : Black mangrove is valuable in restoring 
brackish and salt water marshes due to its ability to filter 
and trap sediments.  Mangrove forests, which include 
black mangrove, have a high capacity as a sink for excess 
nutrients and pollutants.  It also mixes well with other 
native plants to reduce wave energy.  
 
Wildlife : Black mangrove serves as nursery habitat for 
crustaceans and fish.  Mangrove detritus (dead leaves and 
twigs) in water feeds microorganisms that provide food 
for young marine life.  It is estima ted that as much as 80% 
of the organic budget of bays in Florida came from the 
surrounding mangrove forests. Black mangrove serves as 
nesting habitat for many coastal birds including brown 
pelicans.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Black mangrove is a subtropical woody shrub that grows 
in salt ma rshes.  Mangroves are very hardy and have 
become adapted to harsh environments where water and  salinity levels fluctuate.  Pneumatophores, or breather 
roots, form a network that collects silt and debris, and 
controls erosion.  Pneumatophores are a major ad
aptation 
to the stresses of intertidal habitat.  They allow root 
respiration in anaerobic, waterlogged soils.  The 
pneumatophores are also excellent nursery areas for 
crustaceans in the marsh plant community.  The height of 
black mangrove in Louisiana vari es from 4 to 9 feet.  In 
Florida, individual trees can reach 60 feet, but are usually 
much shorter.  Leaves are 1 to 5 inches long, elliptical, 
opposite, thick, leathery, dark green, glabrous (smooth) 
above, and grayish with a tight felt -like pubescence 
be neath.  Glands on the underside secrete salt.  Clusters of 
small sessile flowers with white petals, approximately ½ 
inch in diameter, are borne in the leaf axils and growing 
tips on the twigs.  The fruit are flat, approximately 1 inch 
long, dark green and glabrous beneath a velvety pericarp.  
The bark on the black mangrove is thick, dark brown or 
blackish, with rough irregular flattened scales.  Twigs are 
grayish in color and smooth, with enlargements at the 
joints.    
 
Black mangrove is adapted to sub -trop ical and tropical 
coastal intertidal zones along the Gulf of Mexico.  The 
spatial distribution across the intertidal zone for black 
mangrove, red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ), and white 
mangrove ( Laguncularia  racemosa) suggests differential 
flooding tolera nce among these species.  Black mangrove 
penetrates farthest inland into brackish water and farthest 
north of the mangrove species.  Black mangrove is able to 
regulate its internal salt concentration and grow in a wild 
range of salinities, but its ability to increase leaf area is 
limited under high salinity.  At Bay Champagne near 
Fourchon, Louisiana, three vegetation zones were 
delineated in a mangal/salt marsh community: a zone 
adjacent to the bay and dominated by black mangrove, an 
inland zone dominated by cordgrass ( Spartina 
alterniflora ), and a zone between the two containing both 
species .  
  Black mangrove is a valuable component of the 
marsh ecosystem.  This plant is susceptible to freezing 
and the native range can be changed drastically by hard 
winters .   
Distribution : Black mangrove is native to the southern 
U.S., tropical America, and Africa.  Please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Establishment  
Black mangrove grows in the intertidal zone throughout 
the Gulf o f Mexico.  It will establish in nature from  seed 
that floats and can travel some distance on the tides.  Seed 
will germinate quickly and establish young seedlings in