Plant Fact Sheet     
 
GIANT CANE 
Arundinaria gigantea (Walt.) 
Muhl. 
Plant symbol = ARGI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
cane, switchcane 
 
Uses 
Giant cane provides high-quality forage for cattle, 
horses, hogs, and sheep.  It is valued for summer 
grazing in northern part of range and for winter 
grazing in states along the gu lf coast.  Stems of this 
grass are also used for fi shing poles, pipe stems, 
baskets, and mats. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Giant cane is a native, warm-season, robust, 
rhizomatous perennial grass.  The height is between 4 
and 20 feet.  The leaf blade  is 5 to 12 inches long, at 
least 1/2 inch wide, and tapers to a sharp point.  
Generally, it has groups of 3 to 5 blades at end of 
small branches and a short petiole between the blade 
and sheath.  The leaf sheath is rounded and 
overlapping.  The ligule is a row of short hair.  The 
stem is hollow, woody.  The seedhead is an open 
panicle with 8 to 12 spikelets per seedhead.  
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Overgrazing and uncontrolled burning easily kills 
this grass.  For maximum production, no more than 
50 percent of current year's growth by weight should 
be grazed off at any season.  Controlled burning 
should be done under ideal humidity, soil moisture, 
and wind conditions no more than every 3 to 4 years.  
Deferred grazing for at least 90 days during summer 
every 2 to 3 years improves  plant vigor.  Overgrazed 
stands require complete protection from grazing and 
fire during the growing season to allow plants to 
regain vigor. 
 
Establishment 
Giant cane produces green leaves and stems all year.  
It grows vigorously from rhizomes and from 
auxiliary buds at basal nodes.  It also grows in small 
colonies, thickets, and large canebrakes as well as 
makes vigorous growth under a dense stand of trees.  
It is adapted to moist soils along riverbanks and in 
bottomlands and similar sites.  It does best on soils of 
high fertility. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp