Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED MAPLE 
Acer rubrum L. 
Plant Symbol = ACRU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
swamp maple 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Red maple is available in quantity 
for revegetation work and landscaping.  It is a 
valuable riparian buffer plant due mostly to it’s 
tolerance of wetter soils. 
 
Wildlife : Red maple seeds provide food for squirrels 
and some birds.  The species is not preferred by deer 
as a browse source, so in heavy deer pressure this 
species is over  abundant in forest regeneration. 
 
Wood: The wood is not desirable for lumber or 
veneer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult  with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Acer rubrum  L., red maple, is a wide-ranging native 
tree that is very well adapted to most soil and site 
conditions.  This species is one of the early 
harbingers of fall as it turns color well in advance of 
other eastern deciduous trees, especially when it is 
located in wet sites.  The fiery colors of fall are 
typically a brilliant red.  Conversely, it is also one of 
the earliest flowering trees in the spring.  Red maple 
has the smallest winged seeds (samaras) of all native 
maples, about 5/8-3/4 inches long.  Also, the samaras 
ripen in the spring- a trait shared only with silver 
maple which has much larger samaras.  This maple is 
a medium sized tree with fairly rapid growth (2-5 
ft/yr), but not as fast as the much larger growing 
silver maple.  
 
  ©  William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Red maple is adapted to wet sites where it associates 
with black ash, cottonwood, and black gum.  Some 
forested wetlands are referred to as maple swamps 
due to their stands of red maple.  However, red maple 
is also well adapted to well drained but moist soils of 
upland sites where its companions are sugar maple, 
beech, black cherry and the  birches.  This capability 
makes this species a common tree in home 
landscapes where the fall colors can be displayed.  
The range of red maple extends from Florida to the 
Maritimes and west to Texas and Minnesota.  Red 
maple is shade tolerant. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Red maple seed is easily germinated in nature or in 
nurseries.  The seed can be direct planted with no 
pre-treatment.  The seedlings have moderately fast 
growth and are usually outplanted as 1 year old or 2 
year old bareroot stock. 
 
Management  
Red maple seedlings must be protected from fire and 
livestock, and are greatly aided where weed and grass

competition is controlled.  This is particularly true in 
any plantings where grass sod is the cover between 
trees.  Weed control mulch or fabric, or herbicide 
treatments are recommended for the first three years 
or longer.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few pests seriously bother red maple, although the 
Asian long-horned beetle is a dire threat to the 
species if eradication efforts fail. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are many selections in the horticultural trade 
that have mostly been se lected for a growth form 
oddity.  These are not recommended for riparian 
buffer use, rather the typical growth form is 
preferred.  Purchasing stock of known origin will aid 
in assuring adaptation, and nurseries should be 
willing to provide this information. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson , retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office 
Syracuse, New York 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.