Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
JOINTVETCH  
Aeschynomene americana  L. 
Plant symbol = AEAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA Florida Plant Materials 
Center, Brooksville, Florida 
 
Alternate Names 
Shyleaf 
 
Uses 
Jointvetch is primarily used as an annual grazing crop 
that can be cut for hay befo re maturity.  Deer graze it 
and quail, dove, and turkey eat the seed.  It can also 
be used as components of fresh water wetland 
reclamation seedings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Legume Family (Fabaceae).  Jo intvetch is an upright 
native, annual to short-lived perennial plant that 
could be classified as a forb or subshrub growing 3 to 
6 feet tall.  The stems are well-branched and 
moderately leafy.  The leaves are compound, have 25 
to 60 leaflets measuring 3 inches long, and are 
sensitive to light and touch.  The flowers are yellow 
with dark lines and appear as loose clusters. 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA SCS 1991 @ PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
The site should be moderately to poorly drained.  If 
the site floods during the rainy season, the stand 
should be well established before flooding begins.  
Taller plants have a moderate tolerance to temporary 
flooding.  During hot weather, seedlings can be 
damaged within a few days.  The soil should be well 
prepared by plowing, disking, and packing.  
Excellent volunteer stands may be obtained by 
disking areas that had successful stands and matured 
seed the previous year.  A pply lime, if necessary, to 
bring the soil pH into the 5.5 to 6.5 range.  Seed 
between March 1 and June 30, if irrigated, or after 
June 1
st when there is a greater chance of adequate 
rainfall to allow germination and sustain the seedling.  
In a prepared seed bed, broadcast 5 pounds per acre 
de-hulled seed or 10 lbs/acre in the hull.  If you are 
seeding into existing pastures, the seeding rate should 
be doubled.  Cultipack the ground after seeding.  
Place seed at a ½ to 1 inch seeding depth.  All seed 
should be inoculated with  either “cowpea” or special 
Aeschynomene  culture. 
 
Management 
Maintain a pH of 5.5 to 6.0.   Apply fertilizer 
according to soil test recommendations.  Initiate 
grazing when plants are 18 to 24 inches high and 
remove cattle when grazed to 2 to 3 inches.  To 
insure a volunteer crop, grazing must cease after 
October 1
st to allow blooming, seed set, and seed 
maturation.  After seed maturation, graze to use 
forage before November 1
st, when forage value 
decreases.  Volunteering follo wing a seed crop can be 
encouraged and a stand secured by disking or 
chopping the area in early to mid-spring of 
succeeding years.  Graze th e area until volunteer seed 
germinates to reduce weed competition.  Resume 
grazing when plants are 18 inches high. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
A selection ‘F-149’ has been distributed by the 
Natural Resources Conservation Service since the 
1950’s, though it was never formally released.  Little

variation occurs in native stands throughout Florida.  
Researchers at the University of Florida have done 
extensive work with this species and it is 
commercially available. 
 
Prepared By:  
Florida Plant Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Florida Plant Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida. 
 Edited:  23March2006 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.