Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE ACACIA 
Acacia angustissima (P. Mill.) 
Kuntze 
Plant Symbol = ACAN  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ Smith 
Plant Materials Center 
 
 
                                                         Rudy G. Esquivel 
                  USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ Smith PMC   
 
Alternate Names 
Fern acacia, white-ball acacia, Texas acacia, prairie 
guajillo 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Prairie acacia may provide ground 
cover vegetation for critically eroding areas to reduce 
soil erosion and improve water quality. 
 
Livestock : Prairie acacia forms a symbiotic 
association with rhizobial bacteria, and this 
association fixes atmospheri c nitrogen. The measured 
crude protein percentage  of prairie acacia leaves 
ranges from 16 to 29. Prairie acacia can withstand 
frequent cutting or defoliation. Prairie acacia has 
been extensively investigated as a fodder shrub/tree 
for tropical areas. Reports describe prairie acacia as 
having low to moderate palatability. The leaves of 
prairie acacia contain tann ins and non-protein amino 
acids. These compounds are toxic to some animals. 
Sudden dietary supplementa tion with prairie acacia 
fodder at high concentrations caused death in sheep. 
The signs of toxicity from prairie acacia are similar to 
those exhibited by sheep fed flat pea ( Lathyrus 
sylvestris ) hay. Rabbits fed prairie acacia leaves  (20% of the diet) exhibited a progressive reduction of 
intake and weight reduction. All rabbits consuming 
prairie acacia showed central nervous system 
disturbances. Researchers, in Stephenville, Texas, 
compared 15 native pere
nnial herbaceous legumes 
for herbage production, crude protein percentage, and 
laboratory measurements of digestibility. Prairie 
acacia exhibited high, compar ed to the other species, 
herbage yield and crude protein percentage. The 
laboratory measurements suggested that prairie 
acacia is more digestible to livestock than other 
species tested  
 
Restoration: Prairie acacia is a hardy and drought 
tolerant plant that is useful for revegetation of land 
disturbed by mining or road construction.  
 
Wildlife : Prairie acacia is browsed by white-tail deer. 
It is a prolific seed producer. Quail and other birds 
will utilize the seed for food and the vegetation 
provides cover for small animals and wild birds.  
 
Alley Cropping:  Prairie acacia has potential as a 
nitrogen fixation tree for alley cropping systems in 
the Caribbean and other subtropical and tropical 
areas.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Prairie acacia is a native, 
perennial, warm-season, hardy, deep taproot legume.  
A smooth and small rounded shrub, forming colonies 
by means of woody rhizomes  with aerial stems that 
are thornless and rarely over  three feet tall.  The plant 
has an attractive and delicate fern-like foliage which 
closes at night and when touched.   Stems are thin, 
usually unbranched, glabrate, and ridged.   Leaves are 
alternate, the blade divided into usually 3-12 pairs of 
segments, these again divided into 6-20 pairs of tiny 
leaflets .  Flowers  are small and white to creamy 
yellow.  It has 5 petals and stamens numerous, long, 
and protruding.  Flowers numerous, congested in 
rounded terminal clusters on long stalks arising from 
upper leaf axils.   Fruit is brownish flat seed pod 4-7 
cm (1.6-2.8 in) long and 6-8 mm (0.25-0.3) wide. 
Plant is similar in appearance to Illinois

bundleflower, Desmanthus illinoensis , but the fruit 
and leaf structures are different. 
 
Adaptation 
Prairie acacia is native fr om Columbia and the 
Caribbean, north to Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, 
Arkansas, Missouri, and Florida. Prairie acacia is a 
tough subshrub found in dry soils on prairie hillsides, 
savannahs, rock outcrops, grasslands and open 
shrubby vegetation areas. It grows on well-drained 
acidic to slightly alkaline soils. This drought tolerant 
perennial subshrub grows from Zones 6a-10b of the 
USDA Plant Hardiness Zones Map.  
  
Establishment 
A well prepared seedbed that has been plowed, 
harrowed, and compacted to  produce a clean and firm 
seedbed is required.  For seed production at the 
NRCS/James E. ‘Bud’ Smith Plant Materials Center 
near Knox City, Texas, seeds were planted in 40 inch 
row pattern at a depth of ¾ inch at 5 Pure Live Seed 
(PLS) pound per acre. A two row cotton planter, with 
a junior planter attachment, for slick seeds, was used.   
On established pasture a native grass drill equipped 
with coulters and with a small legume box will do 
well for planting.  Another planting method if a 
native grass drill is not available or cannot be used 
due to terrain, is tracking the ground with a bulldozer 
then broadcasting the seed.  Seeds should be 
inoculated before planting with a general cowpea 
inoculant. The proper time of planting is from March 
to April to assure establishment before summer. The 
seed of prairie acacia are small, about 198450-
220500 seeds per pound. M echanical scarification 
and soaking seed in cold water have produced 
increases in the germination percentage.     
 
Management 
Plan a grazing management system for prairie acacia 
growing in pasture or rang eland. Prairie acacia can 
decrease under misuse or  heavy grazing.  For an 
aesthetic landscape use, these plants with their round 
white flowers that appear in  the summer into fall, are 
attractive to bees, butterflies, and birds.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No Pest or potential problems were found on prairie 
acacia while growing at th e NRCS/James E. ‘Bud’ 
Smith Plant Materials Center near Knox City, Texas.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no cultivars of prairie acacia in 
the commercial seed or plant production. 
  Prepared By 
Rudy G. Esquivel
, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
and 
James Henson , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Rudy G. Esquivel , USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
Edited: 070108 jsp; 080107 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.