Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANADIAN 
MILKVETCH  
Astagalus canadensis L. 
Plant Symbol = ASCA11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Erosion control, forage quality, wetland 
restoration/enhancement, and wildlife habitat 
benefits. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Canadian milkvetch ( Astragalus canadensis ) is a 
perennial legume with underground rhizomes.  Plants 
of this species may be large and robust once 
established, with plant height ranging from 12 to 40 
inches.  The leaves are  odd-pinnately compound; 
leaflets are medium green, 1 to 4 cm long, and 5 to 
15 mm wide.  Generally, they are smooth or slightly 
hairy on the upper surface with stiff, short hairs on 
the underside. 
 
The flowers are creamy, gree nish white and about 1/2 
to 3/4 inch long in a dense spike-like head.   
 
Flowering occurs from May to August.  The pods 
contain several seeds that are small, smooth, and 
brownish yellow-green. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Canadian milkvetch is a native legume that is widely 
distributed across all but the extreme southeastern 
and southwestern United States.  It is found naturally 
in moist prairies, open woodlands, roadsides, 
thickets, and streambanks.  Plants tend to colonize in 
these areas. 
 
 ©  William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Site:   Canadian milkvetch prefers moist sites.  It is 
adapted to a wide range of soil types and conditions.  
However, it is NOT recommended for dry uplands. 
 
Rate of Seeding:   Planting Canadian milkvetch as 
part of a native grass/forb mix (preferably as a 
sculptured seeding on an adapted site) is 
recommended.  The number of seeds/lb varies, but 
averages 266,000 to 275,000 seeds/lb.  Planting 1/10 
to 1/4 PLS lb/ac as part of a mix should produce 
adequate densities.  When higher densities are 
desired, such as along streambank corridors, 1 to 2 
PLS lb/ac is recommended. 
 
Date of Seeding:   Spring seeding should be done 
prior to May 15; dormant seeding after October 20.  
Seed should be mechanically scarified to break down 
dormancy due to hard seed coat.  It is also desirable 
to inoculate seed with sp ecies-specific rhizobium for 
nitrogen fixing.  Plant seed shallow at a depth of 1/2 
to 3/4 inches into a firm seedbed.  The preferred 
planting method is to use the legume box of a grass 
seed drill for the Canadian milkvetch seed.  Low 
rates of seed may need to be mixed with filler 
material for better seed distribution.  The second 
method of choice is to mix the Canadian milkvetch 
seed with the other native species in one of the other 
seed boxes.  If seed settles to the bottom of the box, it 
should be added in frequent intervals rather than all at 
once.  If conditions do not permit the use of a drill, 
double the seeding rate, broadcast the seed, and cover 
lightly by harrowing.

Management 
Longevity of Canadian milkvetch is short, generally 
3 to 4 years.  Persistence may be enhanced by 
mowing or grazing to prevent seed formation.  Plants 
may also be improved by phosphorous or potassium 
fertilizer.  The plant is palatable to livestock and deer 
and is highly nutritious at certain times of the 
growing season. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Sunrise’ was released in 1997 by Dr. Arvid Boe 
from 
South Dakota State Univ ersity and the South 
Dakota Agricultural Experiment Station.  It was 
exclusively released to Norfarm Seeds, Inc. in 
Roseau, Minnesota.
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Nancy Jensen , Agronomist 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center 
Bismarck, North Dakota 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.