Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CRESTED 
WHEATGRASS 
Agropyron cristatum  (L.) 
Gaertn. 
Plant Symbol = AGCR 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 Loren St. John USDA NRCS Idaho PMC 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Crested wheatgrass is 
commonly recommended for forage production.  It is 
palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife and is 
a desirable feed in spring and also in the fall if it re-
grows enough.  It is commonly utilized for winter 
forage by cattle and horses, but protein supplements 
are required to ensure good  animal health.  It can 
withstand very heavy grazing pressure (65% use and 
greater) once stands are estab lished.  The best forage 
types in order are Siberian,  desertorum, and Hycrest.  
The cristatum type is not considered a productive 
forage type.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Crested wheatgrasses 
are useful for soil stabilization.  They compete well 
with other aggressive intr oduced grasses, but because 
of this trait, they are not compatible in mixes with 
native species.  Their drough t tolerance, fibrous root  systems, and good seedling vigor make these species 
ideal for reclamation in areas with 8 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  In 
areas above 14 inches of 
precipitation, the cristatum types 
may exhibit their 
rhizomatous traits and make excellent low 
maintenance lawns.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover and to stabilize ditchbanks, 
dikes, pipelines, powerlines and roadsides.  
 
Wildlife : Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds; deer, antelope and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall. Upland and song birds 
utilize stands for nesting. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Crested wheatgrasses  Agropyron cristatum, 
Agropyron desertorum , and Siberian wheatgrass 
Agropyron fragile  are perennial grasses commonly 
seeded in the western United States.  They are long-
lived, cool season, drought tolerant, introduced 
grasses with extensive root systems.  Cristatum type 
crested wheatgrass grows from 1 to 3 feet tall and 
seed spikes may be 1.5 to 3 inches long with a short-
broad shape that tapers at the tip.  Flower clusters 
within the spike are flattened and closely 
overlapping.  Each seed has a short awn.  Stems are 
leafy and erect, forming a dense tuft. Leaves are flat, 
smooth below, slightly coarse above, and vary in 
width from 1/16 to 1/4 inch. 
   
Adaptation and Distribution 
Cristatum type crested wheat grass is adapted to areas 
where annual precipitation averages 10 and where the 
frost free period is generally less than 140 days; it 
does well up to 9,000 feet elevation.  Crested 
wheatgrass grows on shallow to deep, moderately 
course to fine textured, moderately well to well 
drained and weakly acidic to moderately alkaline 
soils.  Under saline conditions, vigor and production 
are reduced.  The cristatum type is not well adapted 
to silty soils.  All crested wheatgrasses are cold 
tolerant, can withstand moderate periodic flooding in 
the spring, and are very tolerant of fire.  They will not

tolerate long periods of inundation, poorly drained  
soils or excessive irrigation.  
 
Crested wheatgrass is distributed throughout the 
western United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Crested wheatgrass should be  seeded with a drill at a 
depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine textured 
soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured soils.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for all 
crested wheatgrasses are 5 to 7 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) or 20 to 30 PLS per square foot.  If used 
as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired.  For critical areas, increase the seeding rate 
to 40 to 50 PLS per square foot.  Mulching and light 
irrigations on highly disturbed areas are beneficial for 
stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring on heavy to medium textured soils 
and in late fall on medium to light textured soils.  
Late summer (August to mid September) seedings are 
not recommended unless irrigation is available.  
 
If weed control is needed, application of 2,4-D 
should not be made until plants have reached the four 
to six leaf stage.  Mow weeds that are beginning to 
bloom to reduce weed seed development.  New 
stands may also be damaged by grasshoppers and 
other insects and use of pesticides may be required. 
 
Management  
Crested wheatgrasses produce leaves in the spring 
about 10 days after bluegrass species and about 2 to 3 
weeks earlier than native wheatgrasses.  
 
New stands of crested wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they are firmly established and have 
started to produce seed heads.  Six inches of new 
growth should be attained in spring before grazing is 
allowed in established stands.  Three inches of 
stubble should remain at the end of the grazing 
season to maintain the long term health of the plant.  
 
Crested wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants 
requiring little additional treatment or care. However, 
spring/fall deferment or grazing rotations are 
recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  
 
Crested wheatgrass can be used for hay production 
and will make nutritious feed, but is more suited to  pasture use. Light, infrequent applications of nitrogen 
(25 pounds/acre) and irrigation will increase total 
biomass production and lengthen the green period. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Crested wheatgrasses are long
-lived, spread primarily 
via seed, but may also spread via rhizomes in the case 
of the cristatum types.  They are not considered  
"weedy" or invasive species.  Most seedings do not 
spread beyond original plantings, or if they do 
spread, the rate of spread is not alarming.  They will 
cross with each other (exception Siberian types do 
not cross with other types), but do not cross with 
native species.  
 
Crested wheatgrasses resist cheatgrass competition 
better than native species because it germinates 
earlier and grows more rapidly at colder 
temperatures.  This is an important competitive 
advantage when dealing with winter annual species 
such as cheatgrass.  
 
Due to commonly being planted in monocultures 
(single species) stands in the past, some feel crested 
wheatgrasses are not ecologically appropriate.  It is 
important to consider multiple species mixes to avoid 
this conception. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Douglas' (former USSR, Iran and Turkey) may be 
used on roadsides; 'Ephraim' (Turkey) is rhizomatous 
when planted in higher precipitation zones above 14 
inches, and is useful for disturbed areas, mine spoils, 
roadsides and turf applications; 'Parkway' is 
recommended for hay and pasture; and 'Ruff' is 
recommended for a short seas on spring forage crop, 
roadsides, parks, and playgrounds in low rainfall 
areas of the central Great Plains. 
 
Crested wheatgrasses  Agropyron cristatum (L.) 
Gaertn. X  Agropyron desertorum  (Fisch. ex Link) 
J.A. Schultes (Hycrest type)  is a hybrid between the 
cristatum and desertorum types which results in a 
plant with excellent seedling vigor.  ‘Hycrest’ 
(central Asia/former USSR) is easier to establish than 
either of its parents and is more productive during the 
establishment period than either parent.  Long term 
productivity exceeds the cristatum type and is equal 
to the desertorum type.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho

Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.