Plant Fact Sheet
MAUI CHAFF FLOWER 
Achyranthes splendens Mart. Ex 
Moq.  
Plant Symbol = ACSP3  
 
Contributed by: USDA/NRCS Hoolehua Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Figure  1 Outplanting of A. splendens var. splendens at 
Upper Kaulana, Kahoolawe. Kim & Forest Starr, 
DEC2008 
 
Alternate Names:    
Ewa hinahina; round chaff flower; round -leaved chaff 
flower.   
 
Uses:  
Achyranthes splendens has the potential f or ecosystem 
restoration, re -vegetation of degraded habitats, and to 
increase diversity in dry -land and coastal communities.   
Its silvery appearance makes it an excellent selection for 
xeriscape gardens and other dryland landscaping projects.
 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).
 
Achyranthes splendens  var.  rotunda  is listed by  the U.S. 
Federal Government as an Endangered S pecies. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Achyranthes splendens  is a small shrub 2 to 6 feet in 
height . The leaves are arranged opposite and are obovate 
to broadly elliptic or suborbicular  in shape, ranging in size 
f rom ¾  to  4 ½  inches long and ½  to 2 ½ inches wide. The  
leaves  are  also  covered with white hairs, especially on the 
lower surface  giving them a silvery a ppearance.  Its 
flower is a densely -congested spike with a silvery 
appearance as well and can measure fr om 1 to 9 ½ inches 
long.  
 
Achyranthes splendens  is an endemic shrub. It occurs 
naturally  at low elevations, generally from sea level to 
100 feet, in open ,  dry areas .  It is known to survive 
plantings up to 1000 feet.  It is currently known to occur  
natural ly along the western coast of O ahu, on the 
Kalaupapa peninsula on M olokai, near Manele and 
Maunalei Gulch on Lanai, in West Maui, and near Kula 
on East Maui. There are 2 varieties recognized in The 
Manual of the Flowering Plants of Hawaii  (Wagner 
1990);  A. splendens  var.  rotundata,  and  A.  splendens  var. 
splendens . 
 
 
 
 
Achyranthes splendens  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
For  updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.