Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KOA 
Acacia koa A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = ACKO  
 
Contributed by: Traditional Tree Initiative 
 
 
 Acacia koa , University of Hawaii 
 
The following information has been abstracted from 
the full treatment at  http://www.traditionaltree.org
. 
Please consult the full treatment for more information 
including genetics, associated species, establishment, 
plantation design, and agroforestry management. 
 
Alternate Names 
None 
A closely related species is ACKO2 -  Acacia koaia: 
dwarf koa, koaie, koaoha, koai‘e, koaia 
 
Uses 
The primary use is for ti mber, though it creates 
wildlife habitat, and is an ornamental.  Koa trees in 
natural ecosystems provide habitat for many plants, 
insects, and birds, some  endangered, such as the 
‘akiap ōlā ‘au ( Hemignathus munroi ), a species of 
honeycreeper.  As a nitrogen-fixing species, koa 
plays an important role in forest fertility.  A key 
traditional use of koa logs by early Hawaiians was to 
build canoes and make tools.   Commercially, koa is 
the premier native timber of Hawai‘i and is one of the 
most expensive woods in the world.  The leaves and 
ashes have been used medicinally by Hawaiians.  
Tannin from the koa bark  has been used to make a 
red dye for traditional bark cloth.  The name “koa” 
also means “warrior” in  Hawaiian and is important 
culturally. 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Koa is the largest native Hawaiian tree.  It typically 
attains heights of 15-25 m (50-80 ft) with a canopy 
spread of 6-12 m (20-40 ft).  Found between 100-
2300 m (330-7500 ft).  The form of trees ranges from 
an upright single trunk to low and sprawling with 
multiple trunks.  Pale yellow flowers are borne in 
axillary racemes with sphe rical heads about 8.5 mm 
(0.33 in) in diameter.   Flowers are produced 
throughout the year, peaking in mid to late winter.  
Seeds are contained within a pod (legume) 15-20 cm 
(6-8 in) long containing 6- 12 seeds.  There are three 
varieties of  Acacia koa.  A. koa  var.  koa, A.koa  var. 
latifolia , and A. koa  var. kauaiensis . 
 
Distribution : Endemic to the Hawaiian Islands.  
Please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
The only propagation method currently in wide use is 
from seed.  Pods are ready  to pick when their color 
has turned from green to brown or black.  Growing 
koa seedlings is very similar to many other nitrogen-
fixing tree species, requiring pre-germination 
treatment (scarification) to break through the hard, 
impermeable seed coat, inoculation with appropriate 
rhizobia bacteria, and special  nutrient requirements.  
Trees should be inoculated in the nursery within 4 
weeks of germination.     
 
Koa requires well-drained soils.  Koa stands on 
shallow soils are not as productive as those on deep 
soils and may be short-lived.  Koa is difficult to 
integrate with annual crop s due to koa’s aggressive 
surface root system that co mpetes with crops, while 
also susceptible to damage by human, animal, and 
machine traffic.   
 
Hawai‘i’s highly variable climate means that 
matching an appropriate seed source to the site 
co
 nditions is important to foster a viable koa 
planting.  Environmental tolerances of koa vary by 
population.  Such variation is one reason that 
seedlings used in reforestation should come from 
seeds collected from sites near or similar to the 
planting site.  Koa trees grow well only in the sun.

After an overnight frost, young seedlings may be 
killed by rapid thawing caused by direct sunlight.  
The use of sun screens to slow thawing of seedlings 
is recommended.  Young seedlings are intolerant of 
grass competition.   
 
Management 
Overwatering and over-fertilization cause stress 
which often exhibits itself as yellowing of the leaves.  
Decreasing irrigation and eliminating nitrogen 
fertilizer can reverse the problem.  Weed whacking 
the bark at the base of the  tree can ruin the tree in a 
fraction of a second.  It’s best to control weeds only 
by hand cutting and mulching near the tree.  Leave a 
few inches of space against the trunk when mulching 
to reduce rotting.  Root-bound seedlings that have 
become stunted in their containers will never return 
to being vigorous, healthy trees and should be 
discarded.   
 
Without adequate soil contact, newly planted 
seedlings can be severely set back or die within a few 
days of planting.  When planting seedlings, especially 
those grown in forestry tubes, the soil should be 
firmed up against the seedling’s root system.  Windy 
or shady conditions are not conducive to rapid 
growth.  Trees should be protected from wind and 
given full sun most of the day.  When planting dense 
stands of koa, failure to thin trees will cause growth 
to stagnate.  The planting area must be fenced to 
exclude any grazing animals and competitive 
vegetation should be removed around planting holes. 
 
In urban situations, mulching with leafy materials is 
recommended to suppress weeds, conserve moisture, 
and protect koa’s surface roots.  Pruning is not 
recommended since cuts pr ovide easy access to fungi 
and borers. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Pests and diseases currently  limit koa’s optimal range 
to elevations above 610 m (2 000 ft).  The major pests 
affecting koa are koa wilt, fungi, and twig borers.  
Twig borers damage branches and may kill young 
seedlings.  Livestock readily consume small 
seedlings and can quickly cause catastrophic damage 
to young trees.  Seed pred ators include seed weevils 
and the koa seed worm.  The koa moth may cause 
defoliation and in some cases may kill trees.  Rusts 
are common on phyllodes, but are usually not serious 
problems.  Banana poka ( Passiflora tarminiana), a 
vigorous climbing vine, has overgrown and 
suppressed stands of koa.   Koa is susceptible to root-
knot nematodes, especially when grown in grassy 
areas at low elevations. 
  Environmental Concern 
Koa is not generally planted outside its native range.  
However, as a fast-growing
 nitrogen-fixing tree, the 
potential for invasiveness outside Hawai‘i may be 
high.  Alien invasive species can take over koa 
forests and prevent regeneration. 
 
Full treatment:  Elevitch, C.R., K.M. Wilkinson, and 
J.B Friday. 2006. Acacia koa  (koa) and Acacia koaia 
(koai‘a), ver. 2.2. In: C. R. Elevitch (ed.). Species 
Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry. Permanent 
Agriculture Resources (PAR), H ōlualoa, Hawai‘i. 
<http://www.traditionaltree.org>.  
 
 
Edited: 090609 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.