Plant Fact Sheet
TEXAS INDIAN 
MALLOW   
Abutilon fruticosum Guill. & Perr .  
Plant Symbol = ABFR3  
Contributed by: USDA – NRCS James E. ”Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas   
 
Photo Courtesy: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names   
Pelotazo, sweet Indian mallow, Indian mallow   
   
Uses   
Texas Indian mallow a native perennial subshrub forb 
grows in dry areas on cliffs, slopes, limestone outcrops, 
prairies and in open woods and chaparral.  Plants are 
browsed by deer, sheep and goats and are quickly 
eliminated from grazed rangelands.  Seeds are eaten by 
bobwhite quail and mourning doves, and the plants 
provide cover for wildlife.  It has potential to enhance 
water quality and improve range condition with proper 
management.  Indian mallow is drought -tolerant and 
suitable for xeriscaping.  The conspicuous flower attracts 
birds, butterflies and larval plant food for several species 
of skipper butterflies.    
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
    Description and Adaptation  
Mallow Family (Malvaceae).  Texas Indian mallow an 
upright warm
-season, hairy perennial subshrub forb 
reaches .3 to 1.8 meters (1 to 6 feet) , more commonly .6 
to .9 meters (2 to 3 feet high), the stem unbranched to 
much branched.  Leaves 10 centimeters (4 inches) long, 
al ternate, short -stalked; blade thickish, gray in color with 
fine, star -shaped hairs, heart -shaped at base, sharply 
pointed at tip, the margins irregularly toothed.  Upper 
leaves much smaller.  Flowers  are conspicuous at  1.9 to 
2.54 centimeters (¾ to 1 inch)  across; 5 petals, pale 
orange -yellow; stamens numerous; blooms from June to 
October; 5 to 9 hairy carpels, two or more seeds in each 
carpel.  Found in dry, mostly calcareous soils of prairies, 
chaparral and in open woodlands, and on rocky cliffs and 
slope s from Arkansas, Oklahoma to Texas.       
 
 
Photo Courtesy: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Establishment   
Texas Indian mallow should be seeded early in the spring, 
either by broadcasting or with a grass drill equipped with 
a small seed box.  For best result seeds no deeper than ¼ 
to ½ inch on a firm well prepared seedbed using some 
type of carrier, such as san d, to enhance seed distribution.  
Texas Indian mallow could be a valuable component if 
included in a grass/forb mix for pasture and rangeland.    
   
Seed production of Texas Indian mallow is achieved at 
the NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center 
i n Knox City, Texas by seeding at a rate of 2.0 Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) pound per acre.  The Plant Materials Center 
seeds in the spring after the last frost with a two row 
cotton planter equipped with a Planet Jr. planter 
attachment.