Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEARBERRY 
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi  (L.) 
Spreng  
Plant Symbol = ARUV  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
kinnikinnick 
 
Uses 
Bearberry serves a dual role on sandy soils, as both a 
beautification plant as well as a critical area 
stabilizer.  The thick, prostrate, vegetative mat and 
evergreen character are what make bearberry a very 
popular ground cover.  It is often planted around 
home sites, sand dunes, sandy banks, and commercial 
sites.  The fruit it produces is eaten by a few species 
of songbirds and game animals.  Deer will sometimes 
browse the foliage lightly. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pure stands of bearberry can be extremely dense, 
with heights rarely taller than 6 inches.  Erect 
branching twigs emerge from long flexible prostrate 
stems, which are produced by single roots.  The  
 
trailing stems will layer, sending out small roots 
periodically.  The finely textured velvety branches 
are initially white to pale green, becoming smooth 
and red-brown with maturity.  The small solitary 
three scaled buds are dark brown.   
 
The simple leaves of this broadleaf evergreen are 
alternately arranged on branches.  Each leaf is held 
by a twisted leaf stalk, ver tically.  The leathery dark 
green leaves are an inch  long and have rounded tips 
tapering back to the base.  In fall, the leaves begin 
changing from a dark green  to a reddish-green to 
purple. 
 
 Charles Webber © California Academy of Sciences @ CalFlora
 
Terminal clusters of small urn-shaped flowers bloom 
from May to June.  The perfect flowers are white to 
pink, and bear round, fleshy or mealy, bright red to 
pink fruits called drupes.  This smooth, glossy 
skinned fruit will range from 1/4 to 1/2 inch in 
diameter.  The fruit will persist on the plant into early 
winter.  Each drupe contains 1 to 5 hard seeds, which 
need to be scarified and stratified prior to 
germination to reduce the seed coat and break 
embryo dormancy.  There is an average of 40,900 
cleaned seeds per pound.
   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bearberry’s native range is from Labrador to Alaska, 
south to Virginia, Illinois, Nebraska, and in the 
mountains from New Mexico north through 
California to Alaska.  This long-lived, low growing 
shrub is very cold tolerant.  This plant prefers coarse 
well to excessively drained soils of forests, sand 
dunes, bald or barren areas.  It does not tolerate moist 
or off-drained sites.  Although bearberry is often 
found growing in the open on sand dunes, it grows 
well under partial shade of forest canopies.   
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Bearberry can be propagated  from seeds, softwood 
cuttings or pre-rooted stem cuttings.  It is difficult to 
root this plant from bare cuttings in the greenhouse.  
Scarified seed sown in early summer will improve 
germination the following spring, but this technique 
is not as reliable as cuttings.  Softwood cuttings 
should be harvested in late summer, and rooted stem 
cuttings are most successful when harvested during 
the dormant season.  Successfully grown seedlings or

cuttings should be handled carefully in containers; 
bare root plantings are rarely effective. 
 
Management 
This shrub species requires very little maintenance 
once it has been established.  Annual spring 
applications of 10-10-10 will increase the growth rate 
of bearberry, but will also  increase weed growth.  
Weed growth must be controlled to sustain healthy 
stands of bearberry. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no known varieties of bearberry available; 
local or regional selections are available from 
commercial nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.