Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DESERT 
NEEDLEGRASS  
Achnatherum speciosum  (Trin. 
& Rupr.) Barkworth 
Plant Symbol = ACSP12  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS Great Basin Plant 
Materials Center 
 Alternate Names 
desert stipa, Stipa speciosa 
 
Uses  
Grazing/Rangeland : Desert needlegrass is palatable 
to all classes of livestock when young.  After desert 
needlegrass matures, it is moderately grazed by 
horses and cattle, but is often avoided by other 
livestock such as sheep.   
 
Soil Stabilization : Desert needlegrass can be used for 
ground cover in arid areas where there is light  disturbance.  However, it may not persist in areas 
with a large population of grazing animals due to 
excessive trampling and overgrazing. 
 
Wildlife
: Desert needlegrass is palatable to wildlife 
such as desert bighorn sheep and feral burros, 
particularly when young.   
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., th reatened and endangered 
species, state noxious stat us, and wetland indicator 
values).   
 © Dr. D.W. Taylor, Jepson Herbarium 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Desert needlegrass is a 
native, cool-season, perennial bunch grass that grows 
from 1 to 2 feet tall (30 to 60 cm).  The leaf basal 
sheath is hairy, the leaf blade is generally rolled, and 
the ligule is short.  The in florescence is compact, 4 to 
6 inches long (10 to 15 cm), and is generally partly 
enclosed by the uppermost leaf sheath.  Seeds have 
an awn approximately 1.5 inches long (38 mm) that 
is bent once and is hairy below the bend. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution  
Desert needlegrass typically grows on coarse soils 
with little or no profile development, including 
alluvial fans, dry rocky hills, talus slopes, and in 
canyons.  Desert needlegrass can tolerate low 
precipitation environments and usually occurs in 
areas that receive 6 to 20 inches (15 to 50 cm) of 
annual precipitation.   
 
Desert needlegrass typically grows in Mediterranean 
climates that have mild winters and warm to hot 
summers. 
 
Desert needlegrass is found throughout many western 
states, including New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, 
Utah, Nevada, California, and Oregon.  For current 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Desert needlegrass can reproduce vegetatively and by 
seed.  Vegetative reproduc tion occurs through the 
annual growth of new tillers.  Seed production is 
highly variable depending on rainfall, and little seed 
is produced when soil moisture is low and 
temperatures are high.

The long awns of desert needlegrass seed enable self-
planting.  Cycles of wetting and drying cause the awn 
to twist and untwist, which drives the seed into the 
ground.   
 
A study on germination rates for desert needlegrass 
found that germination was greatest for a treatment 
temperature of 59 degrees Fahrenheit.  The study 
concluded that after 14 days of incubation at 59 
degrees Fahrenheit, germination should be more than 
90%.  
 
Management 
Desert needlegrass tolerates light grazing, but 
overgrazing may eliminate desert needlegrass from 
the ecological site.  It is best to graze desert 
needlegrass before seed develops because the seed 
has a prominent, sharp callus that can injure the eyes 
and mouths of grazing animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
No releases of this species have been completed. 
 
Prepared By:  
Steven Perkins , USDA NRCS Great Basin PMC, 
Fallon, Nevada 
 
Dan Ogle , USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Species Coordinator: 
Steven Perkins , USDA NRCS Great Basin Plant 
Materials Center, Fallon, Nevada 
 
Edited: 30Jan08sp; 30Jan08dgo;  08Feb29 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.