Plant Fact Sheet
BROOMSEDGE 
BLUESTEM  
ANDROPOGON 
VIRGINICUS  L.   
Plant Symbol = ANVI2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  
  
   Melinda Brakie , USDA NRCS East  Texas Plant  Materials  Center   
Alternate Names  
b roomsedge, yellowsedge bluestem, Virginia bluestem , 
whiskey grass
      
Uses  
Livestock:  Broomsedge bluestem is not considered 
important cattle forage.   It provides grazing in spring and 
early summer. However, nutritional quality and 
palatability quickly decrease as the summer progr esses.    
 
Wildlife:  Small birds utilize the seed in winter when other 
food supplies are limited. Broomsedge bluestem provides 
cover for ground nesting birds such as quail and turkeys.   It is a larval host for the Zabulon Skipper butterfly 
(
Poanes zabulon) .   
   
Ornamental:  Broomsedge bluestem is used as an 
ornamental plant.   It is recommended for golf courses and 
residential landscaping because it requires low amounts of 
water.   In the fall, the foliage turns a reddish orange and 
retains this color during winter dormancy, thereby adding 
color to the winter landscape.   
   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov  ) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Broomsedge bluestem is a native warm season perennial 
bunchgrass that grows 2 to 4 feet tall.  The leaves are flat 
to partly  folded 10 to 15 inches long and approximately 
1/8 inch wide.  The fringed ligule is 1/16 inch long.  The 
flattened basal leaf sheaths are colorless or yellow. The 
rest of the plant is a pale greenish yellow. Broomsedge 
bluestem produces many seeds on the  upper half of the 
plant that are distributed by the wind.   At a distance the 
inflorescence may appear silvery in the sunlight.  
 
Broomsedge bluestem grows where average rainfall is 
greater than 25 inches.   It is found throughout the eastern 
portion of th e United States. The grass is found in open 
areas such as abandoned fields, overgrazed pastures, cut -
over timber sites, and rights of way.   Broomsedge grows 
on a wide variety of soils, preferring loose, sandy, moist 
sites with low fertility and is an indicator of low 
phosphorus soils. It also is a shallow rooted plant.  
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment   
Broomsedge bluestem can be established by direct 
seeding or transplanti ng.  Direct seeding is the preferred 
method of establishing a broomsedge bluestem stand. 
Prepare a firm, weed free seedbed by discing and 
cultipacking.  The site may be prepared by treating the 
planting area in the spring with a nonselective herbicide 
such  as glyphosate to kill existing vegetation then using a 
no -till type drill to plant.   
 
The best time to p lant broomsedge bluestem seeds is  in 
the spring when soil temperature is at least 55 °F or 
greater.   The seed should be planted no more than ¼  inch