Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN WATER PLANTAIN  
Alisma subcordatum  Raf. 
Plant Symbol = ALSU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
  
 Alternate Names 
Alisma plantago-aquatica L. ssp. subcordatum(Raf.) 
Hultén 
 
Uses 
Waterfowl and upland birds readily consume the seed 
of this broadleaf species, but the roots have not been 
observed to be eaten.  Its small white and yellow 
flower are attractive, havi ng potential use in water 
gardens. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 
Description 
This light to yellow green, erect herbaceous perennial 
can reach heights of about 3 feet.  The ovate to 
lanceolate shaped leaves emerge from a 1 1/4 to 6 
inch long stem.  Each l eaf has a primary mid-vein 
which is flanked by three subparallel veins.  Leaf 
stems emerge from bulb-like corms which have 
shallow fibrous roots.  Vegetative spread is slow and 
radial.  This species relie s on population spread by 
seed.  Independent, single or multiple, whorl 
branched inflorescence rise  from the plant base to a 
height of 3 1\2 feet.  White to pinkish 3 petaled 
flowers bloom from June to September on compound 
panicles.  Numerous flat, keeled, achenes form 
terminally in tight rings, mature from July to 
October.  Seedlings will emerge on exposed soils, in 
stands of existing vegetation or newly disturbed 
locations. 
  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA, NRCS 1995 Northeast Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The native range of water plantain is from 
Massachusetts to Minnesota, south to Florida and 
Texas.  This broadleaf emergent can be found 
growing in shallow, quiet to slow moving water, and 
in mud of marshes, ponds, lakes, streams, ditches, 
and seeps.  It requires organic or silty soils, with 
seasonally or permanently  inundated freshwater (<0.5 
parts per thousand salt content).  To grow optimally, 
it requires full sunlight. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
This species can be established effectively by 
vegetative divisions or seed.  Bare-root or 
containerized vegetative propagules are used to 
effectively establish plantain within its hydric regime.   
It is easy to handle this form of material due to its 
small size, ease of separation, and plantability.  On 
site and nursery seedings are not as predictable; water 
plantain requires specific after ripening, stratification, 
and germination conditions before emergence will 
occur.  Once established onto a site with ideal 
hydrology, this species will continue to re-seed itself 
for as long as the ideal  environmental conditions 
exist.  Ideal sites for germination require direct 
sunlight, finely textured soils, and adequate sustained 
soil moisture.

Management 
On manageable sites, water depths must be kept 
moist to flooded (<4 inches) for the growing season.  
In early spring, water depths must recede, exposing 
seeds to bare soil to germinate.  This species 
responds well to low to moderate levels of fertilizer 
amendments; naturally released nutrients from 
sediments and organics are usually adequate for good 
plant growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known detrimental pests of this species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no commercial varieties available, but local 
and regional collections are available from wetland 
plant nurseries.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.