Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PINELAND 
THREEAWN  
Aristida stricta  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = ARST5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Warning: This species may be 
mechanically injurious to livestock. 
 
Alternate Names 
wiregrass  
 
Uses  
Cattle graze pineland threea wn in early spring.  
Spring growth becomes wiry  and unpalatable during 
May and June. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Pineland threeawn is a 
cool-season, perennial bunch grass native to the U.S.  
The height is between 1-1/2 and 2-1/2 feet.  The leaf 
blade is mostly basal; 12 to 20 inches long; narrow; 
rolled inward; wiry; and hairy on upper side at base.  
The ligule is hairy.  The seedhead is a slender panicle 
10 to 12 inches long; glumes have 3 awns about 1/2 
to 3/4 inch long, one a little longer than other two. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass increases slowly  on areas burned annually 
and grazed all year.  It decreases on areas grazed 
heavily in early spring  and on which grazing is 
deferred during summer and early fall.  Double 
chopping with heavy rolling cutters in early spring 
easily reduces it. 
 
Establishment 
Pineland threeawn growth starts in January in south 
Florida and in early March in Georgia and is rapid.  
The leaf blades usually grow 6 to 8 inches in 4 weeks 
and the seedheads appear during May and June.  
Pineland threeawn is a poor seed producer and a low 
forage producer.  It tolerates shade.  Occasionally 
short, thin rhizomes develop on plants that have been 
burned repeatedly.  It grows on well-drained sands 
over finer textured subsoil and on sands covered with 
shallow water for part of the year.  It does well on 
moderate to well-drained strongly acid soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 25june02 ahv; jul03 a hv; 20sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.