Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LEMMON’S 
NEEDLEGRASS 
Achnatherum lemmonii  
(Vasey) Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = ACLE8  
 
Contributed by: 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon
 
 
Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Alternate Names:   Also known as Lemmon’s stipa, 
Stipa lemmonii  (Vasey) Scribner.  Other scientific 
names are Achnatherum  lemmonii  subsp. pubescens  
and  Achnatherum lemmonii  var. jonesii .  
 
Uses:  Lemmon’s needlegrass is a desirable cool 
season bunchgrass for restoration of upland prairies 
and oak savannas, including sites representing 
extremes in both drought and soil infertility.  In 
western Oregon and western Washington its best use 
may be revegetation of hot, sunny, dry, south facing 
slopes and rocky outcrops with impoverished or 
weakly developed soils.  In drier and nearly semi-arid 
regions of the western US, the species can be used for 
rangeland plantings as a component of seed mixtures.   
 
Lemmon's needlegrass is a valuable forage plant and 
has good palatability for deer, sheep, and cattle.  It 
produces large seeds that ar e important food for birds 
and small mammals.  The species may have potential 
in low maintenance lawns or xeric landscaping. 
 
Description:   Lemmon’s needlegrass is a medium to 
long lived, relatively short, densely tufted perennial 
grass with culms (stems) that are 20-80 cm tall and 
hairy below the nodes (joints).  Leaf blades are 10-20 
cm long, 1-2 mm wide, flat or rolled inward, and 
often blue-green in color.  The form is spreading to 
upright and the inflorescen ce (seed head or panicle) 
is spike-like, narrow, and pale or purplish in color. 
Spikelets are one flowered.  The subspecies 
pubescens  has pubescent or tomentose culms.  
Lemmon's needlegrass flowers in May and seeds 
mature by mid June in the foothills of western 
Oregon. 
 
Key to Identification:  Lemmon's needlegrass has a 
distinct spike-like seed head and long awns (linear 
appendages that are 15-50 mm but typically 20-35 
mm) on the seed that are bent twice and twisted at 
maturity.  The species can easily be confused with 
other grasses in the genus  Stipa or Achnatherum.  
However, other needlegrasses are less likely to occur 
at low elevations west of the Cascades from the 
Willamette Valley northward.  Western needlegrass 
( Stipa occidentalis ) can co-exist at mid-elevations but 
its seed is much smaller than Lemmon's needlegrass.  
Without seed heads the fine textured bluish foliage of 
Lemmon’s needlegrass may be confused with 
Roemer’s fescue ( Festuca roemeri) which has a 
broader, branching panicle.   
 
Adaptation:   Lemmon’s needlegrass is found 
naturally in northern and western California, 
including the Sierra Nevada Mountains, north to 
southern British Columbia and east to Montana, 
Utah, and Arizona.  The species has deep fibrous 
roots and is very drought tolerant.  Stands typically 
occur on dry sunny slopes, grasslands, savannas, 
openings within pine woodlands, and upland prairies 
from sea-level to 7500 ft. elevation.  It is adapted to 
low fertility and moderately acid to slightly alkaline 
(pH 5.0-7.5), shallow soils derived from basalts.   
Soil texture ranges from gravelly to medium fine 
loams and silts.  The subspecies  pubescens is 
restricted to serpentine soils (soils high in silicates of 
magnesium and iron as well as other minerals and 
therefore toxic to many plants).

Commercial availability of seed:  Seed is 
periodically available in California from vendors.  In 
addition, the Bureau of Land Management and the 
US Forest Service contract  with private growers to 
produce Lemmon’s needlegrass for their restoration 
work and growers sometimes  sell extra seed.  Most of 
this seed originates from east of the Cascades or 
southern Oregon. Willamette Valley and western 
Washington sources may be limited to wild 
collections. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  This species is 
infrequent in the Willamette Valley and Puget 
lowlands where it is often confined to foothills and 
south slopes.  It is more common east of the Cascades 
as well as in southern Oregon and California. 
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:   
Lemmon’s needlegrass has high seed dormancy and 
delayed germination which can allow weedy species 
to establish first.  After seedling emergence, 
establishment is still relatively slow.  Plants are shade 
intolerant.  It can be disease prone on winter wet to 
summer moist sites where it is maladapted or a weak 
competitor.  Like other needlegrasses, the long awned  seed can cause injury to the mouth and other facial 
tissues of livestock. 
Line drawing reprinted by permission, 
University of Washington Press 
 
Establishment:   The awns on the seed should be 
removed by a debearder or other device in order to 
plant using standard seeding equipment.  
Germination for most seed lots improves 
substantially with 60-90 days of cold, moist chilling 
(stratification).   Therefore, direct seeding should be 
in the fall to overcome dormancy.  In some cases, 
light scarification of the seed coat has improved 
germination as well.  There are approximately 95,000 
seeds/lb (+/- 15%) with awns removed but hulls 
intact.  One pound of live  seed sown per acre is 
equivalent to about 2.2 live seeds per square foot.  
For best results and easier management, sow alone at 
4-8 lbs/ac or at lower rates in mixes with other 
species that have similar seed dormancy.  Where 
winters are relatively mild and snow free, seed may 
germinate outdoors as early as January.  Control of 
fall and winter weeds is essential for initial stand 
establishment, otherwise results can be poor.  Good 
results can be achieved with the use of a nonselective 
foliar applied herbicide after sowing but prior to 
emergence of Lemmon’s needlegrass.  The species 
tolerates light to moderate grazing and fire as natural 
components of prairie ecosystems. 
 
 Prepared By:  
Dale Darris, Sonja Johnson, and Amy Bartow. USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited 7/31/07 D. Darris; 070802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.