Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPIKE BENTGRASS  
Agrostis exarata Trin. 
Plant symbol = AGEX 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
Alternate names: Other common names include 
spike redtop and western bentgrass. There are three 
recognized varieties:    A. exarata. var. exarata,  A. 
exarata.  var. pacifica  Vasey, and  A. exarata. var. 
monolepis  (Torrey) Hitchc.  Spike bentgrass 
apparently hybridizes with  A. scabra and A. 
stolonifera.  
  
Uses:  As a pioneer species, spike bentgrass has good 
potential for restoration of prairie wetlands, riparian 
areas, and other seasonally wet or intermittently 
flooded habitats.  It is also useful for revegetation of 
ditches, logged or burned over timberland, and other 
disturbances within brush and open woodland 
communities.   
 
 Where locally abundant, this species is an important 
source of forage for livestock.  Foliage remains green  and palatable throughout the summer.  Its palatability 
is rated good for cattle, horses, and elk, and fair to 
good for sheep and deer.  Spike bentgrass is also 
planted as a soil stabilizer 
in degraded areas and has 
been suggested for use in excluding reed canarygrass 
( Phalaris arundinacea ).  Value for wildlife habitat is 
ranked high for numerous birds and mammals. 
Compared to many bentgrasses, spike bentgrass is 
considered by some as more compatible with other 
native grasses, forbs, and trees.  
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Description:  Spike bentgrass is a  medium textured, 
cool season, perennial bunchgrass with a dense, 
spike-like flower head (pan icle).  The stems (culms) 
are slender and erect, usually 50 to 100 (150) cm tall.  
The leaf blades are 2 to 20 mm wide, 5 to 20 cm 
long, and harsh to the touch.  This species contains 
considerable variability, from dwarf alpine forms to 
taller, more robust specimens along the seacoast.  
Some texts indicate the occas ional presence of short 
rhizomes and root development or growing points at 
lower nodes, but rhizomes appear to be lacking on 
plants in our area.  This  species  is found mostly in the 
western United States and Canada.    
 
Key to identification:  Compared to most other 
bentgrasses, the panicle is particularly narrow and 
more spike-like.  It is 10 to 25 cm long.  The 
individual flower groups (spikelets) are very tiny and 
1-flowered.  A botanical grass key may be required to 
accurately distinguish it from other bentgrasses. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Spike bentgrass is 
relatively common is western Oregon, western 
Washington, and California. It can be locally 
abundant on moist sites throughout the western 
states. The species produces large quantities of tiny 
seeds with good retention th at are easy to harvest or 
collect. It is usually not found in large pure stands, 
but occurs as scattered individuals or small colonies 
across a landscape. 
 
Adaptation:  Spike bentgrass has broad adaptation to 
a wide variety of habitats. Despite the tiny seed size, 
it is easy to establish and a high seed producer with 
good commercial potential. Spike bentgrass occurs in 
a wide variety of habitats including forest openings, 
grasslands, shrub lands, wet meadows, freshwater 
and high tidal marshes, as well as along streams, 
rocky beaches, and lake margins. It is most 
commonly found in moist open places, but 
occasionally grows in dry habitats such as semi-arid 
grasslands. Relatively shade intolerant, this species
 
performs well on moderately acidic, mineral soils.

While most prevalent on disturbed sites such as 
ditches, harvested forestland, and roadsides, it may 
also be found in established meadow and riparian 
plant communities. Habitats range from sea level to 
alpine zones.  This species  occurs mostly in the 
western United States and Canada.
 
    
 
Establishment:  Some recommend a light debearding 
to remove the seed appendage (awn) in order to 
facilitate further seed cleaning and sowing with a 
drill. The seed has no dormancy and germinates 
readily. There are approxim ately 5,600,000 seeds/lb 
(+/- 20%). A seeding rate of 1 lb/acre of pure live 
seed would result in 125 live seeds per square foot.  
Given the small seed size, the single species seeding 
rate is generally 1-3 lbs/acre, but some literature 
recommends a rate of 3-5 or up to 8 lbs/acre to attain 
a full stand.  The species establishes easily on moist, 
mineral soil in spring or fall.  However, the seed 
readily migrates in flood prone areas so a thin mulch 
layer coupled with a late summer or early fall 
plantings may be preferred. 
  Management:
 Information on this species is limited.  
Moderate amounts of forage are produced and 
utilized by livestock, large game, and other wildlife 
well into summer. The ability of spike bentgrass to 
easily volunteer on moist, disturbed ground and 
readily produce seed makes it a candidate for moist 
soil management of wetland habitat for waterfowl, 
shorebirds, and other wildlife. 
 Line drawing reprinted by permission, 
University of Washington Press 
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:
 
Due to its abundant seed production and broad 
adaptability, it may be considered weedy in certain 
environments.  Please consult with your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative  Extension Service office, 
or state natural resource or  agriculture department 
regarding its status and use. 
 
Commercial availability of seed: Several seed 
sources are available for California and at least one 
for the Willamette Valley of Oregon.  Ecotypes may 
be harder to locate fo r other western states. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris  and Amy Bartow , USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 16mar2006 jsp, 16sept2008 dcd; 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.