Plant Fact Sheet
PURPLE GIANT  
HYSSOP   
Agastache scrophulariifolia   
(Willd.) Kuntze   
Pla nt S ymbo l = AGSC  
Contributed by: USDA  NRCS  Cape May Plant Materia ls  
Center 
 
U S DA-NRCS PLANTS Database / William S. Justice @ USDA -NR C S  
PLANTS Database  
 
Alternat i ve N a me s   
Common Alternate Names:   
giant hyssop   
prairie hyssop  
 
Scientific Alternate Names : 
Hyssopus scrophulari ifolia W illd .  
Agastache scrophulariifolia v ar.  mollis  (Fe rn ald ) A .  
Heller  
 
Us e s  
Wildlife Use :  Purple g iant hyssop provides a nectar sou rc e 
fo r p o l lin a t o rs  a n d  is  we l l suited for use in pollinator 
restoration habitat. Preliminary observation found that 
purple giant hyssop attracted 14 different species of 
Hy menoptera and Lepidoptera in  Cape May,  New  Jers ey. 
The halictid bee  ( Agapostemon virescens ), leaf -cutter bee 
( Megachile mendica ), and Megachile texana  species  were 
most frequently observed visiting the flowe r.  Other bees 
known to frequent the flowe r are  the European honey bee 
( Apis mellifera ), blac k and gold bumb le bee ( Bo mbus auricomus
), and Bo mb us pensylvani cus. The flowe r a lso 
attract s goldfinches and hummingbirds.   
 
Orn ame nt al    
Purple g iant hyssop  is a popular ornamental p lant. The 
relative ly la rge height of the plant  makes  it a good choice 
as a background against fencing.  
 
S tatus  
Pleas e cons u lt the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Depart ment of Natura l  Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g ., threatened or endangered s pecies , state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Des cripti on  an d A da pta tio n  
Description : Purple giant hyssop  is  a  la t e -flowering, 
native perennial herb of the  mint fa mily.  It can grow 
unusually tall for a   mint; up to 6 feet,  with dia mond -
shaped stems, aro matic  foliage and flowers, and vigorous 
stolons. The stems are erect and form c lu mps. The upper 
braches  may b e purplish. 
The densely bran ched inflores cence is  a 1 –6 in  t e r min a l, 
continuous, or interrupted flower spike, o r race me . The 
plant usually has several spikes. The tops of the spikes 
develop into a flowe r and two  lateral branches develop 
under the flower  fr o m a co mmon node; giving the 
inflores cence a s ymmetrica l appearance. The flowe r 
clusters persist throughout the winter.  
T he individual flowers are ¼   in  long, 15 -nerved tubes that 
are lavender to pale p ink. The upper lip has 2  lobes and 
p ro ject s  fo rward ;  an d the lower lip curves downwards 
with  3  lobes. The individual  lobes are 3 -nerved.   
Not all flowe rs  open at the s ame time. The  flowers  
contain 4 stamens that extend beyond the flower. The two 
lower stamens curve upwards, while the two upper 
s tamens  curve do wnwards . The pollen s acs  are nearly 
p a ra lle l.  
A. scrophulariifolia  is simila r to blue g iant hyssop ( A. 
foeniculum ), however purple giant hyssop has a cup -li ke  
whorl o f green sepals (modified lea f -like  bracts under the 
flo we r)  wh ile  A. foeniculum  has blue -v iolet s epals . Often 
the sepals of giant purple hyssop have colored marg ins.  
Nutlets  are .0 5 -. 07  in  ( 1 .5–2 mm) , dark brown, rounded, 
and minutely hairy at the squared -o ff t ip .   
The stalked leaves of purple giant hyssop are positioned 
opposite on either side  of the s tem. The s h arp-pointed 
leaves  are 4  in  long and 2  in  wide,  with a cordate, 
s omewhat heart -shaped or rounded base. The ma rgins of 
the leaves  are coars ely toothed and short hairs  cover the 
leaf s te ms . The unders ides  of the leaves  are green, and

s mo oth or appear shaggy. Conversely, the underside of 
the blue giant hyssop ( A. foeniculum) is   wh it is h . T h e  
s pecies  name  is  derived fro m the Scrophulariaceae or 
figwo rt fa mily,  for the res emb lance of the leaves  to the 
figwo rt. When crus hed, the leaves  emit a d is t in c t , a n is e-
like odor.  
 
Purple giant  hyssop  distribution from  USDA -NRCS PLANTS  Database.  
 
Adaptation: Like  many  me mbe rs of the  mint fa mily, 
purple giant hyssop grows best in  moist soil or  wet 
conditions. It is found in rich  woodland sites with dappled 
shade, woodland borders, meadows, thickets, the upper 
limits of  floodplains, and upland woods. It prefers 
recently disturbed, sandier soils where co mpetit ion is 
li mit e d .  Plants will not persist under hot and dry 
conditions (USDA  zone 9 or higher). Threats to its habitat 
include changes in land use, competition fro m non -native 
s pecies , and natural s uccess ion . Fo r  updated  distribution, 
p leas e cons ult the Plant Profile  page  for this species on 
the PLANTS Web s ite.  
 
Es tablishment  
Purple g iant hyssop requires co ld stratification and 
sunlight to germinate.  Keep the seed for 8  weeks at 40ºF 
and move to 68ºF for germinat ion.  The s eeds  will 
germinate in  30 –90 days  in containers with good 
drainage.   When planting in the fa ll, cold stratification  is  
not required.  Fo r v egetative propagation, take late spring 
cuttings fro m the basal growth that emerges in  mid -
March. Thes e cuttings  can be fertilized for quic ker 
establishment.  
 
Purple g iant hyssop propagates rapidly by seed and 
transplants easy into natural settings. One ca n use it in 
d ry -s ite s eed mixes  for  pollinator habitat at 8%  of the 
mix.  Sow  into open ground and cover with a  light layer of 
mu lch or sow  into flats and grow to 12  in (30  c m)  in   height before tra
nsplanting. There are 60,000 –93,000 
seeds/ounce . 
 
Manage ment  
Because purple giant hyssop requires soil disturbance for 
successful establishment, regular c learings must be 
created and maintained through tree -thinning, elimination 
of competing vegetation, or by delaying natural 
s uccess ion cycles .   
 
Populations of pur ple giant hyssop tend to be short -liv e d  
becaus e they are eas ily out -competed. Therefore,  fie ld 
plots may ne ed to be re-es tablis hed every 3 –4 y ears  fo r a 
fuller  look. To encourage more  vigorous growth, cut 2 –6 
in   fro m the plant.  
 
Pe s ts  an d P ote nti al  Pr o bl e m s  
L it t le   is  kn o wn  about potential pests. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests  it  can be affected by mildew and rus ts . There are 
mixed findings on the plant’s susceptibility to browsing 
deer.  
 
The gradual and continued loss of farmland to either 
forests or urbaniza tion continues to threaten a species that 
requires open fields and  meadows for habitat.   
 
Environmental Concerns  
None  
 
Prepare d By  
Christopher M.  Sheahan ; USDA -NRCS,  Cape May Plant 
Materials   Center,  Cape May, N e w Jers ey . 
 
Ci ta ti o n  
Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Fact s heet  for purple g iant hyssop 
( Agastache  scrophulariifolia ). US DA -Natura l Res ources  
Cons ervation Service,  Cape May Plant Materia ls  Center. 
Cape May, NJ.  08210.  
 
Published  07/ 2012 
 
Ed it e d :  
For  more  info rmation about this and other plants, please 
contact you r local  NRCS  fie ld office or  Conservation 
Dis t ric t  <
http://ww w.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials  Progra m Web s ite <
http://plant-
materia ls.nrcs.usda.gov>  
 
 
 
 
US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER