Plant Fact Sheet
LEADPLANT 
Amorpha canescens  Pursh  
Plant Symbol = AMCA6  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Figure 1. Leadplant showing purple flowers and gray lead -colored 
leaves. Photo by Alan Shadow (2006) USDA NRCS.  
Alternate Names 
Lead -plant, leadplant amorpha, downy indigobush, prairie 
shoestrings, buffalo bellows,  Amorpha brachycarpa 
Uses  
Erosion control:  Planted for erosion control because it has 
deep, branching, woody root system.  
 
Ethnobotanic : Many Native American tribes used 
leadplant in many ways.  Most made a tea from the leaves 
and drank the tea, sometimes as a medicine to treat 
ailments such  as pinworms, eczema, rheumatism, 
neuralgia, open wounds, and cuts .  Some tribes made a 
substance to smoke from leadplant leaves and buffalo fat.  
Some believed that it could be used to make a “medicine” 
to attract buffalo to the person that had it on their 
clothing.  S ome tribes named the plant “buffalo bellows” 
because the timing of flowering coincided with the time 
of the year that the buffalo were in rut and bellowing.  
  Landscaping and restoration: Leadplant is an ideal 
ornamental species because it has showy flowers
, is 
drought tolerant, and shade tolerant.  It also forms nodules 
on its roots to fix nitrogen and can be used for prairie 
restorations.  
 
Wildlife and livestock : It is a floral food resource for 
pollinating insects, including solitary bees.  It is very 
palatable to livestock and wildlife, including cattle, sheep, 
horses, elk, and deer.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation  
Leadplant  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Leadplant is a subshrub to herbaceous perennial with 
multiple stems that can get to about 3 ft tall.  Leaves are 
odd- pinnately c ompound and covered in dense lead -
colored  silver-gray hairs  (giving the plant its common 
name) .  Purple flowers have one petal and are along the 
top parts of some of the stems.   The stamens are orange in 
color and when found extend out past the petal.  The  fruits 
are small pods that contain one seed, which is smooth and 
brown.   
Leadplant can occur in soils that are somewhat acidic to 
alkaline and can tolerate some salinity.  It is resistant to 
occurrences of fire and can tolerate a moderate amount of 
grazi ng.  Leadplant is a good indicator of well managed 
lands that have moderate to low levels of livestock 
grazing.  Leadplant is native to areas in Manitoba and 
Ontario .  In the U.S. it occurs from Montana east to

Michigan, and south to New Mexico and Louisiana.  For 
updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Prepare a firm, weed -free seedbed and plant pods 
separately or in rows that alternate with grasses.  Seed 
should be inoculated prior to seeding.  Seed should be 
planted 1/4 in. to 3/16 in. deep in the spring or fall, 
depending on stratification requirements.  For full stands 
of leadplant a seeding rate of 20 to 30 pure live seed 
(PLS) per square foot is n eeded.  For seeding in grass or 
grass forb mixtures use a seeding rate of 0.5 to 1 PLS per 
acre.  
 
Seed will need to be stratified.  Methods for stratification 
of seed are to sow seeds in the fall and let them stratify 
over winter or soak in 180- 200˚F (82-9 3˚C) water for 12 
hours then moist chill seed at 41 ˚F (5˚C) for 30 days.  
Germination will be between 14 and 20 days after 
planting.  
 
Leadplant can also be propagated by greenwood or 
hardwood cuttings.  Transplanting success is generally 
poor in prairie re storations. 
Management  
Initially grazing should be withheld and weeds controlled 
by mowing above seedlings during establishment period.  
Graze or mow conservatively and periodically graze only 
after dormancy to sustain cover and high production 
imp rovement , leaving tall stubble.  The presence of 
leadplant on native rangeland is usually indicative of a 
well managed area.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Common pests of leadplant are grasshoppers, leafhoppers, 
and small mammals.  Leaf spots, rusts, downy mildew,  and 
Cytospora amorphae  have been found on leadplant 
but they are not considered major diseases.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with leadplant.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
These  plant materials are somewhat readily available 
from commercial sources.  No known cultivars, improved, 
or selected materials of leadplant are known at this time.  
 
Photo Credit: Shadow, A. 2006. Photo of leadplant. 
USDA -NRCS East Texas Plant Materials  Center, 
Nocogdoches, TX.  
 
Prepared By : P. Allen Casey, USDA  NRCS Kansas 
Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas   
Citation  
Casey, P. A. 2011.  Plant Fact Sheet  for leadplant 
( Amorpha canescens) . USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, Kansas.  
Published : March 2011  
Edited: 27Jan2011 rlw ; 28Jan2011 jmr;  2Feb2011 jd;  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER