Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
BEACHGRASS  
Ammophila breviligulata  Fern.
Plant Symbol = AMBR 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
American beachgrass is the predominant plant 
species utilized along the Atlantic and Great Lakes 
coastlines for initial stabilization of frontal sand 
dunes.  It has also been utilized on extreme, non-dune 
sites, some having high salinity levels and droughty 
conditions, for erosion control and initial cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
American beachgrass is a l eafy, spreading, strongly 
rhizomatous grass, producing up to of 100 stems per 
clump annually.  This cool season perennial grass 
species will spread up to 6-10 feet annually by 
subsurface rhizomes.  It will grow to 2 or 3 feet tall, 
tolerating annual over-topping  accumulations of sand 
up to a foot.  The leaves have deeply furrowed upper 
surfaces and smooth undersides.  The long narrow 
leaves may become rolled or  folded when exposed to 
intense heat, excessive sunlight, or drying winds.   Another moisture conservation attribute of American 
beachgrass is that the rough upper leaf surface, 
containing gas exchange openings (stomata), will 
orient itself away from winds.  The seedhead emerges 
in late July or August as a spike-like cluster at the 
tips of long stalks.  This multi-flowered panicle 
extends about ten inches above the leaves.  Seed 
production is usually poor. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This grass is a native of the mid-Atlantic coastal 
region from Maine to North Carolina and the Great 
Lakes.  It will grow on sandy or other course textured 
soils on inland sites with or without high salinity, 
given that supplemental fertilizers are applied.  This 
grass does not tolerate much soil moisture before it 
begins showing signs of stress.  
 USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center Beltsville, MD 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Vegetative establishment of American beachgrass, 
with dormant stem divisions, from October 15 to 
April 1, is effective.  Seed 
production is sparse so it is 
not normally considered as an establishment option.  
Beachgrass culms must be planted at least 8 inches 
deep.  This prevents plants from drying out, as well 
as being blown out by the wind.  A tiling or ditching 
spade is an excellent tool for opening the planting 
hole.  
 
For erosion control and cover applications, two or 
more 18 to 24 inch long stems are mechanically or 
hand placed, 18 to 24 inches  apart, per planting hole.  
If the site is exposed to severe wind erosion, spacing 
needs to be reduced to 12 in ches and rows staggered.  
Utilizing an 18" spacing will require 38,720 culms 
per acre.  
For nursery production, the soil should be well 
worked prior to planting.  Single stems (12" to 18" 
long) should be planted one foot apart in rows, 
spaced wider than 30 inches to match cultivation 
equipment.  Mechanical planting equipment is most 
productive under these site conditions for areas 
greater than 1/2 acre.  
 
Management  
Properly applied fertilizer is the key to good vigorous 
initial growth of newly established stands of 
American beachgrass.  Applications providing

between 30 and 60 lbs. of nitrogen per acre annually 
are adequate.  These annual fertilizer amounts are 
more effective if split into a spring and early summer 
application.  The spring application should be applied 
at least 30 days after establishment, but no earlier 
than April 1.  Once the stand is established, the rate 
of fertilizer applied can be reduced by half, or applied 
only when the stand appears to be weakening. 
 
Pedestrian or vehicular traffic that bends or breaks 
the culms will seriously damage or kill the plants.  
On frontal dunes, areas devoid or with declining 
communities pose the threat of blowout.  Replanting 
stands of beachgrass where openings or voids have 
developed should be an annual maintenance 
procedure, and exlusion of traffic with fencing is 
strongly advised.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two named varieties available for 
conservation purposes: ‘Cape’ (Massachusetts), and 
‘Hatteras.’  ‘Cape’ was selected and developed by the 
Cape May PMC then released to the commercial 
market in 1971.  ‘Hatteras’ is an older variety, 
released by the North Carolina Agricultural 
Experiment Station in the early 1960’s.  It is better 
adapted for southern climates.  ‘Cape’ is considered 
the industry’s standard, and has been proven to out 
perform all other varieties for conservation 
applications from Maine to North Carolina.  
Foundation stock of ‘Cape’ is available to 
commercial nurseries from the Cape May PMC in 
New Jersey.  Certified material is available to the 
public from numerous commercial nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.