Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIBERIAN 
WHEATGRASS 
Agropyron fragile  (Roth) P. 
Candargy  
Plant Symbol = AGFR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
 Loren St. John USDA NRCS Idaho PMC  
 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron cristatum (L.) Gaertn. ssp. fragile (Roth) 
A. Löve 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland: Crested wheatgrass is 
commonly recommended for forage production.  It is 
palatable to livestock and wildlife and is a desirable 
feed in spring, and in the fall if it re-grows enough.  It 
is used for cattle and horse winter forage, but protein 
supplements are required to ensure good animal 
health.  It withstands heavy grazing pressure (65% 
use and greater) once stands are established.  The 
best forage types in order are Siberian, desertorum, 
and Hycrest. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Crested wheatgrasses 
are useful for soil stabilization.  They compete well 
with other aggressive intr oduced grasses, but because 
of this trait, they are not compatible in mixes with 
native species.  Their drough t tolerance, fibrous root 
systems, and good seedling vigor make these species 
ideal for reclamation in areas with 8 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  These grasses can be used in 
urban areas where irrigation water is limited to 
provide ground cover and to stabilize ditchbanks, 
dikes, pipelines, powerlines and roadsides. 
 
Wildlife : Birds and small rodents eat crested 
wheatgrass seeds; deer, antelope and elk graze it, 
especially in spring and fall. Upland and song birds 
utilize stands for nesting. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Crested wheatgrasses  Agropyron cristatum, 
Agropyron desertorum , and Siberian wheatgrass 
Agropyron fragile  are perennial grasses commonly 
seeded in the western United States. They are long-
lived, cool season, drought tolerant, introduced 
grasses with extensive root systems.  Crested 
wheatgrass grows from 1 to 3 feet tall and seed 
spikes may be 1.5 to 3 inches long. Spiklets flattened, 
closely overlapping, located  divergent (flatwise) at a 
slight angle on the rachis flower stem. The lemmas 
generally narrow to a short awn and glumes are firm, 
keeled, tapering into a sh ort bristle. Culms are erect, 
in a dense tuft and leafy. Leaves are flat, smooth 
below, slightly coarse above and vary in width from 
2 to 6 mm. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Crested wheatgrasses are adapted for non-irrigated 
seedings where annual precipitation averages 8 
inches or more and where the frost free period is 
generally less than 140 days.  On droughtier sites 
with 8 inches or less annual precipitation, Siberian 
wheatgrass may be the best choice; it is known to 
surpass the desertorum and Hycrest types in rate of 
establishment, stand persistance, and total forage 
yield on the more arid sites.  Siberian wheatgrass has 
been seeded in areas with as little as 5 inches of

precipitation with some success.  Crested wheatgrass 
should generally be seeded below 7,000 feet 
elevation.  Crested wheatgrass does well on shallow 
to deep, moderately course to fine textured, 
moderately well to well drained and weakly acidic to 
moderately alkaline soils.  Under saline conditions, 
vigor and production are redu ced.  Siberian types are 
well adapted to light, droughty soils.   
All crested wheatgrasses are cold tolerant, can 
withstand moderate periodic flooding in the spring, 
and are very tolerant of fire.  They will not tolerate 
long periods of inundation, poorly drained soils or 
excessive irrigation.  
 
Crested wheatgrass is distri buted in the Midwestern 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Crested wheatgrass should be  seeded with a drill at a 
depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium to fine textured 
soils and 1 inch or less on coarse textured soils.  
Single species seeding rates recommended for 
Siberian wheatgrasse is 6 pounds Pure Live Seed 
(PLS) or 24 PLS per square foot.  If used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  
For mined lands and other harsh critical areas, the 
seeding rate should be increased to 40 to 50 PLS per 
square foot.  Mulching and light irrigations on highly 
disturbed areas are beneficial for stand establishment.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained in very early 
spring on heavy to medium textured soils and in late 
fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seedings are not 
recommended unless irrigation is available.  Crested 
and Siberian wheatgrasses establish fairly quickly, 
with ‘Hycrest’ and ‘Vavilov’ noted for the best 
seedling vigor.  They should not be seeded with 
native species.  Under favorable conditions they can 
become a good weed barrier. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage.  Mow when weeds are beginning to bloom to 
reduce weed seed development.  New stands may 
also be damaged by grasshoppers and other insects; 
pesticides may be required. 
 
Management  
Crested wheatgrasses produce leaves in the spring 
about 10 days after bluegrass species and about 2 to 3 
weeks earlier than native wheatgrasses.  New stands 
of crested wheatgrass shou ld not be grazed until they  are firmly established and have started to produce 
seed heads.  Six inches of new growth should be 
attained in spring before grazing is allowed in 
established stands.  Three inches of stubble should 
remain at the end of the gr
azing season to maintain 
the long term health of the plant. 
 
Crested wheatgrasses are low maintenance plants; 
however, spring/fall deferment or grazing rotations 
are recommended to maintain plant health and to 
maximize forage production potential.  Crested 
wheatgrass can be used for hay production and will 
make nutritious feed, but is more suited to pasture 
use.  Light, infrequent applications of nitrogen (25 
pounds/acre) and irrigation will increase total 
biomass production and lengthen the green period. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Crested wheatgrasses are long -lived, spread primarily 
via seed, but may also spread via rhizomes in the case 
of the cristatum types.  They are not considered 
"weedy" or invasive species.  Most seedings do not 
spread beyond original plantings, or if they do 
spread, the rate of spread is not alarming.  They will 
cross with each other, but do not cross with native 
species.  Crested wheatgrasses resist winter annual 
competition better than native species because they 
germinate earlier and grows more rapidly at colder 
temperatures.  Due to commonly being planted in 
monocultures (single species) stands in the past, 
some feel crested wheatgrasses are not ecologically 
appropriate.  It is important to consider multiple 
species mixes to avoid this conception. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘P27’ (Kazakhstan) is awnless, has finer leaves, and 
retains greenness and palatability later into the 
summer than other crested wheatgrasses. It yields 
less and has poorer seedling vigor than other crested 
wheatgrasses.  ‘Vavilov’ (former USSR, Turkey) has 
better seedling vigor than ‘P-27’ and will not cross 
with other crested wheatgrasse s. It is expected that 
‘Vavilov’ will eventually  replace ‘P-27’ on the 
commercial seed market. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.