Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARROWFEATHER THREEAWN  
Aristida purpurascens  Poir. 
Plant Symbol = ARPU8  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Warning: This species may be 
mechanically injurious to livestock. 
 
Alternate Name 
arrowfeather 
 
Uses 
Cattle graze arrowfeather threeawn a few weeks in 
the early spring.  It produces low-quality forage the 
rest of year. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Arrowfeather threeawn is a native, cool-season, 
weak, perennial bunch grass.  The height is between 
1-1/2 and 2 feet.  The leaf blade is flat; narrow; 4 to 
12 inches long; tends to lie down and curl into 
ringlets, especially as plant matures.  The seedhead is 
a narrow panicle that is sometimes lax and nodding, 
and one-third to one-half the height of the plant.  The 
awns are about 1/2 to 3/4 inch long, equal length, and 
drop off a few weeks after the seeds ripen. 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Because this grass increases on all sites, it can be 
managed to reduce it from the plant community by 
close grazing 2 to 3 weeks in the spring just before 
seedheads appear.  Deferred grazing that allows 
warm season grasses to grow and mature later in the 
season will convert the range through natural plant 
succession to warm-season grasses.  It withstands 
annual burning. 
 
Establishment 
Arrowfeather threeawn grow th starts about 2 weeks 
before that of most warm-season grasses.  It usually 
produces a good seed crop in June, then becomes 
dormant.  It greens up in the fall if moisture is 
available.  Barblike hairs on  the base of the seed help 
to plant them.  Seedstalks  do not deteriorate readily 
unless they are burned or broken off.  It grows best 
on sandy soils and tolerates moderate shade. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana

Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070112 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.