Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWEET FLAG 
Acorus calamus  L. 
Plant Symbol = ACCA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center 
Alternate Names 
Calamus 
 
Uses 
Cultural  Primarily, sweet flag is or was known by 
the American Indian tribes and early settlers for its 
medicinal value. Although  the preparation of this 
species and the ailments it treats vary somewhat 
among the tribes, rhizomes are the most commonly 
used part.  
 
Wildlife   Sweet flag provides habitat for waterfowl.  
Muskrats eat the rhizomes and wood ducks consume 
the seed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sweet flag is a perennial, rhizomatous, iris-like herb.  
The erect, sharp-pointed, sword-shaped leaves fan-
out from a pinkish base and grow to 5 feet in length.  
The midvein is usually off-center.  Cut or bruised 
leaves produce a sweet, tangerine-like scent.  The 
flower stem, or scape, aris es from the base of the 
outer leaves.  Although resembling a leaf, the scape is 
triangular in cross section.   A long, erect bract, or 
spathe, extends beyond the scape.  A single, 
cylindrical 2 to 4-inch spike, or spadex, angles 
upward at this union.  The slightly curved spadix is 
crowded with small yellowish-green to brown 
flowers that appear from May to July.  Sweet flag has 
thick, creeping rhizomes w ith brownish exteriors and 
white, fleshy interiors. 
 
  Tony Bush Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sweet flag is irregularly circumboreal.  In North 
America it is found from Nova Scotia and Quebec to 
Minnesota, Alberta and Eastern Washington, south to 
Florida, Texas and Colorado on wet soils and shallow 
water in ditches, marshes, river edges and ponds.  It 
prefers full sun and a pH range from 5 to 7. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Sweet flag can be propagated  vegetatively by plant or 
rhizome division, and by seed.  Vegetative 
propagation is best completed in the fall or spring 
using firm, healthy rhizomes cut into 2- to 4-inch 
sections.  Plant sections in rich soil 4 - 6 inches deep 
and 1 foot apart.  Separating individual sprigs from 
clumped plants is an alternative to using rhizomes. 
These should also be transp lanted at 1-foot spacings.

Seed should be planted during the fall or winter in a 
greenhouse.   Fill a 2-inch deep tray with an organic  
soil mix, scatter seed sparsely on the surface and 
press firmly into the soil.  Do not bury further than 
1/8 inch deep.   Keep soil moist to saturated.   Seed 
does not require stratification and germinates in less 
than 2 weeks.  When plants reach 3 to 4 inches 
transplant into individual 4-inch pots.   Pots can be 
placed in shallow water or irrigated frequently to 
maintain very moist to saturated conditions.  
Transplant outdoors 1 foot apart in the spring.  With 
adequate moisture seed can also be planted outdoors 
spring through early summer, or in a cold frame late 
summer through fall.  
 
Management 
Keep soil very moist to saturated; sweet flag does not 
tolerate droughty conditions.  It grows well under 
seasonal, shallow inundation, however, avoid 
flooding of newly established plants or seeded areas.  
 
Starter fertilizers may be used indoors to improve 
early growth but  are unnecessary once transplanted 
outdoors into a rich soil. 
 
The spadix will turn brown as the seed ripens in late 
summer or early fall.  Seed can be planted 
immediately or stored in low humidity refrigeration.   
 
Rhizomes should be harvested for medicinal use in 
early spring before new growth, or late autumn.  
Collect when large and firm, generally after 2 – 3 
years of growth, before becoming hollow.  
 
Prepared By/Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush, Agronomist  
 Tony Bush Rose Lake Plant Materials Center East Lansing, Michigan 
Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.