Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
CARPETGRASS  
Axonopus fissifolius  (Raddi) 
Kuhlm.  
Plant Symbol = AXFI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
Axonopus affinis, axonopus, caratao grass, carpet 
grass, teppichrasengras, grama-missioneira, 
gramalote zacate amargo, Louisiana grass, mat grass, 
narrowleaved carpetgrass  
 
Uses  
Common carpetgrass is grazed  all year by livestock.  
It is a managed pasture grass in some localities.  It is 
also used on recreational areas such as campgrounds, 
parking lots, baseball fields, and picnic areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Common carpetgrass is a 
native, warm-season, stoloniferous perennial grass.  
The height is between 8 and 20 inches.  The leaf 
blade is usually flat or folded; 1/4 to 1/2 inch wide; 
fine hair along margin near base; rounded or slightly 
pointed; and reddish or purplish near maturity.  The 
ligule is a minute membrane.  The seedhead is 
usually 3 slender racemes 1-1/2 to 4 inches long, 2 at 
summit and 1, rarely 2, below. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
For maximum production and most efficient harvest 
by livestock, grazing should be rotated about every 
30 to 40 days and no more than 50 percent of current 
year's growth by weight grazed off.  A 2- to 3-inch 
stubble height is a good gage of proper use.  
Fertilization is not profitable on all sites. 
 
Establishment 
In southern Florida, common carpetgrass stays green 
all year.  Elsewhere, it becomes dormant early in the 
fall and starts growth in the spring.  It produces 
seedheads and stolons du ring the active growth 
period.  It reproduces from stolons and from seed.  
Pure stands are common.  It is adapted to clays, 
sands, mucks, and peats.  Most commonly, it is found 
on slightly acid sandy to sandy loam soils that have a 
favorable soil-moisture relationship. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 25june02 ahv; jul03 a hv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.