Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
REDTOP 
Agrostis gigantea  Roth. 
Plant Symbol = AGGI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 Alternate Names 
Agrostis alba auct. non L. 
 
Uses 
Redtop is used for erosion control, pastures, 
temporary grass in turf seedings and occasionally for 
hay.  It is often used for stabilizing critical areas, 
such as ditch and channel banks, strip mine spoils, 
and grassed waterways because it germinates very 
rapidly.  It may be our most widely adapted grass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Redtop is a rhizomatous perennial grass that makes a 
coarse but fairly dense turf.  Leaves are narrow and 
sharp and about 3/8 inch wide.  The stems are  slender, growing to 30 or 40 inches tall.  The 
inflorescence is pyramidal and reddish in color--
hence the common name of redtop.  There are 
approximately 4,990,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Redtop is widespread in the Northeast.  It has better 
growth in the humid North than in the warmer 
climates of the Southern portions.  It will grow under 
a wide variety of soil and moisture conditions.  It 
grows on very acid soils and poor clayey soils of low 
fertility.  It is drought-resistant and also grows well 
on poorly drained soils. 
 
  Robert H. Molenbrock USDA NRCS 1989 Midwestern Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Redtop is distributed throughout most of the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Because of its tiny seed, redtop should have a firm, 
well-prepared seedbed.  It may be sown in early 
spring or late summer.  Seeding depth is 1/4 inch.  
Redtop is seldom seeded alone, except for temporary 
cover.  Rates of seeding will vary depending upon 
purpose, and whether seeded alone or in mixtures. In 
mixtures, rates of 1 to 2 pounds per acre are generally 
used.  For pure stands, seeding rates are from 4 to 5 
pounds per acre.  The higher rates are used for 
temporary critical area stabilization.  Redtop grows 
rapidly after seeding and excessive seeding rates are 
not recommended, particularly in mixtures.  When 
used for erosion control on 
critical areas, fertilizing is 
essential to give rapid cover. 
 
Management  
Redtop can be a significant forage producer in hay 
fields, particularly at the first cutting, but it is 
generally not highly regarded as a forage grass.  It 
does not withstand continuous close grazing.  It will 
persist longer on critical areas since the grass is not 
often harvested, but will disappear under frequent, 
close mowing.  It will respond to fertilizer and lime. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
One certified midwestern  variety is currently 
available, named 'Streaker'.  Common redtop seed is 
also available.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.