Plant Fact Sheet
MANCOS MILKVETCH  
Astragalus humillimus A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = ASHU  
 
Contributed by :  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  
Figure 1:  Mancos milkvetch (Astragalus humillimus). Photo ©Al 
Schneider, Plants Database and  www.swcoloradowildflowers.com ,  
used with permission.  
   
Alternate Names  
Tragacantha humillima  (A. Gray) O. Kuntze 
Phaca humillima  (A. Gray) Rydberg  
 
Uses  
As a pollinator, the  attractive and  sweet -smelling flowers 
of Mancos milkvetch are frequented by a variety of 
pollinators including  members of the bee family , Osmia 
titusi  and O. sculleni, as well as by  honey bees.  
B utterflies are also  often seen resting on the fragrant  plant 
when it is in bloom. It has no known agricultural, 
economic, or other human uses at this time.  
Status  
Mancos milkvetch is listed  as endangered without critical 
habitat throughout its range by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service  (USFWS) .  Please consult the  PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
General:   
Pea family (Fabaceae).  Mancos milkvetch  is a 
diminutive,  low -growing,  tufted perennial sub -shrub 
growing in clumps up to 12 inches (in)  (30 centimeters  [
cm ] across ,  with a dense crown of persistent spiny leaf 
stalks (Figure 1).  N o other mat-forming  Astragalus 
species has persistent, sub -spinescent  petioles.  Stems are 
up to 0.4 in ( 1 cm)  long and are crowded with matted 
leaves up to  1.6 in (4 cm ) long,  which are made up of 
several oval or nearly rounded leaflets no more than 0.1 in 
( 2  millimeters  [mm]) long.  Flower branches support 1 to 
3 lavender/purplish flowers with a conspicuous lighter -
colored spot in  the throat of the corolla tube.  The pods 
are egg -shaped and laterally compressed measuring about 
0.2 in (4.5 mm) long and 0.1 in (2 mm) wide. Flowering 
occurs in late April and early May.  
 
Figure 2. Mancos milvetch distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
 
Adaptation  
Mancos milkvetch is adapted to occur within a  narrow 
band  of Mesozoic sandstone derived from the Hogback 
geologic formation .  Occupied habitat is confined to large 
sheets of exfoliating  sandstone substrate ledges and mesa 
tops  where plants grow  in cracks or  shallow bowl -like 
depressions (tinajas) that accumulate sandy soils and 
rainfall at 5,650 feet, (1,854 meters) in elevation .  This 
species occurs within an average annual precipitation 
range of 5 -10 inches (12- 25 cm). Common plant 
associates include: scabrous bricklebush ( Brickellia 
microphyla  var. scabra ), single leaf ash  ( Fraxinus 
anomala ), small leaf mohagany ( Cercocarpus intricatus ), 
and rosy ipomosis ( Ipomopisis roseata).    
Mancos milkvetch  is a narrow endemic known only from 
the Four Corners region of the southwestern United 
States.  Its known global distribution includes 13 sites, 
including 3 sites from Colorado in Montezuma County 
and 10 sites from New Mexico, in San Juan County.

For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Seed germination trials conducted by the Arboretum at 
Flagstaff , Arizona  have shown that this species is difficult 
to establish from seed and difficult to keep in cultivation 
as it is sensitive to over - or under -watering.  Low 
fecundity is commonly found in plants of the genus 
Astragalus  particularly where species persist in small, 
highly restricted populations which are endemic to 
particular geologic formation.  
 
Mancos milkvetch plants produce viable fruit by 
o utcrossing and self -pollinatio n.  Each fruit of Mancos 
milkvetch produces 4 to 9 seeds in its egg -shaped pods.  It 
takes two growing seasons for seedlings to mature, with 
flowering usually the third and fourth year compared to 
other species of Astragalus,  which generally take one 
growi ng season to bloom.  
 
Management  
Mancos milkvetch is threatened by surface disturbance 
activities associated with energy exploration and 
development and transmission line construction and 
maintenance, as well as recreational off -highway vehicle 
(OHV) use.  T he plant 's habitat occurs in  areas  of active 
oil and gas development.  Nearly all known and potential 
habitat may be affected by natural gas or oil exploration 
and development.  Most damage occurs after vehicles and 
heavy equipment drive over and crush individual plants as 
well as break apart sandstone areas that contain tinajas, 
which are a requirement for Mancos milkvetch 
establishment.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Spider mite insect infestations have been noted to cause 
mortality,  especially  when the plants are already stressed 
by drought.  Larval bruchine  beetles of the genus 
Acanthoscelides  may also  feed upon Mancos milkvetch  
seeds as evidenced by pin -sized emergence holes on the 
seed pods . 
Environmental Concerns  
The decrease in population numbers  of Mancos milkvetch 
is thought to be due to several notable drought periods  of 
the recent past .  Some recovery with new seedlings has 
occurred but appears to be triggered by both adult 
mortality and increased moisture events . 
 
 
  Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)
 
None at this time . 
 
Figure 3:  Mancos milkvetch ( Astragalus humillimus ) habitat,  
photo © Steve O'Kane, used with permission. 
 
Prepared By :   
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA 
NRCS , Denver, Colorado.  
 
Citation  
Taliga, Christine E., 2012 . Plant  Fact Sheet  for  Mancos 
milk vetch ( Astragalus humillimus) . USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State Office.  
Denver, CO 80225- 0426. 
 
Published  September, 2012  
Edited:  18Sep2012jab  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at  
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site 
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov PLANTS is not responsible for 
the content or availability of other Web sites . 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER