FOURWING 
SALTBUSH 
Atriplex canescens 
(Pursh.)Nutt. 
plant symbol = ATCA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Alternate Names 
chamiza, chamise, chamiso, bushy atriplex, fourwing 
shadscale, buckwheat shrub, white greasewood, salt 
sage, wafer sagebrush, box brush 
 
Uses 
Ornamental and beautification: Its grayish or whitish 
green color has possibilities as an ornamental or 
screening plant in picnic or camping areas in low 
rainfall sites.  The plant has excellent potential for 
plantings to promote native species.  It is used on 
mine spoils, cut banks and other disturbed areas to 
blend into natural vegetation. 
 
Erosion control: Due to its extensive and deep root 
system (20 to 40 feet deep) this plant has an 
adaptation for erosion control, especially where 
associated native plants have not been disturbed. 
 
Livestock: This is a nutritious plant.  It has a good 
rating for sheep and goats, fair for cattle, and poor for horses, except in winter when its rating would be fair 
to good.  The seed crop is extremely nutritious and  
 
eaten so extensively by livestock as to be detrimental 
to the continued reproduction of the plant. 
 
Wildlife: Deer relish this plant, especially during the 
winter.  Quail use this species for shady cover, 
roosting, and food.  It has been observed to be used 
by porcupine, ground squirrel, and jack rabbit. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Atriplex canescens (Pursh) Nutt., fourwing saltbush, 
is an evergreen, much branched, gray shrub from 2 to 
6 feet tall occasionally reaching 10 feet tall.  It has 
stout, gray scurfy branches.  Leaves are alternate, 
linear-spatulate to narrowly oblong, with 1/2 to 2 
inches long margins somewhat enrolled with a dense 
permanent scurf on both sides.  Male and female 
flowers are on separate plants, male flowers in spikes 
forming large panicles, female flowers in spikes 
forming large, dense leafy, spike-like panicles.  
Fruiting bracts have 4, free, flat, entire or fringed 
wings from which the plant gets its name. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Fourwing saltbush is an important species in the 
northern salt desert shrub association.  Average 
annual precipitation in this desert area varies from 6 
to 14 inches but is mostly in the 8 to 12 inch range; 
summers are hot and dry and winters are normally 
cold. Fourwing saltbush grows on a wide range of 
soils from clays to sands.  It does well in soils with 
high lime content.  It can tolerate soil depths from 10 
inches to over 3 feet, but is mostly found in 
moderately deep to deep soils.  It is able to exist on 
soils with heavy white or black alkali concentrations 
but is not restricted to saline-alkali areas and is by no 
means an indicator of these conditions.  The plant is 
found in desert flats, gravelly washes, mesas, ridges, 
slopes, and even on sand dunes.  It can grow at 
elevations from 3,000 to as high as 8,000 feet, but is 
most likely to be found at 4,500 to 6,000 feet. 
 
Fourwing saltbrush is distributed throughout the 
western United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
© W.L. Wagner
Smithsonian Institution
USDA NRCS PLANTS

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
Establishment 
The seedbed should be weed free and firm.  Drilling 
is the most successful seeding method but some 
success has occurred from broadcasting where some 
method of covering has been employed.  Seed should 
be covered no deeper than 1 inch.  Seedings have 
been successful throughout the year but best results 
are obtained by seeding in late spring or early 
summer.  Good stands have been obtained by seeding 
during the winter as late as January.  Seeding rate 
should be 8 to 10 pounds per acre.  De-wing the seed 
with a hammer mill improves the ease of handling 
and enhances germination.  Poor stands may result if 
seed is not de-winged. 
 
Seed ripens in late August and September and can be 
collected from September to December by stripping it 
from dense clusters.  They can be stored successfully 
and remain viable for 6 or 7 years.  Some 
transplanting of 2 or 3 year old nursery stock has 
been tried but has not been successful. 
 
Management 
Planted areas should be kept free of weeds during the 
first year of establishment.  Proper grazing use on 
this shrub should be 40% of the total annual growth 
during the growing period and 50% during the plant 
dormancy period.  This plant is well adapted to 
winter use.  Careful management is needed due to the 
brittle nature of the twigs.  A rotation deferred system 
of grazing will aid this plant in producing a 
maximum yield of forage for livestock.  
 
As a screening plant, this species has a place on drier 
locations.  However; it should not be seeded in heavy 
foot, horseback, or vehicle travel areas where it 
would soon be killed due to its brittle nature.  In 
heavy winter deer concentration areas, this plant will 
be grazed out if additional food sources are not 
provided. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests of fourwing saltbush.  
Rabbits and other small rodents are especially 
damaging to small seedlings. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Marana’ (CA), ‘Rincon’ (NM), and ‘Santa Rita’ 
(AZ). Seeds can be purchased from commercial seed 
sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 31Jan2002 JLK