Plant Fact Sheet
KREMMLING  
MILKVETCH  
Astragalus osterhoutii       
  M.E. Jones  
Plant Symbol = ASOS  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure1:  Kremmling milkvetch, (Astragalus osterhoutii).  Photo 
USFWS, Alicia Langton July 2010.  
Alternative Names  
Common Alternate Names:   Osterhout’s milkvetch 
 
Warning:  Kremmling milkvetch is a selenium 
accumulator and may cause selenium poiso ning. 
 
   
Uses
 
The flowers are white and showy , attracting a variety of 
pollinators. Primary pollinators include Apis mellifera , 
Bombus  sp., and Osmia  sp.  Kremmling milkvetch is of 
economic significance as an indicator of selenium and as 
a potentially toxic plant i n rangelands.   
Status  
Kremmling  milkvetch  was  listed as “endangered” und er 
the Endangered Species Act in  1989 .  
 
The Nature Serve conservation status rank, an 
international effort which rank species on their “global” 
status , denotes  Kremmling  milkvetch  as G1/S1- critically 
imperiled globally and statewide, because of  its extreme 
rarity , it is especially vulnerable to extinction.   
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Pea family (Fabaceae).  Kremmling milkvetch,  is a 
relatively  tall plant with linear leaflets and several bright 
green stems reaching  up to 40 i nches  ( 100 centimeters) in 
height . There are 12 —25 white flowers, 1 in . (2.4 cm) 
long, per inflorescence, each ultimately with  stipitate 
pendulous  pods,  1.8 in. (4.5 cm) long.   Astragalus 
pattersonii   and  A. bisulcatus   are similar species also 
with a relatively tall growth form.  The three species may 
be separated as follows : Kremmling milkvetch  is 
distinguished from  A. pattersonii  by its long, pendulous 
fruits  that  are
 laterally compressed , from A. bisul catus  by 
its large, white flowers, and from both by its lime -green,  
linear leaflets . 
 
Kremmling milkvetch is adapted to grow on highly 
seleniferous, grayish- brown clay soils derived from shales  
of Niobrara, Pierre, and Troublesome formations.  
Kremmling milkvetch occurs on shaley slopes at middle 
elevations ranging from 7,400 –  7, 900 feet (2,256  – 2,408 
meters)  within the sagebrush parks eco -region with an 
average annual precipitati on of 10-16 inches.   
 
Habitat :  
Kremmling milkvetch  occurs on moderate slopes, on 
white shale outcrops of the Niobrara, Pierre, and 
Troublesome Formations in northern Grand County, 
Colorado.  The chaparral/shrubland habitat i ncludes the 
following common plant associates: big sagebrush  
( Artemesia tridentata),  yellow rabbitbrush