Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EUROPEAN BLACK ALDER  
Alnus glutinosa  L. 
Plant Symbol = ALGL2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Caution: This plant could become 
invasive. 
 
Alternate Names 
Alnus alnus (L.) Britt. 
 
Uses 
European black alder is a rapidly growing tree that is 
useful for planting on drastically disturbed and acid 
sites such as coal strip-mines.  It is capable of 
nitrogen fixation though it is not a legume, so it is a 
soil improving species.  Black alder is also an 
excellent choice for internal  orchard windbreaks.  It 
can be sheared to very narrow widths of 3-4 feet 
thick, and produces sufficient density to be effective.  
Black alder has been reported as invasive on some 
soil types.  It should not be planted widely as a 
landscape or specimen tree. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
  Robert H. Molhenbrock USDA NRCS 1995 Northeast Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS  PLANTS 
 
Description 
This species was introduced from Europe and should 
not be confused with native alders.  The leaf, flower, 
and fruit are similar to the native shrub alders found 
along the streams of the Northeast.  Black alder is a 
tree that can grow 60-70 feet tall. The leaf is smooth, 
3-5 inches long, with a serrated margin.  Small, 
winged seed is produced in little woody cone-like 
fruits.  The bark is dark brown, with prominent warty 
strips. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Black alder will grow on a wide variety of soils, from 
well drained to somewhat poorly drained with light to 
moderate textures.  It does not do well on droughty or 
wet sites. The species is hardy to the south shore of 
Lake Ontario, and to northeast Kansas but may not be 
reliable in USDA zone 4 or colder. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Planting 1-0 nursery bare-root stock is preferred.  
Older 
plants are usually too large for easy planting. Take 
care to properly place the root system in the planting 
hole or trench.  Black alder will respond to 
phosphorus fertilizer, particularly when planted in 
acid soils. Plant dormant stock early in the spring as 
possible.  Containerized plants can be planted in early 
summer as well.  There ar e 321,000 seeds per pound. 
Black alder should be planted in mixtures with other 
species for critical area treatment.  Spacings of 6x6 to 
10x10 work well. Under-seeding with a cool season 
grass mixture is recommended.

Management 
All trees and shrubs respond very strongly to 
effective control of weeds and sod.  Mechanical or 
chemical controls are acceptable as long as they are 
used according to the label.  Failure to control sod 
will result in growth reduced by 50% or more. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None have been released in the US. A few nurseries 
produce this tree to meet  the needs of orchard and 
mine revegetation interests. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.