Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVER MAPLE 
Acer saccharinum L. 
Plant Symbol = ACSA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Uses 
Forest Buffers: Silver maple is a natural for use in 
riparian forest buffer installations due to its 
adaptation to such sites.  However it should be used 
as a relatively minor percentage of the species mix 
because of its tendency to outgrow other species and 
mature at an early age.  Wh ere silver maple is already 
present in nearby stands, it should not be planted as it 
will show up in short order anyway.  This species is 
much preferred to box elder in any planting. 
 
Wildlife : Silver maple is not notable for its 
attractiveness to wildlife,  but as a source of fast 
shading, large woody debris, and litter in streams the 
species has few rivals.  It seems to be a preferred 
nesting species for Baltimore orioles. 
 
Biofuels : The species is one of only a few that has the 
growth rate for serious consideration for biofuel 
production.  Though shrub willow and poplar hybrids  are currently receiving greater
 attention, silver maple 
has been tested for this use in the Midwest. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 ©  William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Description 
Acer saccharinum  L., silver maple is one of the 
fastest growing deciduous trees of the eastern and 
midwestern forests.  Also called river maple, this 
name derives from the common occurrence of the 
species along our river system s.  Silver maple shares 
many of its sites with red maple, but the two species 
are easily distinguished.  Silver maple is typically a 
much larger tree with a much larger fruit (called a 
samara), but the two species are the only native 
maples with spring seed dispersal.  The leaves of 
silver maple are often larger and more deeply 
fissured between lobes than those of red maple.  
Silver maple can grow 3-7 feet per year. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Silver maple is adapted wherever adequate moisture 
is assured, but grows best on well drained but moist 
river bottom soils.  It is rarely found at higher 
elevations in the uplands.  The brittle nature of its 
wood limits the longevity of the species where high 
winds or heavy ice accumulations are common.  As a 
pioneer species, silver maple is shade intolerant. 
 
Silver maple is distributed throughout most of the 
eastern United States.  For  a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Silver maple is among the easiest of trees to establish 
from seed or transplants.   Its rapid growth competes 
well with other plants, although grass and weed 
control will improve survival and allow for even 
better growth.  The seed germinates rapidly, and 
streambanks underneath mature trees are often 
covered with seedlings shortly  after seed dispersal in 
the late spring, especially along the waterline.  The 
rapid growth means that seedlings are almost always 
out-planted as 1-0 stock.

Management 
In buffer plantings the only management needed is 
grass and weed control and livestock exclusion.  
Silver maple is not usually damaged by deer 
browsing, and is not a preferred target of gypsy moth 
caterpillars.  
 
On sites where natural regeneration produces too 
many saplings thinning should be carried out to allow 
other species to survive. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Like other maples, this species will be devastated by 
the Asian longhorn beetle if that pest escapes 
eradication efforts in our port cities.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
A few horticultural selections may exist in the 
market, but for conservation plantings seedlings from 
regional wild sources should be utilized. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson , retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office 
Syracuse, New York 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.