Plant Fact Sheet
DESERT MADWORT  
Alyssum desertorum Stapf  
Plant Symbol = ALDE  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana  PM Program  
 
Figure  1. Desert madwort fruits are glabrous and 
compressed in the same plane as the septum. Photo by 
Matt Lavin, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana. Used with permission.  
Alternat ive Names  
Common Alternate Names:  desert alyssum  
Scientific Alternate Names:  Alyssum minimum , 
Psilomema minimum  
Uses  
P ronghorn antelope ( Antilocapra americana)  in 
Yellowstone National Park consistently use desert 
madwort in their winter diets . 
W estern harvester ants ( Pogonomyrmex occidentalis ) 
harvested  up to 100% of desert madwort seeds from the 
seed bank of a site near Kemmerer, Wyoming.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive on disturbed 
sites  in some regions or habitats , particularly on 
overgrazed  or otherwise disturbed arid and semi -arid  r
egions  and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Desert madwort is considered a wea k 
invader requiring disturbance for population expansion.  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please 
consult the Related  Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
Desert madwort is a n herbaceous annual native to Africa, 
Asia, and Europe.  Stems are erect, ascending, or 
decumbent , often several growing from the base  two  to 11 
inches tall.  Leaves are alternately arranged on the stem, 
linear in shape or broadest at the tip, tapering to a petiole -
like base (sub -sessile) , the tip sharply pointed, and 0.2 to 
1 inch long by 0.04 to 0.12 inch wide .  The entire plant 
except t he fruit is covered with 8 - to 20- rayed stellate 
hairs (tri chomes) giving the plant a pale to grayish 
appearance (canescent).  The inflorescent  grows up to 
four inches in length with 30 to 40 flowers on stout, strait, 
ascending pedicels 0.06 to 0.12 inch l ong.  The flowers 
form from the bottom up as the inflorescence grows.  
Flowers are small, less than a tenth of an inch wide, with 
four pale yellow or dull -whitish, blunt-  or notch-tipped 
petals that are widest at the tip and early  deciduous .  The 
fruiting  pods (silicles) are 0.1 to 0.16 inch in diameter, 
circular in outline with a shallow notch at the tip where 
the short style persists, uniformly inflated at the middle 
and broadly flattened at the margins.  There are two 
chambers in the pod each capable of producing two seeds.  
The chambers are separated by a thin membrane that 
persists and is obvious on the dried, senescent plant.  The 
seeds are egg -shaped in outline, slightly compressed and 
vary narrowly winged at the margins, brown, and 0.06 
inches long.   Plants flower and fruit from April to July in 
North America.   The chromosome number is 2n = 32.  
Similar to its native range, desert madwort grows in 
deserts, rocky areas, disturbed sites, along roadsides, in 
fields, meadows, and sagebrush flats in North A merica 
from 2,600 to 6,500 feet above sea level.   In the Tianshan 
Mountains of central Asia, desert madwort has similar 
ecological requirements and habitats with mouseear cress 
( Arabidopsis thaliana).

Desert madwort
 distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
For updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Desert madwort establishes from seed g erminating 
predominantly in the spring. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Desert madwort plants infected with powdery mildew 
( Erysiphe cruciferarum ) have been reported from Turkey 
and Romania.  
Environmental Concerns  
In  Republic of  Armenia, increased water erosion of the 
soil resulted from increased development of  desert 
madwort and other drought -resistant annual weeds that 
provided no soil cover following overgrazing of Volga 
fescue ( Festuca rupicola).  
Control  
A  native grass restoration project in the northern 
boundary area of Yellowstone National Park north of 
Gardner, Montana, used prescribed burns applied on  October 13, 2011 to reduce (p<0.0001) 
desert madwort 
from 527 to 5  plants per square foot at the Cinnabar site 
and from 657 to 237 plants  per square foot at the Reese 
Creek site the  year following the burns.  
A number of herbicides temporarily reduce populations of  
desert madwort including metsulfuron  methyl and 
glyphosate.  Please contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or coun ty weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each control 
method.  Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRC S does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) . None  
Prepared By Jim Jacobs, USDA -NRCS, Bozeman, 
Montana  
Citation 
Jacobs, J . 2012 . Plant fact s heet for  desert madwort  
( Alyssum desertorum ). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conservation Service,  Bozeman State Office, MT . 
Published  September 2012 
Edited:  091112js ; 091812rg  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <
http:// www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER