Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FIELD BROME 
Bromus arvensis L. 
Plant Symbol = BRAR5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
 
 ©W.L. Wagner Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution, Dept. of  Botany
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive.  
Please consult specialists in your area. 
 
Uses 
Field brome is used primarily as a winter cover crop 
on vegetable lands and in orchards in the Northeast.  
Due to its heavy root growth and low, dense top 
growth, it gives good protection against wind and 
water erosion.  The heavy root growth makes it a 
useful green manure crop.  When used as a cover 
plant, it provides good pasturage for Canada geese, 
especially in the spring. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.   Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Field brome is a winter annual.  It produces dense, 
low leafy growth in the fall.  Spring growth starts 
earlier than most other annual grasses used for cover 
crops.  It does not have creeping stolons or rhizomes, 
but tillers profusely.  It produces seedheads in late 
spring or early summer.  Seed stalks are 2 to 3 feet 
tall.  The principal characteristics that make it an 
outstanding cover crop are the extensive fiberous root 
system and the relatively short top growth.  It is 
winter hardy in northeast and north central regions.  
It grows vigorously under high fertility and often 
smothers other grasses or weeds.  It is an excellent 
seed producer and can maintain itself as a reseeding 
annual.  There are 25 0,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation 
Field brome does best on medium textured soils that 
are moderately well-drained to well-drained.  It has 
done well in lowlands subject to flooding and on 
sloping, gravelly soils.  The most suitable pH range is 
between 6.0 and 7.0. 
 
Field brome can be found throughout the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
The best seeding date for field brome is mid-August 
in the North to early September in the South.  When 
used as a cover crop in cropland, field brome is 
usually seeded at the time of the last cultivation.  
Field brome should be seeded for orchard cover on a 
firm seedbed.  Seeding rate is 10 pounds per acre.  
Rolling, cultipacking, or cultivating after broadcast 
seeding is essential for a uniform stand.  Field brome 
is a heavy user of nitrogen and best growth is 
produced when nitrogen is available.  The light, 
fluffy seed of field brome may cause some planting 
difficulties.  The seed is best applied using a power 
driven cyclone type seeder with an agitator.  A 
cultipacker seeder or a grai n drill with a positive type 
feed may be used for planting. 
 
Management  
Nitrogen application is not essential for cover crop 
use, but supplemental nitrogen may be added to

increase growth and to speed up breakdown of the 
heavy sod after plowing.  Without adequate nitrogen 
the succeeding crop, particularly vegetables, may 
show nitrogen deficiency.  This grass can be heavily 
grazed in late fall and again in the spring for 6 to 8 
weeks. 
 
When managed as a reseeding annual in orchards, the 
stand should be disked in the spring before seedheads 
are produced, leaving only 10 percent of the stand to 
produce seed.  This will provide ample seed to re-
establish the stand the following fall.  After seed 
maturity, the entire stand can be disked under. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Svalof's Sleipner' is the only released variety of field 
bromegrass.  Most seed produced in this country can 
be traced to this variety. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.