Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANE BLUESTEM 
Bothriochloa barbinodis  (Lag.) 
Herter  
Plant Symbol = BOBA3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
cane beardgrass, feather bluestem, plains beardgrass, 
pinhole bluestem, Andropogon barbinodis  
 
Uses  
Cane bluestem is a choice forage grass.  Catle search 
it out during early growth.  Because the stems are not 
palatable in the fall and only the leaves are eaten, 
some livestock producers misjudge its forage quality.  
It is used in mixtures for reseeding rangelands in west 
Texas.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Cane bluestem is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass with height 
ranging from 2 to 4 feet.  The leaf blade is narrow, 
long, and rough.  The leaf sheath is sparsely hairy at 
the throat.  The stem is round, smooth, greenish 
yellow, and often branching at the nodes.  The node 
is enlarged and covered with short silvery hair.  With 
the above characters, you  can identify this grass 
without the seedhead.  The seedhead  is a  raceme 3 to 
5 inches long, silvery to creamy or silky white when 
ripe.   
 © W.L. Wagner Smithsonian Institution-Botany 
@ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Periodic grazing deferments of 90 to 100 days during 
the growing season are needed for maximum 
production, plant vigor, and maintaining the density 
of the stand.  No more than 60 percent of the current 
year’s growth by weight should be removed by 
grazing.   
 
Establishment 
Growth starts when daily temperature reaches 65 to 
70 degrees F.  Growing points stay close to the 
ground until midsummer when the seedheads appear.  
At that time, growing points are 2 to 4 inches above 
ground.  The seeds ripen in  the late summer and early 
fall.  Cane bluestem is well adapted to sandy loam to 
loamy calcareous soils with a pH of 7.2 to 8.0, which 
overflow frequently.  It grows on gravelly foot slopes 
that have a good soil-moisture relationship. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.