Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED GRAMA 
Bouteloua trifida Thurb. 
Plant Symbol = BOTR2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate names 
Sixweeks grama 
 
Uses  
All livestock graze red grama.  Forage production is 
low, but quality is good when plants are green.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Red grama is a native, 
warm-season , weak perennial grass.  The height is  between 5 to 10 inches.  The leaf blade is short, 
narrow flat or rolling, an
d the surface slightly rough 
with scattered long hairs on the margin.  The leaf 
sheath is shorter than the internodes and smooth or 
slightly rough.  The ligule has a ring of short hairs.  
The stem is smooth.  Young plants are erect and the 
old plants are bent at the base.  The nodes are naked 
and darker than the rest of stem.  The seedhead is  3 to 
7 spikes per seedhead and about 12 spikelets per 
spike.  The rachis is hair y and the fertile lemma of 
each spikelet is tipped with 3 short awns. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
After seedbeads appear, nutritive value declines 
rapidly.  This grass helps to protect soil from wind 
and water erosion if lightly  grazed.  Growing points 
and basal leaves are so clos e to the ground that most 
livestock cannot harvest more than 50 percent of 
current year's growth by weight.  Deferred grazing 
during the growing season every 2 to 3 years 
maintains plant vigor and allows the plants to mature 
seed for maintaining a stand.  This grass is seldom a 
key management species, except on ranges where it 
grows in almost pure stands.   
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the spring when daytime temperature 
is about 70' F and moisture is adequate, and seeds 
mature 6 weeks after growth  starts.  Because of this 
characteristic, red grama is often referred to as 6 
weeks' grama.  It reproduces from seed, has a shallow 
root system, and becomes semi-dormant during the 
summer.  It is adapted to shallow, gravelly, stony 
soils in southwest Texas that have a poor 
soil-moisture relationship.  It invades deep, loamy 
soils denuded by overgrazing.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.