Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HAIRY GRAMA 
Bouteloua hirsuta Lag. 
Plant Symbol = BOHI2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Uses  
Hairy grama is used primarily for grazing and 
withstands it well.  Most  livestock graze it readily 
any season.  It makes especi ally good winter forage, 
because it cures well.  It is not considered a hay 
grass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Hairy grama is a native, 
warm-season, perennial grass.  The height is between  10 and 20 inches.  The leaf blade is flat or slightly 
rolled; narrow; mostly basal; margins hairy.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded; smooth; shorter than internodes.  
The seedhead is 1 to 4 spikes, purplish before 
maturity, about 1 inch long; rachis extends beyond 
spikelets. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass yields more if it is not overgrazed and 
grazing is deferred every 2 to 3 years during the 
period of most active growth. 
 
Establishment 
Hairy grama makes little growth before summer rains 
begin.  If moisture is adequate, it matures rapidly.  
During exceptionally dry y ears, produces little forage 
but withstands drought well.  It reproduces from 
auxiliary buds at basal nodes, from short stolons in 
some localities, and from seed.  In the northern part 
of its range, this grass usually has only 1 or 2 spikes 
per seedhead and short stolons that form a sod.  
Further south, it grows taller, more like a bunch 
grass, and has 2 to 4 spikes per seedhead.  A tall 
variety ( B. hirsuta  var. pectinata)  grows mostly in 
central Texas.  It is adapted to sandy and sandy loam 
soils and gravelly loams and does well on soils 
neutral to slightly calcareous .  It is often associated 
with blue grama ( Bouteloua gracilis ), but is more 
drought resistant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett,  & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 a hv; 20sep05 jsp; 17dec07 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) 
@ plants.usda.gov

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.