Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE GRAMA 
Bouteloua gracilis  (Willd. ex 
Kunth.) Lag. ex Griffiths 
Plant Symbol = BOGR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
Uses 
Livestock: In southern states, blue grama grows as a 
bunchgrass; in northern states or areas of heavy 
grazing pressure, it is a sod former. 
 
Erosion control : Blue grama is suitable for mixtures 
of grasses used in erosion control, low maintenance 
turf plantings, and surface mine revegetation. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bouteloua gracilis , blue grama, is a major warm 
season grass found throughout the Great Plains.  The 
plant is fairly short, reach ing 10 to 20 inches with 
narrow basal leaves of 3 to 6 inches.  Blue grama 
grows in definite bunches and reproduces by tillering 
and by seed.  Mature seed heads are curved, 
resembling a human eyebrow.  Blue grama  can be 
found growing in association with buffalograss, 
western wheatgrass, needlegrasses and in some areas 
the bluegrasses. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Blue grama demonstrates good drought, fair salinity, 
and moderate alkalinity tolerances.  In its dormant 
state, it will also tolerate burning.  Blue grama will 
not tolerate dense shade, flooding, a high water table, 
or acid soils. 
 
Blue grama is distributed throughout the western 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
 © W. L. Wagner Smithsonian Institution @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
As with all native grasses, proper ground preparation 
is one of the most important considerations. The 
seedbed should be firm but not solid; cultivation to 
kill the roots of cool-season grasses is essential.  
Planting may be done by either drilling or 
broadcasting, with the seed being sown no more than 
1/4 to 1/2 inches deep at a rate of 1 to 3 pounds 
PLS/acre.  Seeding in late spring is recommended in 
the Great Plains; earlier seeding is recommended in 
areas further south.  In the Southwest, seeding should 
be done during the period from June 15 to July 15.  
Mulching and irrigation is recommended on harsh 
sites.  Soil tests should be made to test the soils for 
deficiencies.  Blue grama will tolerate low-nutrient 
soils better than acidic conditions.  Planting should be 
done by a native grass seed drill.  In western areas 
plant blue grama in a sorghum cover crop, stubble, or 
in with the crop itself. 
 
Management  
Once the grass is established, it is very palatable to 
livestock all year long.   Since growing points are at 
or near the ground surface, the grass withstands fairly 
close grazing.  For best yi elds, defer grazing during 
the growing season every 2 to 3 years.  Blue grama 
cures well on stem, making it a good grass for 
grazing during the dormant season.  Renovation of 
sodbound stands is also recommended.  Weeds can 
be controlled by use of herbicides, mowing or 
controlled grazing.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of blue grama 
grass.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Improved materials include the cultivars ‘Lovington’ 
(NM), ‘Hachita’ (NM), and ‘Alma’ (NM) and the 
selected class release Bad River Ecotype (SD).  Seeds 
are available at most commercial seed sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program   
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.