Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINO GRAMA 
Bouteloua breviseta  Vasey 
Plant Symbol = BOBR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
Gypsum grama 
 
Uses 
Cattle, horses, sheep, and goats graze Chino grama.  
Sometimes limited amounts are harvested for hay.  It 
is an important conservation grass, because it is 
adapted to sites on which few other species will 
grow. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).   Chino grama is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height is 
between 8 and 12 inches.  The leaf blade is usually 
flat, narrow, 1 to 3 inches long, and curls during 
prolonged dry periods and at maturity.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded, smooth, and overlapping about 
two-thirds as long as the internodes.  The ligule is 
hairy and the stem is solid.  The seedhead has 2 
spikes resembling a chicken's comb on top of each 
stalk.  
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass dies if overgrazed.  It requires a full 
growing season deferment every 2 to 3 years for 
maximum production. 
 
Establishment 
It reproduces largely from auxillary buds at basal 
nodes.  Some new plants are established from seed.  
When growth starts in the late spring or early 
summer, most of old growth greens up, because this 
grass stores nutrients in stem s as well as in roots.  It 
grows in nearly pure stands on gypsum sands and 
highly calcareous clay loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political

beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.