Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVER BLUESTEM 
Bothriochloa saccharoides  
(Sw.) Rydb.  
Plant Symbol = BOSA  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternate Name 
Andropogon saccharoides 
 
Uses  
Silver bluestem is used primarily for grazing.  Cattle 
graze it a few weeks in the spring, but little after the 
seedheads form.  It can  be grazed some during the 
winter if livestock are fed a protein supplement.  
Goats relish the seedheads when seed is in the dough 
stage.  This grass is usually not seeded nor managed 
to control erosion on critical areas, but established 
itself readily on denuded so ils and overgrazed ranges. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Silver bluestem is a native, 
warm-season, short-lived perennial bunch grass.  The 
height is between 2 to 3 feet.  The leaf blade is 2 to 8 
inches long.  The stems are round at the base, but 
sometimes branching at nodes.  The lower part is 
purplish throughout the growing season and usually 
has a ring of white hairs at the nodes.  Stems turn 
irregularly at each node.  The seedhead is a  raceme 
that is silky white soon after it emerges from the 
sheath.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
It is cut for hay only wh en associated with other 
grasses, such as little ( Schizachyrium scoparium ) and 
big bluestem ( Andropogon gerardii ).  This grass 
increases on ranges that ar e grazed continuously.  It 
is an invader on ranges in poor condition.  Range 
managed to maintain this grass in the plant 
community should be grazed no more than 50 percent 
of the current year's growth and grazing should be 
deferred 45 to 60 days in the spring every  2 to 3 
years.   
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the spring when daily temperature is 
70 to 75 degrees F.  The seedheads emerge 3 to 4 
weeks later with the seeds ripening during a 4- to 
6-week period.  Silver bluestem is a prolific seed 
producer.  It grows best on loamy soils underlain by 
limestone.  It grows well on clays and clay loams 
throughout the blackland resour ce areas of the South.  
Further west, it grows on rocky slopes and coarser 
textured soils.  It does not grow well on moist sites.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.