Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN 
BACCHARIS  
Baccharis halimifolia  L. 
Plant Symbol = BAHA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New Jersey State 
Office & Cape May Plant Materials Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
groundsel tree, saltmyrtle, seamyrtle, silverling 
 
Warning: The leaves of this plant are poisonous to 
livestock. 
 
Uses 
Eastern baccharis plants are dioecious, meaning there 
are separate male and female plants.  The female 
plants are particularly attractive in flower and make a 
good landscape plant in exposed coastal conditions.  
This plant is highly resistant to salt spray and 
flooding.  
 
Habitat: Marsh wrens and other small birds 
frequently nest in the openly branched, brittle stems. 
 
Erosion control: This plant is currently being 
investigated for application in soil bioengineering  
 
systems to stabilize tidal shorelines because of its 
ability to root from a dormant, unrooted cutting. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
 © William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Eastern baccharis is a deciduous shrub, up to 10 feet 
tall; with simple, thick egg-shaped leaves (up to 2.5” 
long).  It is a U.S. native.   Leaves are mostly coarsely 
toothed above the middle of the leaf, and the 
uppermost leaves have smooth margins; they are 
alternately arranged.  Bacc haris has small heads of 
white flowers in stalked clusters that form terminal 
leafy infloresences.  The fertile heads are very showy 
and cottonlike.  Although deciduous, the naked stems 
remain slightly green throughout the winter. 
Baccharis is often confus ed with high-tide bush (Iva 
frutescens ) which has opposite, regularly toothed 
leaves and bare, gray stems in the winter. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Eastern baccharis grows naturally in the upper fringes 
of irregularly flooded tidal fresh and brackish 
marshes, back dunes and inland open woods, vacant 
fields, and desert habitats from Massachusetts to 
Florida, Arkansas, and Texas. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
These plants are most commonly installed as 1 to 2 
year old containerized material.  Investigations are 
underway to determine the rooting ability in the field 
from a dormant unrooted cu tting.  If rooting success 
is high, the potential exists for incorporating 
baccharis  into soil bioengineering systems for tidal 
shoreline stabilization. 
 
Management  
The facultative light requir ement of baccharis seeds 
may provide one opportunity for effective 
management to control the species as a weed.  The 
maintenance of a dense stand of pasture, plantation or 
native cover may effectively shade the ground

surface, discouraging seed germination.  The loss of 
viability of seed after 14 months or less implies that 
local eradication of a population at a single point in 
time could rapidly curb regeneration.  On the other 
hand, prolific seed production from a single plant will 
avoid eradication. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A beetle,  Trirhabda baccharidis , may assist in 
reducing seed viability and potential rate of spread in 
semi-tidal areas, but it is not anticipated that it will 
effect any significant reduction in the groundsel bush 
infestation outside such areas. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Baccharis has the ability to grow in dense clusters 
reaching over 3 feet in height  with in 2 to 3 years.  
This shrub usurps resources that otherwise might be 
utilized by commercial pastures and timber species in 
coastal regions with an annual rainfall of over 90 cm.  
Baccharis may also be a nuisance in populated areas 
because its pollen and othe r airborne plant parts are 
believed to be allergenic.  Irrigation channels and 
coastal canals provide favorable man-made habitats 
for this species.  Best ge rmination temperature under 
constant light is 25 degrees Celsius.  The well-known 
baccharis foliage  feeding beetle Trirhabda 
baccharidis  (mentioned in the previous section) can  
reach very high densities in the field and larval 
hatching in autumn can cause complete defoliation at 
anthesis. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This plant is commercially available from specialized 
coastal and wetland plant nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Christopher Miller , PMS-Southern NE/Mid-Atlantic 
USDA NRCS 
Somerset, New Jersey 
 
William Skaradek, Mgr. 
Cape May Plant Materials Center 
Cape May Court House, New Jersey 
 Edited: 31Jan2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all  prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.