Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RIVER BIRCH 
Betula nigra L. 
Plant Symbol = BENI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
and USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Alternate Names 
black birch, red birch, water birch 
 
Uses 
Buffers: River birch fits well into buffer installations 
along with its companion species. 
 
Erosion Control : It has been used successfully in 
strip mine reclamation and in erosion control. 
 
Wildlife : Its young twigs, buds and foliage are 
browsed by white-tailed deer; seeds are eaten by 
grouse, turkeys, small birds and rodents.  Its spring 
ripening make it particularly valuable. 
 
Timber : Its wood is locally used for fuel and 
occasionally for inexpensiv e furniture, basket hoops 
and turned articles; artificial limbs and toys. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: River birch is useful 
in native-oriented landscapes.  It has a balanced and 
well-formed growth habit and interesting features 
through all seasons. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  
 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
River birch is native to the eastern United States; 
south to Florida, north to Minnesota and west to 
Kansas; it is restricted to stream banks and other 
moist places.  The tree can grow as tall as 40 to 70 
feet and 15 to 30 inches in diameter.  The bark is 
exfoliating; gray-brown to ivory or copper colored. 
The leaves are alternate, simple, 1-3 inches long, and 
oval-shaped with serrated edges; they are green 
above and whitish underneath.  Flowers are 
inconspicuous.  The winged fruit is small, brown, and 
borne in clusters in the spring.  River birch bears an 
average of 375,000 seeds per pound.  Root crowns 
and roots survive fire and sprout vigorously.  The 
growth rate of river birch is typically 1.5 to 3 feet per 
year. 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS 1989. Midwestern Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This species is restricted to low and medium 
elevations, and is most common along streams.  
River birch is at home on somewhat poorly drained to 
well drained soils making it an easy choice for 
riparian buffers throughout the range of the species.  
River birch, like other pioneer species, is not 
particularly pH sensitive and seems to be tolerant of 
soils that are in the 4.5 to 7.5 range.  It will 
occasionally develop iron chlorosis in soil with 
neutral and higher pH.  River birch is shade 
intolerant. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seed ripens and sheds in the spring and should be 
directly sown.  A seeding density of 25 to 44 per 
square foot is desirable, lightly covered or without 
covering if seedbed is kept moist.  Stratification of 
birch seed is usually counter-productive.  Seedlings 
have moderate growth rate and are usually outplanted 
as 2 year old bareroot stock.  Given effective grass 
and weed control, river birch is easy to establish.  
 
Fertilization of tree and shrub seedlings at planting is 
generally not recommended.  Defer any necessary 
fertility applications to the second year to avoid root

damage, but only drastically disturbed soils are likely 
to need fertility inputs. 
 
Management 
Attention to weed control is the most critical factor 
for rapid establishment and early growth of riparian 
buffers.  Grass competition for moisture, nutrients 
and light is generally more critical than broadleaf 
weed pressure, however there are broadleaved weeds 
that are serious threats--these are the very large 
annuals and the spreading perennials.  
 
The use of selected herbicides or a weed control 
fabric are two ways to reduce weed competition.  
State land grant college weed control guidelines for 
herbicide use should be reviewed for application rates 
and species compatibility.  Consider the grass control 
herbicides which allow application contact with tree 
and shrub species.  
 
Weed control fabric can be placed at planting time 
and provide protection for 3-5 years.  The initial 
expense is greater, but the overall expense may be 
less where weed pressure is heavy and multiple 
sprayings of herbicide would otherwise be necessary. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The principal leaf disease of river birch is 
anthracnose leaf blight caused by  Gloeosporium 
betularum . Christmas mistletoe ( Phoradendron 
serotinum ) is a common pest in the South.  Minor 
problems with leaf miner and iron chlorosis which 
commonly occurs when grown on calcareous soils 
and other high pH soils.  River birch has no serious 
insect pests and is considered borer resistant.  The 
tree is not very vulnerable to deer browsing. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No conservation cultivars of river birch exist, but 
there are horticultural selec tions in the marketplace.  
Avoid those selections that exhibit growth patterns 
not typical of the species, such as variegated leaves 
or weeping growth habit. 
 
Prepared By:  
John Dickerson , Retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office, Syracuse, New 
York 
 
Lincoln Moore, Forest Biologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson , Retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office 
Syracuse, New York 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.