Plant Fact Sheet
HOARY ALYSSUM 
 Berteroa incana (L.) DC.   
Plant Symbol = BEIN2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS P lant Materials Program 
 
Photo by James Jacobs, USDA NRCS, Bozeman, MT   
 
Caution: This plant is weedy and may be invasive.   
 
Alternate Names:   
Alyssum incanum , False hoary madwort, hoary berteroa.  
 
Uses:  The continuously blooming flowers are considered 
attractive to open areas and around gardens. It is used as 
vegetative cover in mining and municipal wastelands in 
the Ukraine and Germany.   
 
Status:   
Hoary alyssum is an aggressive invader in fields of 
alfal fa, clover, or birdsfoot trefoil and is listed as a state 
noxious weed in some states. Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
 
Description
:   
Berteroa incana  (L.) DC., hoary alyssum, a member of 
the mustard family, is an annual to short -lived perennial 
forb  native to east -central Europe and western Asia. It has 
a slender tap root, star -shaped hairs on the stems, leaves, 
sepals, and seed pods, and four white, notched petals on 
flowers clustered at the stem tips. It is invasive along 
roads, railroads, trails, and gravelly stream and lake  banks, in lawns, farmyards, vacant lots, overgrazed 
pastures and rangeland, and in hay meadows.  
 
Adaptation: 
 
Hoary alyssum is adapted to the temperate continental 
climate characterized by cold winters and hot dry 
summers, but  is found throughout much of the US. Fall 
seedlings and rosettes are resistant to winterkill, and 
flowering plants are resistant to summer drought. It grows 
well on sandy or gravelly soils with poor soil fertility, and 
is most prolific on dry, disturbed open sites. It is 
commonly found on limestone and calcareous substrata 
and less so on acidic soils.  
 
Establishment:   
Seeds can germinate from early spring to late fall, limited 
mainly by open space and water. Seedlings establishing in 
early July or sooner can flower and produce seed by early 
fall. Seedlings establishing in late July or later will remain 
as rosettes and produce flowers and seeds the following 
year.   
 
Management:   
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed speci alist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA, NRCS does not 
gua rantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
 
Hoary alyssum is controlled using 2, 4- D applied at label 
rates. Spring applications when plants are actively 
growing and prior to bolting will be mos t effective. 
Repeated applications will be needed to target plants 
regenerating from the seed bank. Reports indicate 
metsulfuron applied at 0.5 ounce product per acre will 
control hoary alyssum. Other sulfonylurea herbicides 
including chlorsulfuron, and tr isulfuron products as well 
as dicamba, and imazapic products may also be effective. 
Hand pulling that removes the root crown is effective. 
Mowing will not control hoary alyssum and may increase 
infestations by cutting down a shading canopy and 
spreading se ed pods. Regular, repeated mowing to a six -
inch stubble height may reduce seed production when 
combined with irrigation and nutrient  management to 
increase the vigor of desired plants. Shallow tilling that 
severs the tap root below the root crown will kill  hoary 
alyssum plants. However, this type of disturbance will 
favor hoary alyssum regeneration from the seed bank. 
There are no biological control insects available for 
management of hoary alyssum.