Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HORSEFLY WEED 
Baptisia tinctoria (L.) R. Br. 
Plant Symbol = BATI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Janet Novak, used with permission. 
 
Alternate Names 
Yellow Wild Indigo, Rattle Weed, Yellow Broom 
 
Uses 
Conservation :  Horsefly weed is a good ground cover 
in dry sunny locations due to its shrubby habit, and 
extensive root system.  It is a native legume, fixes 
atmospheric nitrogen in the soil and can be part of a 
good wildlife seed mixtur e where native grasses and 
forbs are seeded together. 
 
Ethno botanical :  Horsefly weed is a favorite 
medicine of the North American Indians.  The bark 
and roots steeped in water are used as an antiseptic 
wash for wounds.  It is a purgative, emetic and is 
currently being researched for its anti-bacterial 
properties.  It has a reputation for protecting horses 
and mules from horseflies if fastened to the harness, 
hence its common name.  Historically it has been 
used as an immune system stimulant.  A yellow dye 
made from the plant was used in the southern U.S.  
Caution  should be used in internal use of this plant as 
it contains the alkaloid cytisine, and baptisine which 
is an acrid poison.  These compounds give this plant 
a bitter taste which is unpalatable to grazing animals.   
Landscape and Wildlife
:  This plant is not 
particularly suitable for a formal garden but is at 
home in a meadow garden or sunny informal area.  
Bees are best adapted to pollinate the flowers.  The 
dusky-winged butterfly ( Thanaos brizo) and Io moth 
( Automeris io ) larvae and caterpillars feed on the 
leaves.  It is also a larval and/or nectar source for the 
Frosted Elfin ( Callophrys irus ).  It is the only known 
food of the larval stage of the wild indigo dusky 
winged butterfly ( Erynnis baptisiae).  
 
Status 
Horsefly weed is rare in some parts of its range; is 
threatened in Kentucky and endangered in Maine.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
General :  Horsefly weed is an upright, multi-
stemmed, warm season, shrubby perennial.  It 
typically grows 2 – 3 feet tall. It is a member of the 
pea (Fabaceae) family which reproduces by seed or 
rhizomes.  The dark grayish green leaves emerge in 
April and remain on the plant through October.  The 
smooth leaves have three leaflets or  lobes radiating  
from a common  point .   All parts of the plant will 
turn black when dried.  Depending on the region, it 
will flower in May (in the  south) through September 
(in the north).  It has showy, bright yellow flowers 
which are about ½ inch long.  There is a lot of flower 
color variation, from cream  to clear yellow.  The 4 -5 
inch long terminal  elongated cluster  of flowers  
contain both male and female parts.  Flowers give 
way to ½” long inflated seed pods which turn black 
when ripe.  The seeds rattle around in the pods giving 
its other common name “rattle weed”.  In the autumn 
when fully mature, the plant turns silvery-grey and 
breaks off from the root system at ground level.  The 
pods stay with the plant for some time while the wind 
tumbles it around to new locations.    
 
Distribution : Horsefly weed is the most widely 
distributed of the wild indigoes; from southeastern 
Canada west to Minnesota and south to Florida 
(USDA plant cold hardiness zones 3-9).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.

Habitat: Horsefly weed prefers growing in dry, 
sunny locations in gravel, sandy or well-drained 
loamy soils.  It has a high tolerance to acidic soils.  It 
occurs on sand hills, pine flat woods, xeric 
woodlands, ridges and road banks.  It has even been 
seen growing in the cracks  of shear rock faces. 
 
Establishment 
Seed Propagation :  Seed collected from plants 
growing in native settings have an extremely low 
germination rate due to predation by weevils.  Like 
many other legumes it has a hard seed coat.  The seed 
must be scarified (breaking, scratching or softening 
the seed coat) in order for germination to occur.  
Soaking the seed in water after scarification for a full 
day will allow water to penetrate the seed coat and 
greatly increase seed germination percentages.  The 
seeds normally germinate  when the soil temperature 
nears 50 degrees Fahrenheit.  After the seedlings 
emerge they can be further propagated by divisions.  
Seedlings will develop slowly (two to three years) as 
this plant devotes much of its energy into developing 
its root system.  Due to its extensive, thick, woody 
and deep root system; horsefly weed plants dislike 
root disturbances and should be left alone once 
established.  Horsefly weed plants form slowly 
expanding clumps.   
 
Management  
Horsefly weed is a hardy plant with relatively few 
problems.  Once established it is long lived, and 
requires little maintenance.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Few pests or diseases are kn own to affect the plant.  
In high pH soils (above 6.5) the plant may look 
stunted or have yellow foliage. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Toxicity:  Some older poisonous plant literature has 
blamed  Baptisia  species for killing cattle and horses.  
More modern literature documents this genus as more 
likely to cause severe diarrhea and anorexia.  
Horsefly weed is unlikel y to become weedy or 
invasive in most regions or habitats and rarely 
displaces other desirable vegetation. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Horsefly weed may be 
available from commercial nurseries specializing in 
native plants. 
  Prepared By:  
Shawn Belt, USDA, NRCS 
National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, USDA, NRCS  National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Edited: 090112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.