Plant Fact Sheet     
   
 
COLUMBIA BROME  
Bromus vulgaris (Hook.) Shear 
Plant Symbol = BRVU 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Alternate names:   Narrow-flowered brome is 
another common name. 
 
Uses:  Columbia brome is a native upland grass 
useful for erosion control and revegetation along 
shady streambanks, ravines, and roadsides.  The 
species is also important for the restoration of moist 
to relatively dry understory woodland plant 
communities.   The fibrous root system aids in soil 
retention especially on steeper, rocky, north facing 
slopes.  Ranked high as palatable livestock forage, 
Columbia brome is valuable for grazing at mid to 
higher elevations in certain western ranges. It’s 
affinity for shade lends application to silvopastural  systems (combined tree and forage production).  Elk 
utilize it in spring and other ungulates presumably 
graze it as well.  The seed and plants serve as food 
and cover for small mammals and birds.   
 
Description:  
Columbia brome is a cool season 
perennial bunchgrass that is short to medium lived 
depending on growing conditions.  The base is 
loosely clumped and non-rhizomatous although 
rooting may (rarely) occur from lower nodes along 
the stems (culms).  The culms are 45-120 cm tall and 
erect to spreading, often with hairy nodes (joints).  
Inflorescences (seedheads or panicles) are 8-22 cm 
long, spreading to drooping, typically with the 
slender, compressed spikelets (subunits of the 
seedhead) all hanging in the same direction. Leaves 
are course textured (5-12 mm wide), often hairy on at 
least one side, basal to part way up the stems, lax, 
and flat.   
 
Key to identification :  Despite the typical hairy nodes 
and uniform orientation of the drooping seedheads, 
Columbia brome is difficult to distinguish from three 
other native bromes that  occur in the western US, 
often in similar habitats: fringed brome ( Bromus 
ciliatus ), Orcutt’s brome ( Bromus orcuttianus) , and 
woodland or Chinook brome (Bromus laevipes ).  
Refer to a botanical key for detailed descriptions of 
traits and proper identification. It should not be 
confused with false brome ( Brachypodium 
sylvaticum ), a weedy and invasive introduced grass 
that also grows in woodland situations. The spikelets 
of both species noticeably  droop, but on Columbia 
brome they are clearly stalked (i.e. on short 
branchlets) and on false brome they are not.   
 
Adaptation:
  Columbia brome is widely distributed 
in the western US and Canada from sea level to an 
elevation of 6500 ft. In the US it occurs from 
Washington south to California and west to Montana, 
Wyoming, and Utah.  It strongly prefers shaded 
habitats including woodland edges and the floor of 
hardwood and coniferous forest types. Survival in 
open areas appears more limited to ravines, north 
facing slopes, seepage areas,  and montane meadows.    
 
Soil adaptation varies from volcanic ash to deep, 
moderately well and well drained sandy loams, 
loams, silts, and clays that are moderately acid to 
slightly alkaline (pH 5.4 to 7.9) with generally rich 
nutrient regimes.  The species is found in disturbed 
environments such as along streams and in clearcuts, 
as well as in mature undisturbed forests. In natural 
settings, response to fire varies with litter dryness and 
intensity of burn, but is generally considered neutral

in terms of regeneration.  Prolonged smoldering can 
destroy plants.  Tolerances to saline, flooded or 
saturated soil conditions are low. 
 
Commercial availability:   A few seed sources from 
Oregon and California are periodically for sale. 
 
                 
 University of Washington Pre ss, line drawing reprinted with 
permission 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Columbia brome is 
very common in both disturbed and undisturbed 
forest environments.  Seed is relatively easy to hand 
collect but shatters (separates from the seedhead) 
readily at maturity.  
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:   This 
species can be initially slow to germinate and 
sometimes difficult to establish, especially on open, 
dry, sunny sites where it is maladapted.  It is often 
difficult to grow for seed on open farmland where 
plants may appear stressed  and die after one growing 
season. There are no known environmental concerns.   
  
Establishment:   Seed dormancy has not been 
reported for Columbia brome, but germination can be 
staggered or delayed for several weeks, especially if 
spring sown.  Fall seeding in cool soils is  recommended. No special physical conditioning of 
the seed is required for use in a drill or broadcast 
seeder, but removal of the awn (linear appendage) 
and minute hair from the seed improves seed flow in 
some equipment.     
 
Establishment rate from seed is moderately fast after 
germination.  There are approximately 95,000 (+/- 
20%) seeds per pound with
 seed hulls intact and 
108,000 seeds per pound with hulls removed (naked 
seed).   Therefore, each  1 pound of live seed sown 
per acre is equivalent to approximately 2 to 2.5 live 
seeds per square foot.  Sown alone, a suggested 
minimum seeding rate is 15-20 lbs of pure live seed 
(PLS) per acre for general revegetation.  
 
When grown for seed, fields  should be situated on the 
north side of tall windbreaks or in other wooded 
settings to receive partial shade. Good soil fertility 
and drainage are needed.  Burning for post harvest 
residue management is not recommended at this time.  
Hulls often separate from the seed and seed may be 
damaged during mechanical harvest with a combine.  
Stands are typically variable and frequently short 
lived.  Management requirements for livestock 
utilization are not well reported but may approach 
those of other native bromes provided there is partial 
shade. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 Edited: 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service