Plant Fact Sheet     
 
HAIRY GRAMA 
Bouteloua hirsuta Lag. 
Plant symbol = BOHI  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
  
Uses  
Hairy grama is used primarily for grazing and 
withstands it well.  Most  livestock graze it readily 
any season.  It makes especi ally good winter forage, 
because it cures well.  It is not considered a hay 
grass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Hairy grama is a native, 
warm-season, perennial grass.  The height is between 
10 and 20 inches.  The leaf blade is flat or slightly  rolled; narrow; mostly basal; margins hairy.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded; smooth; shorter than internodes.  
The seedhead is 1 to 4 spikes, purplish before 
maturity, about 1 inch long; rachis extends beyond 
spikelets. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass yields more if it is not overgrazed and 
grazing is deferred every 2 to 3 years during the 
period of most active growth. 
 
Establishment 
Hairy grama makes little growth before summer rains 
begin.  If moisture is adequate, it matures rapidly.  
During exceptionally dry y ears, produces little forage 
but withstands drought well.  It reproduces from 
auxiliary buds at basal nodes, from short stolons in 
some localities, and from seed.  In the northern part 
of its range, this grass usually has only 1 or 2 spikes 
per seedhead and short stolons that form a sod.  
Further south, it grows taller, more like a bunch 
grass, and has 2 to 4 spikes per seedhead.  A tall 
variety ( B. hirsuta  var. pectinata)  grows mostly in 
central Texas.  It is adapted to sandy and sandy loam 
soils and gravelly loams and does well on soils 
neutral to slightly calcareous .  It is often associated 
with blue grama ( Bouteloua gracilis ), but is more 
drought resistant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 
 
 
 
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.