Plant Fact Sheet

BUFFALOGRASS

Buchloe dactyloides (Nutt.) 

Engelm.

Plant Symbol = BUDA 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Hitchcock 1950 Manual of the Grasses of the U.S. 
Alternate Names 
Bouteloua dactyloides (Nutt.) J.T. Columbus 
Uses 
Erosion control: Buffalograss can be used on areas 
that do not receive a lot of rain but are affected by 
wind erosion, such as roadside cuts. 
Recreation and beautification: This grass can be used 
in parks and on school grounds, golf course roughs, 
and open lawns. 
Livestock: This is an important pasture grass for 
native and introduced animals. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Buchloe dactyloides (Nutt.) Engelm., buffalograss, is 
a perennial, native, low-growing, warm-season grass.  
Leaf blades are 10 to12 inches long, but they fall over 
and give the turf a short appearance.  Staminate 
plants have 2 to 3 flag-like, one-sided spikes on a 
seedstalk 4 to 6 inches long.  Spikelets, usually 10, 
are 1/8 inch long in two rows on one side of the 
rachis.  Pistillate spikelets are in a short spike or head 
and included in the inflated sheaths of the upper 
leaves.  Both male and female plants have stolons 
from several inches to several feet in length, 
internodes 2 to 3 inches long, and nodes with tufts on 
short leaves. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This grass occurs naturally and grows best on clay 
loam to clay soils.  It requires little mowing to 
achieve a uniform appearance.  It has a low fertility 
requirement and it often will maintain good density 
without supplemental fertilization. Buffalograss is 
well suited for sites with 10 to 25 inches of annual 
precipitation. It is not adapted to shaded sites. 
Buffalograss is distributed throughout the Midwest.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
Establishment 
Buffalograss is propagated by seed and vegetatively. 
Establishment can be accomplished by seeding, solid 
sodding, or sprigging rooted and unrooted plugs.  If 
seeds are used, drill at 1/2 inch deep and provide firm 
contact between the seed and moist soil.  The seed 
may also be broadcast. When broadcasting seed, 
harrow or rake the area in two directions immediately 
after seeding to work the seeds into the soil.  
Broadcast seed must be covered with soil for the 
seeding to be successful. With any method, the soil 
must be firmed against the seed.  Seedlings begin to 
appear 14 to 21 days after planting when moisture is 
available for germination.  The amount of seed 
needed to ensure a stand at the end of the first year 
will depend on the method of seeding, the quality of 
seedbed preparation, the availability of water for 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

establishment, and certain climatic uncertainties.  All 
planting should be delayed until the danger of frost 
has past.  The time of planting depends upon the 
latitude of the location, and may extend to August 1 
in lower latitudes. 
Buffalograss can be established from pieces of sod or 
sod plugs.  Sod should be planted on a well prepared 
seedbed in 18-inch rows.  Sod should be spaced from 
6 inches to 2 feet apart; plugs should be planted on 12 
to 24 inch centers depending on how quickly a 
complete cover is desired. When planting, dig a hole 
deep enough to set a plant in with the grass blades 
above the ground.  Pack soil around the sod making 
sure not to cover with soil because the plant will die.  
Once planted, the sod should be watered for about 3 
weeks to ensure root establishment. 
Sprigs should be planted into soil that has been tilled 
to a depth of 4 to 6 inches.  Sprigging rate should be 
approximately 240 bushels of sprigs per acre, planted 
to a depth of 1 inch or less. A planted site should be 
rolled to ensure good sprig-soil contact and irrigated 
within 3 hours after planting. Newly planted areas 
will also require irrigation for several weeks to 
maintain a moist environment for root establishment. 
Proper seedbed preparation for planting a home lawn 
is essential.  Buffalograss will grow on heavy and 
compacted soils, but it is easier to start and maintain 
on good loam soils.  Heavy soils may be improved by 
applying good quality organic matter such as peat 
moss, aged manure, or compost.  Applying a 
phosphorus fertilizer stimulates seedling root growth, 
even on soils testing high in phosphorus.  Work the 
soil to a depth of 4 to 6 inches.  This may require 
plowing, discing, or tilling. The seedbed should be 
uniform, friable, and well-packed.  Use tillage 
methods to control any weeds that may develop 
before seeding. 
Management 
Buffalograss is only recommended for low 
maintenance and low use turfgrass areas.  Mowing 
height and frequency depend on grass use, amount of 
irrigation, and time of year. Care must be taken 
when mowing not to cut shorter than 2 to 3 inches to 
avoid other grasses from out-competing the 
buffalograss. Buffalograss responds well to light 
applications of nitrogen. Over- fertilization will 
promote undesirable grasses within the planted area.  
Buffalograss is excellent for people who want a large, 
attractive lawn during the summer with a minimum 
of work involved.  Other advantages of buffalograss 
for lawns is that it withstands heavy usage and has 
good drought tolerance.  However, potential lawn 
growers should note that buffalograss is a warm-
season grass, it turns brown with fall&#39;s first freezing 
weather, and will not green-up until warm weather 
returns; it will be brown and unattractive when the 
neighbor’s Kentucky Bluegrass is brilliant green.  
During extended dry periods in the summer months, 
buffalograss will go brown and become dormant if no 
supplemental water is provided.  Because of 
aggressive runners, buffalograss can require edging 
along walks, driveway, and flower beds. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Buffalograss has no serious pests. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Bison’, ‘Plains’, ‘Texoka’, and ‘Topgun’ (cultivars); 
Bismarck Ecotype (selected class release).  Seeds are 
available at most Midwestern commercial seed 
sources.  Sod, sod plugs, and sprigs can be obtained 
from sod farms. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.