Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BUR MARIGOLD 
Bidens aristosa (Michx.) Britt.  
Plant Symbol = BIAR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 © William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Alternate Names 
beggar ticks 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bur marigold is an upright annual herb (1-5 feet tall) 
with a tap root.  The alternate leaves are pinnately or 
bipinnately dissected, with  each segment lanceolate 
and toothed or lobed on the margin.  Plants produce  numerous solitary flower heads held on long stalks 
from September to October; each head is 1-2 inches 
across and bright yellow with a yellow center.  Seeds 
are dark brown, flattened, and have two prongs that 
project from one end. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bur marigold grows and flowers best in full sun, but 
is also adapted to partial 
shade.  Plants are often 
found growing in open shade along the edge of a 
woodland.  It is adapted to most soil types, except for 
very sandy soils.  Natural stands are generally found 
on moist sites such as in ditches, marshes, and wet 
meadows. 
 
Bur marigold is distributed throughout the eastern 
and midwest United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seed should be planted from August to October.  The 
seed will not germinate until the following spring, but 
it requires exposure to cool, moist conditions during 
the winter.  A firm seedbed is required.  Bur marigold 
germinates best on a clean tilled site that has been 
firmed with a roller or finishing harrow before 
planting.  Seed can also be planted into a closely 
mowed, chemically-killed, or burned sod area with a 
light disking or harrowing that scratches the soil 
surface.  A thick layer of  plant residue on the soil 
surface can interfere with seed germination.  
Broadcast or shallowly drill 4-6 grams seed per 100 
square feet (4-6 lb/acre).  Planting depth should range 
from at the surface to one-qua rter of an inch deep.  
Cultipacking after planting will ensure good seed to 
soil contact. 
 
Management  
Apply fertilizer according to soil test 
recommendations.  If not available, a rate of 3.5-5.5 
oz per 100 square feet (100-150 lb/acre) of 13-13-13 
should be applied after the seedlings are established 
and annually thereafter.  Natural or planted stands of 
bur marigold usually reseed heavily for two to three 
years but will gradually decline without maintenance.  
A light to medium disking will help control perennial 
weeds and promote bur marigold germination.  
Disking should be done in mid to late November.  If 
necessary, plants can be mowed in the spring before 
stem elongation begins in April.  Stands that are not

disked should not be mowed again until after seed set 
in early November. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, Mississippi 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.