Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK GRAMA 
Bouteloua eriopoda  (Torr.) 
Torr. 
Plant Symbol = BOER4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
  
Alternate Names 
woollyfoot grama, hairyfoot grama, navajita negra 
 
Uses 
Black grama is a choice forage grass grazed by all 
livestock.  It is cut for hay on some ranges in wet 
seasons. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Black grama is a native, 
warm-season, stoloniferous perennial grass.  The 
height is between 10 and 20 inches.  The leaf blade is 
narrow and rolls inward during dry periods, giving it 
a threadlike appearance.  Th e leaf sheath is short and 
clasps the stem tightly.  The ligule is a ring of short 
hairs.  The stem is solid, the lower half of the 
internodes woolly, and the upper half smooth.  The 
seedhead is 3 to 8 spikes per seedhead and 18 to 20 
spikelets per spike. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Overgrazing easily kills this grass.  To improve black 
grama ranges, defer grazing two successive years 
during the growing season and do not graze more 
than 50 percent of current growth by weight during 
dormancy.  To maintain ranges, defer grazing for one 
growing season every third year. 
 
Establishment 
During mild winters and with adequate moisture, 
lower stems stay green all winter.  New leaves grow 
from buds at nodes on stolons and from auxillary 
buds at basal nodes.  The seeding habits are not 
dependable.  In some years,  when a good seed crop is 
produced, seed viability is low.  It reproduces 
primarily from stolons.  A healthy plant generally 
produces 6 to 9 stolons.  Two favorable successive 
growing seasons are required for reproduction by 
stolons: First year, to produce stolons; second year, 
for stolons to take root and establish new plants.  It 
generally grows in pure stands.  It grows mostly on 
dry gravelly or sandy soils and seldom grows on clay 
loams or adobe (clay) flats.  Black grama is 
characteristically a lower altitude grass (3,500  to 
5,500  feet elevation), but occasionally grows at 
elevations of 7,000 feet. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.