Plant Fact Sheet
BURNINGBUSH 
Bassia scoparia (L.)  A.J. Scott 
Plant Symbol =  BASC5 
 
 Contributed by : USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Figure 1.  P. Allen Casey. 2009. USDA -NRCS.  Burningbush  that 
exhibits red colored stems.  Found on a disturbed site along a gravel 
road. Riley County, Kansas   
 
Alternate Names  
Bassia scoparia;  Bassia sieversiana ; Kochia alata; 
Kochia trichophila;  Kochia trichophylla;  k ochia,  Mexican 
fireweed; mock cypress; fireweed; mirabel; summer 
cypress; common kochia; Mexican summer -cypress; 
railroad weed; belvedere; firebush; poor man’s alfalfa; 
common red sage   
   
Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
Caution: This plant c an be toxic.  
 
Uses   
Burningbush  is used by wildlife for food and cover.  It 
can be hayed or grazed directly for livestock feed.  
Burningbush  can be planted for soil erosion control and  bioremediation of some contaminated sites.  It is used in 
some Asian cultures fo
r food and in some parts of Europe 
and Asia it is planted for making brooms.  Burningbush  
contains compounds that could be used in medicines.   
   
Status   
This plant is or can be noxious and/or invasive in some 
areas.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland ind icator values).  
   
Weediness   
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at plants.usda.gov
.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
informa tion.  
  
Description and Adaptation  
Burningbush  is an introduced, erect, annual forb.  The 
simple, alternately arranged leaves are linear to narrowly 
ovate to 2 inches (5.5 cm) long and can have hairs, 
depending on age.  Leaves are very short petioled or 
sessi le.  Stems are green, red tinged, or red depending on 
age.  The flowers are green leaf -like bracts. It has a spike.  
Burningbush  has small fruits with an oval, brown to black 
seed.  Burningbush  varies widely in morphological 
characters partially due the environment  where it is found.  
   
Burningbush  is native to central and eastern Europe and 
Asia.  Burningbush  can be found in a very wide range of 
temperatures and climatic regions throughout the world, 
but is particularly adapted to arid and semi -arid regions.  
Burningbush  is common in rangelands, pastures, fields, 
disturbed sites, gardens, roadsides, ditchbanks, and in 
soils with high salinity.  It can be found in areas with as 
little as 6 inches (15.24 cm) of annual rainfall.   
Plant Materials < http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/ > 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page < http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> National Plant 
Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov >