Plant Fact Sheet
ORANGE EYE 
BUTTERFLYBUSH  
Buddleja davidii  Franch.  
Plant Symbol =  BUDA2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter  
 
© G. D. Carr  
Caution: This plant may become invasive.  
Alternate Names  
Alternative common names:   Butterfly bush, orange eye, 
summer lilac,  purple buddlej a, red buddleja  
 
Alternative scientific names:   Buddleia, Buddleja 
variabilis  Hemsl. 
Uses  
Ornamental:  Orange eye butterflybush has been used in 
the nursery trade for over a hundred years due to its 
pleasant  weeping, grey- green foliage  and fragrant, 
colorful blooms that attract butterflies , hummingbirds and 
other  floral  visitors.   Because it can become invasive and 
crowd out desirable native vegetation, sterile varieties or 
hybrids should be chosen when installing new plantings.     
Status  
Orange eye butterflybush is listed  as a Class B  noxious 
weed in Washington, and in Oregon is a list B designated 
weed , subject to quarantine .  As of January 1, 2010, any 
plant listed as ‘butterfly bush’ is assumed to be B. davidii 
and is prohibited entry, transport, purchase, sale or 
propagation in the State of Oregon.  Sterile varieties of 
Buddleja  approved by the Oregon Dept. of Agriculture , 
in cluding inter -specific hybrids , are not regulated and 
may be propagated and sold if labeled as follows:  “Seedless Butterfly Bush*.” “*Produces less than 2% 
viable seed.”  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for
 this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Weediness  
This plant establishes readily from seed and stem 
fragments in disturbed or natural areas, especially riparian 
zones, where  it can form dense thickets that outcompete 
native vegetation.   Seed can be produced the first year, is 
spread easily by wind and water, and can remain viable in 
the seed bank for three to five years.   Plants are difficult 
to remove once established as the y will readily resprout 
from the root crown after the stems are cut.   Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
inform ation is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  and Adaptation  
Orange eye butterflybush is a non- native, deciduous to 
semi -evergreen shrub  that grows  6–16 feet tall  and 4–15 
feet wide .  The leaves are egg - to lance -shaped, up to 10 
inches long, green above and grayish, soft -wool ly below, 
growing  oppositely  on long, arching stems  that are green 
when young and have peeling, gray- brown bark when 
older .   Tiny, tubular , four-petaled  f lowers  are arranged in 
large, cone- shaped clusters 3 –18 inches long that bloom 
from late spring t o first frost in fall.  Flowers are generally 
purplish with a yellow to orange throat, though 
horticultural varieties range from white  or yellow  to pink 
and  deep purple.    
Butterflybush is hardy to  -20°F (USDA zones 5 –10) and 
prefers moist, well -drained  soils in partial to full -sun, 
although it is fairly drought -tolerant once established.  
Roots generally don’t survive in saturated soil.  
Ornamental escapes establish on roadsides, railroad 
tracks, stream and river banks, dryland meadows, dunes, 
coastal fo rest edges and logged areas, surface mined 
lands, industrial yards and other disturbed areas.   
Native to China, this shrub  has been spread widely 
through the horticultural trade and become  naturalized in 
many parts of North America, including the pacific 
n orth west,  northeast , Hawaii and Puerto Rico  (see map 
below) , as well as  western Europe, southeastern  Australia 
and New Zealand.  For updated distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.