Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAY BIRCH 
Betula populifolia Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = BEPO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office  
 Uses 
Riparian buffers: Gray birch can add visual interest 
and diversity to buffer installations, except where 
water tables are at or near the surface. 
 
Wildlife: Birds, especially goldfinches and other 
small-seed eaters, feed h eavily on ripe gray birch 
seed.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Betula populifolia  Marsh., gray birch, is a pioneer 
species typically found on disturbed sites with 
exposed, well drained soils.  Gray birch is a moderate 
sized tree with fast growth (2-5 ft/yr) on sites with 
nutrient availability.  The bark of sapling and pole 
aged plants is white, but not as bright or as papery as 
that of paper birch.  Beyond the pole stage of growth 
the bark quickly develops black and rough patches, 
with white remaining between them.  Gray birch has 
strong terminal growth and is typically well-formed 
with relatively small diameter branches.  The leaves 
of gray birch are narrowly  triangular with larger 
serrations along the edge than paper birch.  The fall 
color of gray birch is a bright yellow.  In eastern  Pennsylvania where the ranges of gray and river 
birch overlap, the salmon colored bark and wider 
leaves distinguish the river birch. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Gray birch is adapted to soils with poor and excessive 
drainage.  However, it is much more common on dry, 
disturbed soils throughout much of its range.  Gray 
birch is native to eastern Pennsylvania, New Jersey, 
and New York (roughly the I-81 corridor) to the 
Canadian Maritime Provinces.  It is often in 
association with conifers such as white pine and 
scotch pine where seed sources exist.  It is often the 
first tree species to invade disturbed droughty sites 
and tends to inhibit other vegetation by utilizing the 
available soil moisture and nutrients.  Gray birch, as a 
pioneer species, prefers site
s with ample sunlight and 
is shade intolerant.  It is not tolerant of flooding of 
any significant duration. 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS.  1995.  Northeast Wetland Flora @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
As noted above, gray birch is a rapid invader on 
disturbed sites when local seed sources exist.  With 
mature trees in the vicinity there is little need to plant 
gray birch.  Seedlings of the species, whether wild or 
nursery grown, are easily transplanted and are widely 
adapted to soil conditions.  Due to their rapid growth 
in the nursery, stock is outplanted as 1 yr or 2 yr field 
grown bareroot seedlings.  Gray birch, like all 
seedlings, requires protection from competing 
vegetation and weeds to achieve acceptable growth 
rates. 
 
Planting dates for trees and shrubs vary depending 
upon their classification as  conifers or deciduous.  
Gray birch can be planted in the spring or fall after 
the leaves have turned color.  The seedlings will 
respond best if planted as early in the spring as 
possible, or as soon as th e plants are dormant in the 
fall.  Both situations allow for root growth and 
settling of the soil before leaf-out or cold drying 
winds increase moisture stress.  
 
In the nursery seed can be planted without 
stratification.  Seed must be planted very shallowly to 
allow for light to help trigger germination.

Management 
Maintaining suppression of grasses and weeds is the 
key to success with woody pl antings.  On sites where 
gray birch seeds in from surrounding mature trees, 
the birch may have to be controlled to avoid too 
much competition with other desirable species. 
 
Soil amendments are generally not needed for 
acceptable growth of  this species. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Gray birch is more resistant than paper birch to the 
bronze birch borer, and is seldom killed by it.  
Likewise, chinch bugs infest the young catkins and 
leaves, but the tree seems to tolerate them. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There may be cultivars of gray birch in the 
horticultural trade, for  instance “weeping” or 
variegated selections.  These should be avoided for 
conservation plantings as  they frequently require 
exceptional care to maintain and are not as likely to 
withstand environmental stress.  Regional seed 
sources are highly preferred for planting stock. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson , Retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office, Syracuse, New 
York 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.