Plant Fact Sheet

SMOOTH BROME 
Bromus inermis Leyss. 
Plant Symbol = BRIN2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
©Larry Allain @USDA NRCS PLANTS Database 
Caution: This plant may become 
invasive. Please consult a specialist in 
your area. 
Alternate Names 
bromegrass, Austrian brome, Hungarian brome, 
Russian brome 
Uses 
Livestock: Smooth brome may be used for hay, 
pasture, or silage.  It is compatible with alfalfa or 
other adapted legumes.  The grass is highly palatable 
and is high in protein content and relatively low in 
crude-fiber content. 
Erosion Control: Since the plant has a massive root 
system and is a sod former it can be used effectively 
for critical area planting and grassed waterways if the 
areas can be irrigated or where annual precipitation 
exceeds 20 inches. 
Wildlife: Smooth brome can be used as a component 
in various upland wildlife and conservation cover 
mixes for nesting cover and food. Note: This species 
is no longer recommended for wildlife use in some 
states because of its aggressive nature. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
This plant has threatened status in Michigan. 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
Description 
Bromus inermis, smooth brome, is a leafy, sod-
forming, perennial, cool season grass that spreads by 
rhizomes.  This species is both native and introduced.  
The stems vary in height from 2 to 4 feet.  The plant 
produces numerous basal and stem leaves that vary in 
length from 4 to 10 inches.  Frequently the leaves are 
marked by a transverse wrinkle resembling a “W” a 
short distance below the tip.  The flower head 
develops a characteristic rich purplish-brown color 
when mature. The seed is produced in semi-compact 
5 inch long panicles with ascending branches.  The 
flat compressed seed is usually awnless, about 1/3 
inch long, and smooth.  There are approximately 
136,000 seeds per pound.  Smooth brome is the most 
widely used of the cultivated bromegrasses and has 
been cultivated in the U.S. since the early 1880s. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Smooth brome is best adapted to cooler climates and 
is generally hardier than tall fescue or orchardgrass.  
It is resistant to drought and extremes in temperature.  
This plant is very susceptible to disease in areas of 
high humidity. Smooth brome grows best on slightly 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

acid to slightly alkaline well drained clay loam soils 
with high fertility but it will also grow well on lighter 
textured soils where adequate moisture and fertility 
are maintained.  Smooth brome performs best in a pH 
range of 6.0 to 7.5.  Stands are difficult to obtain and 
growth is poor on soils high in soluble salts. 
Smooth brome is distributed throughout most of the 
United States. For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
Establishment 
A clean firm seedbed is needed. Due to the slow 
germination and establishment of smooth brome, 
spring seedings are especially preferred in the 
northern states.  In southern areas, late summer 
seedings are a second option.  Fall seedings should be 
made at least 6 weeks before a killing frost is 
expected.  Seeding rates are typically 5-10 pounds 
per acre in mixtures, and about 15 pounds when 
seeded alone.  When smooth brome is seeded in a 
mixture with alfalfa, the alternate row method will 
give the best results.  For seed production plantings 
under irrigation, seed in rows 30 to 42 inches apart at 
a rate of 3 to 4 pounds per acre.  Seedings should be 
drilled at a depth of 1/2 to 3/4 inch.  If broadcast 
increase the seeding rate and cultipack after planting. 
Management 
Smooth brome requires heavy early spring and fall 
applications of nitrogen to maintain high yields in a 
pure stand.  Mixtures with alfalfa will require less 
nitrogen but the alfalfa will usually need P205 each 
year to maintain vigor.  Alfalfa cannot be maintained 
in pasture seedings without rotation.  Best forage 
production is obtained from smooth brome when 
used in a planned cropping system and plowed out 
after 3 to 4 years.  Its heavy sod makes it an excellent 
soil conditioning crop when included in cropping 
systems.  In deep, well-drained soils it will root to 4 
feet. 
Smooth brome performs best in grassed waterways, 
field borders, and other conservation uses where the 
forage can be cut and removed while in early bloom. 
Do not graze the new seeding; cut the first crop for 
hay. 
In bromegrass-legume pastures, allow the legume to 
go to bud or early-bloom stage before turning cattle 
in to avoid bloat hazard, and manage thereafter for  
optimum regrowth of the legume.  Pastures should 
not be grazed prior to smooth brome attaining a 
minimum height of about 10 inches at the beginning 
of the grazing season.  Grazing pressures should be 
adjusted throughout the season to avoid grazing this 
grass to less than a minimum height of 4 inches. 
Grazing schedules should be so arranged that a 
regrowth period of 28 to 35 days between grazing 
periods is available. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshoppers and seedling blight are influences that 
may impede establishment.  Foliar diseases are more 
common in humid areas and seasons.  The 
bromegrass seed midge, Stenodiplosis bromicola, can 
seriously hinder seed production. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Northern type cultivars: ‘Superior’, ‘Manchar’, 
‘Carlton’, ‘Jubilee’, ‘Saratoga’ (various), ‘Polar’, 
‘Bravo’ 
Southern type cultivars: ‘Lincoln’ (Hungary), 
‘Achenbach’, ‘Elsberry’, ‘Lancaster’, ‘Lyon’, 
‘Southland’, ‘Rebound’, ‘Baylor’ (various), ‘Beacon’ 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush 
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.