Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
SLOUGHGRASS 
Beckmannia syzigachne  (Steud.) Fern.   
Plant symbol = BESY   
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
Alternate Names 
Slough grass 
 
Uses 
Beal indicated in 1896 that Beckmannia  was a forage 
grass of some prominence west of the Mississippi 
river. Beckmannia  is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and is frequently hayed or grazed. 
American sloughgrass is an important component of 
Alaska wetlands and provides wildlife with shelter 
and food. The variety ‘Egan’ was selected and 
released for wetland restoration and erosion control 
in Alaska. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation  
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). American 
sloughgrass is a cool seas on annual or short lived 
perennial grass that is commonly found in shallow 
marshes or sloughs. Its shallow root system supports  a leafy stem, which may be as tall as a meter. The 
branched inflorescence is classified as a closed 
panicle. The spikelets have very short pedicels and 
are arranged on only one side of the panicle. 
Spikelets disarticulate belo
w the glumes and are one 
or two flowered. American sloughgrass is one of two 
species of  Beckmannia ; the other Beckmannia  
eruciformis  occurs primarily in eastern Asia. 
American sloughgrass is adapted to conditions in the 
northern United States and southern Canada, Alaska 
and a portion of eastern Asia.  
 
Establishment 
 Gary Larson USDA NRCS Western Wetland Flora USDA NRCS Wetlands Team 
Propagation of American sloughgrass via seed is the 
preferred method since th ere aren’t any dormancy 
restrictions that inhibit rapid and uniform 
germination. The planting site should be prepared 
and tilled to discourage weeds during the 
establishment period. The best planting times in the 
Great Plains are late fall, to allow for fall 
establishment or a dormant seeding, which would 
promote early spring estab lishment. The free flowing 
spikelets present no difficulty for conventional 
planting equipment. Spikelets should be planted at a 
depth of 7 to 15 mm in the soil. There are 1,238,000 
seeds of  Beckmannia  in a pound. 
 
Management 
Beckmannia is palatable forage for livestock and is 
frequently hayed or grazed. Forage nutritional data 
indicates that it is high in protein and nonstructural 
carbohydrates.  Beckmannia grows wild in Alaska and 
the northern United States  along wet meadows, 
marshes and swamps. It is not particular about soil 
type and tolerates acidic, neutral, basic and saline soil 
types. This species normally produces an abundance 
of seed, which will readily  germinate upon reaching a 
suitable growing site. The use of Beckmannia  on 
seasonally inundated sites  where grain production is 
unpredictable may be feasible. Its vigorous growth 
habit is suited to sites where only temporary, yet 
productive cover is desired. Forage and seed yields 
under dryland conditions at Brookings, South Dakota 
were similar to long term averages for smooth 
bromegrass ( Bromus inermis ) in the same area. The 
seed unit that falls from the inflorescence at maturity 
is a firm, free flowing spikelet that presents no 
difficulties for conventional harvesting and planting 
equipment. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Stands of American sloughgr ass tend to decline after 
4 or 5 years due to competition when more

aggressive grass species become established in the 
stands. Seed shatter prior to harvesting remains a 
moderate problem. Processing the seed once 
harvested can be challenging, because the 
Beckmannia  seed is very small and special 
precautions are needed to ensure that small weed 
seeds are not included in  the final product.  The 
Alaska Plant Materials Center has found that when 
‘Egan’ is grown on upland sites without irrigation  
 plants will be stressed to the point of disease onset. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Egan’ American sloughgrass was released as a 
cultivar by the Alaska Plant Materials Center in 
Palmer, Alaska in 1986 for wetland reclamation. The 
original seed was collected in a road fill near 
Fairbanks, Alaska. The cultivar ‘Egan’ was named in 
honor of William A. Egan, the first and fourth 
Governor of the State of Alaska. Breeder and 
Foundation Class seed production will be maintained 
by the Alaska Plant Materials Center. Registered and 
Certified class seeds will be available from Alaska 
Seed Growers, Inc. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. The 
potential of  Beckmannia  becoming a weed problem 
in its area of adaptation is relatively slight.  
 
Prepared By:  Richard Wynia, USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS.  
 Edited: 23March2006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.