Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIDEOATS GRAMA 
Bouteloua curtipendula  
(Michx.) Torr. 
Plant Symbol = BOCU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: This grass is adapted to most soil 
conditions.  Successful seedings are obtained in 
rocky, stony, or shallow soils.  It is a fair to good 
erosion control plant when mixed with the other 
plants naturally associated with it. 
 
Grazing : This is one of the most important range 
grasses.  Although not as palatable as some of the 
smaller gramas, e.g. blue grama, it is more palatable 
than many of the other grass species.  It produces a 
much greater volume of fora ge than blue grama, and 
this tends to make up for its slightly lower 
palatability.  It remains green later in the fall and 
usually begins growth in the spring before other 
gramas.  It cures well, and maintains a fairly high 
feeding value throughout the year. 
 
Wildlife : Furnishes some forage for deer and antelope 
when green.  Elk use this plant throughout the year. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).  It 
is considered threatened in several states. 
 
Description  
 © W. L. Wagner Smithsonian  Institution @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Bouteloua curtipendula , sideoats grama, is a 
medium-size perennial bunchgr ass, 15 to 30 inches 
tall or occasionally taller.   This is the largest and 
most coarse of the grama grasses.  It has a bluish-
green color, sometimes with a purplish cast 
(especially in the spring), and cures to a reddish-
brown or straw color.  Leav es are coarser than other 
species of gramas, straight, comparatively stiff, and 
mostly basal.  Ten to thirty small, non-comb-like 
spikes are borne mostly along one side of each 
central seed stalk.  These  spikes drop when mature, 
leaving a long zigzag  stalk. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sideoats grama is found on rocky open slopes, 
woodlands, and forest openings up to an elevation of 
about 7,000 feet. 
 
Sideoats grama is distributed throughout most of the 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seeding of improved strains of this grass is 
accomplished by drilling in fi rm, weed-free seedbeds 
at the rate of 2-1/2 to 5 pounds (or more) pure live 
seed per acre.  Protect from grazing from date of 
seeding through the second growing season.  
Seedings should be delayed until good soil moisture 
is present. 
 
Management  
Sideoats grama is not as re sistant to grazing as blue 
grama because of its taller gr owth habit, but sideoats 
grama stays green longer and can be grazed for a 
longer period.  Reduced forage production, carrying 
capacity, and loss in cattle weight is a direct result of 
overgrazing.  Sideoats grama is a normal component 
of a large number of range sites.  The grass lengthens

the grazing season and increases forage production, 
in addition to providing variety in the feed.  Sideoats 
grama will return to most ranges under good 
management.  Practices that will bring the grass back 
include proper grazing use, planned grazing systems, 
and brush control. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests of sideoats grama. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Released cultivars include‘Butte’ (NE), ‘El Reno’ 
(OK), ‘Haskell’ (TX), ‘Niner’ (NM), ‘Premier’ 
(Mexico), ‘Trailway’ (NE), and ‘Vaughn’ (NM); 
informal releases include Killdeer (ND) and Pierre 
(SD); and source identified releases include Northern 
Iowa Germplasm, Central Iowa Germplasm, 
Southern Iowa Germplasm (all from IA).  Seeds are 
available at most western commercial seed sources.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK: 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.