Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CAUCASIAN BLUESTEM  
Bothriochloa bladhii  (Retz.) 
S.T. Blake  
Plant Symbol = BOBL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Uses 
Caucasian bluestem is sometimes used as a critical 
area cover plant due to its ability to grow on 
droughty, acid, sterile sites. It should be used in 
mixtures with native warm  season grasses because it 
is not a particularly valuable  wildlife plant. This plant 
is not reliably hardy north of the PA-NY border. 
Though used for forage in the southern Midwest, the 
quality is not high enough to use it in this way in the 
Northeast.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Caucasian bluestem has dense blue-green leaves and 
thin stems with purple tinges at the nodes. It typically 
grows to 3-4 feet in height. The seed head is a 
terminal group of spike-like stalks that come from a 
common point. The most memorable characteristic is 
the sweet, distinctive odor of the foliage. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This grass will grow on soils of moderate drainage or 
better. It will grow well on acid, droughty, and low 
fertility soils. The best use for this grass is on 
drastically disturbed sites such as strip mine RAMP 
sites in PA and South. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Caucasian bluestem should be seeded as the soil 
warms in the spring. The germination is slow 
compared to cool season grasses and the two types of 
grass are almost never planted together. Native grass 
drills such as the Truax, Great Plains, or Tye are the 
best units for planting this seed as they have positive 
feed mechanisms for chaffy seed and double disk 
furrow openers. If a suitable drill is not available or 
cannot be used due to terrain, then broadcasting the 
seed and tracking it in with a bulldozer is also an 
excellent planting method.  Hydroseeding without 
tracking is simply a waste of time, money, and effort. 
Mulches are avoided with warm season grass 
plantings unless absolutely necessary to control 
erosion--then use 1500 pounds per acre of straw as a 
maximum rate.  No nitrogen fertilizer should be 
applied during the seeding year. Phosphorus and 
potassium should be at medium levels, and the pH 
should be 5.5 or better on forage fields and 5.0 or 
better on critical areas.  
 USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center Beltsville, MD 
 
Management  
Once established, there is little management needed 
for this species. It does not respond as strongly to fire 
as do our native species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are several hybrid cultivars from Oklahoma 
and Texas, but these are  not recommended for used 
in the Northeast.  Caucasia n bluestem, sold under that 
name, is the best of the non-native bluestems.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 31may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.