Plant Fact Sheet
ERECT DAYFLOWER 
Commelina erecta var. 
angustifolia (Michx.) Fern. 
plant symbol = COERA 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names 
whitemouth dayflower, 
widow’s tears, narrowleaf 
dayflower, and hierba del 
pollo  
 
 
 
 
 
Uses  
Wildlife:   Erect dayflower ( Commelina erecta  var. 
angustifolia ) is said to be a preferred food source for 
white -tailed deer, so it is a good plant to consider when 
establishing deer food plots. In addition, bobwhite quail, 
white -winged doves and mourning doves eat its seeds.   
 
Restoration:   Erect dayflower can also b e a good plant for 
native area restoration projects.  
 
Forage:   Cattle are known to graze erect dayflower.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endanger ed species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description 
Erect dayflower is a perennial, warm -season, herbaceous 
forb.  A member of the spiderwort (Commelinaceae) 
family, erect dayflower has also   been
 known by the common names of widow’s tears, 
narrowleaf dayflower, and hierba del pollo.  According to 
Ajilvsgi (1991), erect dayflower is said to be named for 
the three Commelin brothers who were all Dutch 
botanists, although only two were productive in t heir 
field.  Erect dayflower’s two larger petals are said to 
represent the two Commelins who were published, while 
the third inconspicuous petal represents the unpublished 
brother.   
 
Erect dayflower has a showy blue flower that is attractive, 
but ephemeral  (lasting only a day) and blooms from 
March to December in Texas.  Erect dayflower starts out 
erect, becoming decumbent as it matures.  There are 
currently three varieties that are found in Texas: erecta, 
deamiana, and angustifolia.    The variety angustif olia is 
native to South Texas.  Erect dayflower is often 
considered a weed, especially in rice fields.  
 
Adaptation  
Erect dayflower can be found from Wisconsin south to 
Arizona and Florida, west to Wyoming, and throughout 
most of the eastern United States . It is common in the 
eastern two -thirds of Texas, but can be found throughout 
the state. Erect dayflower can grow in both sandy and 
clayey soils in almost all habitats.  It is found along 
streambanks, in gardens, on prairies, along roadsides, and 
in waste  places.    
 
Known Distribution  
  
 
Establishment  
Erect dayflower can be grown from cuttings or seed.  An 
informal germination test conducted in the greenhouse at 
the PMC yielded a germination average of 87% with 
approximately twelve hours of daylight at 75- 85ºF and 
twelve hours of darkness at 50 -60ºF.  Cuttings of 
dayflower had about an 80% survival rate with one node 
and three node stem cuttings.   It is recommended that a