Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CYLINDER 
JOINTTAIL GRASS  
Coelorachis cylindrica 
(Michx.) Nash  
Plant Symbol = COCY  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Alternate Names 
Manisuris campestris , Manisuris  cylindrica , Carolina 
jointtail grass, Carolina jointtail 
 
Uses 
Cylinder jointtail grass is grazed readily by all 
livestock. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Cylinder jointtail grass is a 
native, warm-season, rhizomatous perennial grass.  
The height is between 1 and 3-1/2 feet.  The leaf 
blade is slender; pointed, 8 to 14 inches long, flat at 
first, then rolled inward at maturity.  The basal blades 
are shorter than those higher on the stem.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded, about as long as the internodes.  
The stem is erect with sw
ollen, purplish node.  The 
seedhead is a raceme, cy lindric, slightly curved; 
seedhead 2 to 6 inches long.  The spikelets are 
sessile, awnless, and in pairs at the nodes of a 
thickened rachis. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass is never abundant enough to be a key 
management species.  Proper use and management of 
associated grasses maintain it in the plant 
community. 
 
Establishment 
Cylinder jointtail grass growth starts in early spring.  
It produces seedheads in May and June and seeds 
disseminate in early summer .  It becomes dormant in 
the fall.  It reproduces from short, bulb-shaped 
rhizomes.  It does not grow in pure stands, but is 
scattered throughout a plant community and grows 
best on well-drained soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.