Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLOWERING DOGWOOD  
Cornus florida  L. 
Plant Symbol = COFL2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: The fruit is choice fall and winter food of 
the gray squirrel and fox squirrel, bobwhite, cedar 
waxwing, cardinal, flicker, mockingbird, robin, wild 
turkey, and woodpecker.  The leaves and twigs are 
choice food for the white-tailed deer.  It is not an 
important nesting plant. 
 
Ornamental : It is an important ornamental tree used 
around homes and office buildings because of its 
striking display when it is in full bloom. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Cornus florida  L., flowering dogwood, is a small, 
bushy tree which rarely attains a height of more than 
40 feet or a diameter of 12 to 18 inches.  The leaves 
are opposite one another and from 3 to 6 inches long.  
The deeply ridged and broken bark resembles 
alligator hide.  Flowering  dogwood has large, showy, 
deeply notched bracts, 4  of which surround each 
cluster of inconspicuous perfect flowers, in bloom 
from May to June.  The fruit clusters on this shrub-
like tree are scarlet red. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Flowering dogwood is adapted to most upland sites 
but grows best on rich, well-drained soils on middle 
and lower slopes.  It develops best as an understory 
species in association with other hardwoods. 
 
Flowering dogwood is distributed throughout the 
eastern United States.  For  a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Plants can be grown from seed planted 1/2 inch deep 
in late winter. 
 
Management  
In tree harvest or timb er stand improvement 
operations, specify that 5 or 6 dogwoods per acre be 
left in the forest for aesthetic purposes and as a food 
source for squirrels, turkeys, deer, and non-game 
birds.  Leave all dogwoods along highways and 
roads. Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are several wood boring insects and canker 
diseases that attack the main stem while others 
invade the branches and leaves. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings can be purchased from most commercial 
hardwood nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program

Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK ; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.