Plant Fact Sheet
NEW JERSEY TEA 
Ceanothus americanus  L.  
Plant Symbol = CEAM  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center  
  
New Jersey tea in full flower from the PLANTS Database. 
Alternate Names  red root , Indian tea, wild snowball, 
snowbrush, and soapbloom  
 
Uses  
Wildlife:  Rabbit, elk and deer browse New Jersey tea and 
turkey and quail eat the fruit. The small flowers attract 
numerous insects, especially bees, wasps, flies, and 
beetles. Butterflies and moths visit the flowers 
occasionally. These insects collect nectar from  the 
flowers, although bees may also collect pollen. The 
caterpillars of the butterfly Celestina  neglecta  (summer 
azure)  and the skipper Erynnis martialis  (Mottled 
Duskywing)  feed on the flowers, flower buds , and  fruit of  
a variety of small woody shrubs inc luding New Jersey tea.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  Tribes of the Missouri  River region used 
the leaves for tea and the roots for fuel on hunting trips. 
Tribes of the Great Lakes Bioregion ascribed great power 
to its treatment of bowel troubles. Although New Jersey 
tea was nev er listed in the U.S. Pharmacop eia, it was used 
by some physicians. New Jersey tea is a strong astringent 
(8 percent tannins) and contains an alkaloid that is mildly 
hypotensive. The leaves contain the flavonols afzelin, 
quercitrin, and rutin. I t was used by colonists during the 
Revolutionary War as a substitute for tea even though the 
leaves contained no caffeine. Recently it was dis covered 
that the roots contain  a blood- clotting agent.    
Landscaping:
 New Jersey tea is a pretty shrub that can be 
cultivated for its fragrant white flower clusters and leaves 
for te a. Horticulturists have stated  that it should be grown  
more  as an ornamental  plant  especially in droughty sites.  
   
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  and Adaptation
  
 
 
New Jersey tea distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
General:  Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae).  This 
shrubby,  upright, deciduous, native perennial grows to 
approximately 3 feet in height.  It will tiller at the base, 
sending up multiple stems.  Its stems are light green and 
covered with fine white hairs which become woody with 
age in the absence of fire or browsing by wildlife.  Leaves 
are alternate and broadly oblong -ovate, up to 3 inches 
long and 2 inches wide. The underside of the leaf is  light 
green and covered with fine white hairs. The leaf margins 
are  smooth to finely serrate, and slightly ciliate. The 
simple leaves have short petioles and three conspicuous 
palmate veins. From the axils of the upper leaves emerge 
long stalked clusters of numerous white flowers. These 
clusters of flowers are elongated and rounded.  Each 
individual flower consists of a long slender tube 
t erminated in five folded sepals. When the calyx  open s 
five hatchet shaped petals with slender bases spread 
outward, while a large pistil and five stamens ,  with dark 
gray anthers emerge from the flowe r’s center.   The 
flowers have a pleas ant fragrance and bloom  for about a 
month during early summer. Later, three small (1/4 inch)