Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALLIOPSIS 
Coreopsis tinctoria Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = COTI3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Alternate Names 
Plains coreopsis, golden tickseed 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Calliopsis is an 
annual forb which usually germinates in late summer 
or fall and over-winters as a rosette (round, low 
growing group of leaves).  This is a U.S. native.  The 
stems begin growing upward and branching in spring, 
reaching a height of up to 4 feet.  The opposite leaves 
are deeply divided, with the upper leaf segments 
being very narrow.  The flowering heads are 
numerous, 1-2 inches in  diameter, and are yellow 
with a red-brown center.   
 
Adaptation 
Calliopsis is adapted to many soil types.  It grows 
best on a well-drained soil, but will not tolerate a 
very dry site.  Natural stands are generally found on 
bottomland areas with ample moisture.  It grows best 
in full sun, but will tolerate light shade. 
 
Calliopsis is distributed throughout the majority of 
the United States.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A firm seedbed is required.  Calliopsis germinates 
best on a clean tilled site that has been firmed with a 
roller or finishing harrow before planting.  Seed can 
also be planted into a closely mowed, chemically-
killed, or burned sod area with a light disking or 
harrowing that scratches the soil surface.  A layer of 
plant residue on the soil  surface can interfere with 
seed germination.  Broadcast or shallowly drill 1-2 
grams per 100 square feet (1 -2 lb/acre).  Seed should 
be placed close to the soil surface.  Cultipacking after 
planting will ensure good seed to soil contact.  Seed 
will germinate soon after planting and remain as a 
rosette throughout the winter. 
© Jim Stasz 
MD National Capital Park & 
Planning Commission 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Management  
Plant growth and seed production are greatly 
improved by fertilization.  Apply fertilizer according 
to soil test recommendations.  If not available, a rate 
of 3.5-5.5 oz per 100 square feet (100-150 lb/acre) of 
13-13-13 should be applied in the spring before 
flowering.  Stands will res eed prolifically for several 
years, but will gradually decline without soil 
disturbance.  Every two to three years, the site should 
be disked to control perennial weeds and promote 
calliopsis germination.  If necessary, plants can be 
mowed in the spring before stem elongation begins.  
Stands that are not disked should be mowed in late 
summer, and a late fall mowing is also 
recommended. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Several sources consider this species to have invasive 
qualities.  Please consult the Plant Profile for this 
species.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, MS 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 060824 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.