Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWEETFERN 
Comptonia peregrina  L. 
Plant Symbol = COPE80  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Comptonia peregrina (L.) Coult. var. aspleniifolia 
(L.) Fern.,  Myrica aspleniifolia  L., Myrica peregrina  
(L.) Kuntze 
 
Uses 
This nitrogen-fixing plant is used primarily as a 
ground cover for erosion control and species diversity 
in sterile, sandy soils.  The abundant underground 
stems, or rhizomes, makes it especially suited to 
stabilizing steep, sandy banks.  It makes a pleasing 
companion plant in a coastal setting with the low 
growing junipers, rugosa  rose, bayberry, and beach 
plum. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).  It 
is considered threatened or endangered in several 
states. 
 
Description 
Bayberry Family (Myricaceae).  Sweetfern is a low, 
loosely branched, mat-forming shrub, 1-3 feet high, 
with sweet-scented, fern lik e leaves.  The alternate,  hair-covered leaves are 2-5 inches long and taper at 
each end.  There is an 
occasional compound leaf 
form variation.  The leaf bl ades are deeply cut into 20 
or more rounded lobes, dark green above, paler and 
hair-covered beneath and on the midrib and margin 
above.  Resinous glands cover both surfaces.  Leaves 
are very aromatic when crushed.  The flowers are 
small, inconspicuous catkins that bloom during April 
and May.  Flowers of one or both sexes can be 
produced on an individual plant.  The male catkins 
are rather long and cylindri cal; the female catkins are 
short and rounded.  In winter, the male catkins are 
prominent and erect.  The female catkins become 
bur-like at maturity and are  1/2 inch in diameter.  The 
seeds are nutlets that mature in August and become 
available in September and October.  About four 
seeds are found in  each fruit.  Each seed is about 1/4 
inch long, olive brown in color, and shiny. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sweetfern does especially well in open, sterile, sandy 
soils of woodlands, clearings, and pastures.  It prefers 
acidic soils over limestone soils. USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Sweetfern is distributed throughout northeastern  
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Some nurseries offer wild collected clumps, but it is 
best established using nursery-grown, containerized 
plants.  Losses of plants from the wild can be 
considerable.  One or two year old liner material is 
also acceptable. 
 
Management 
Little management is needed if planted in an 
appropriate site.  Sweetfern does not tolerate shading 
well, so removing competing vegetation is important. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known varieties of sweet fern exist.  Plants are 
available at nurseries in th e Northeast that specialize 
in coastal plants. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program

Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.