Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
BITTERSWEET 
Celastrus scandens L. 
Plant Symbol = CESC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
The climbing growth habit of American bittersweet 
makes it a valuable ornamental plant both outdoors 
and indoors. It is easily trained to climb walls, 
trellises, and fences. When added to existing shrub 
plantings, this twining vine produces excellent 
wildlife cover and aids in erosion control as well. The 
berry-like fruit provides winter food for wildlife 
species such as grouse, pheasant, quail, rabbit, and 
squirrel. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bittersweet is a twining vine that, if permitted to 
ascend trees or poles, may  reach heights of 20 feet, 
although it generally grows close to the ground. The 
leaves are alternate, dark  green, oval shaped, and turn 
yellow before dropping in the fall.  It is often 
confused with oriental b ittersweet, which is a weedy 
pest.  Oriental bittersweet ( Celastrus orbiculata) can 
reach much greater heights than American  bittersweet and produces much more seed.  As a 
result it tends to dominate woody vegetation and 
should not be used
.  American bittersweet has been 
agressive on some sites, and should be used with 
caution.  Oriental bittersweet is distinguished from 
American bittersweet by leaves that are rounded at 
the tip, whereas those of  the native species are 
pointed.  Also, fruit of oriental bittersweet are few 
per stalk and close to the stem.  American has several 
seeds on stalks that exte nd out beyond the leaves. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
American bittersweet tolerates diverse climatic 
conditions, but prefers a neutral soil and a sunny 
location. It occurs throughout the Northeast and Mid-
Atlantic region. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Two year old nursery seedlings should be used for 
planting banks and other large areas. Container-
grown plants are ideal for ornamental plantings. 
Clear at least a one square  foot area around the newly 
established plant to reduce competition. 
USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Management  
Because of its aggressive na ture, do not plant in areas 
where it may easily climb favorable trees.  
Bittersweet can be controlled by allowing deer and 
rabbits to browse the plants (this only works for 
young plants) and by herbicides and hand removal. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program  Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.