Plant Fact Sheet
MAY HAWTHORN  
Crataegus aestivalis Walt.  
Plant Symbol = CRAE 
 
 
Contributed by: East Texas Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternative Names  
Eastern May  Hawthorn, Apple May Hawthorn,  Summer 
Haw and Mayhaw  
Uses  
  Food:  
  The fruit is frequently used for preserves and jellies and 
can also be dried for later use.  
 
Erosion control :  
Can be used in shelter belts  and  stream - bank 
stabilization . 
 
Wildlife:   
  Provides nesting sites and cover for small birds.  Birds 
and small mammals eat the fruit. Whitetail deer browse 
the leaves  and  young stems.  
 
Timber :  
  The wood  is h eavy and strong but is  too small for 
commercial use.  Eastern May Hawthorn wood i s used 
locall y f or tool  handl es and mallets.  
 
Medicinal:   
  It  h as been used as a tea in herbal folk medicine  for 
treatment  of high blood pressure.   
 
Landscaping :  
  In recent years this plant  has become popular  with  home 
and commercial landscapers  due to the plant’s showy  white flowers
, attractive foliage  and  ability to adapt  to a 
variety of sites.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  and Adaptation 
  Description:  A member of the Rosaceae  family, the May 
Hawthorn is a deciduous,  small, round - topped tree 
growing to 3 0 feet in height.  Leaves are  dark green, 
simple,  and are alternate ly arranged.. Flowers are white 
and produced either singly or in clusters  of 2 or 3. The 
fruit is a fleshy , red pome born e in May, contributing to 
the common name “Mayhaw” . Twigs are brown to gray 
and spiny.  
   
 
May Hawthorn  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLAN TS 
Database.  
Adaptation:  While preferring full sun , Eastern  May 
Hawthorn will tolerate partial  shade. Once established it 
will  also  tolerate wet soils and drought conditions . It will 
grow in a variety of soil types , but preferring well 
drained, slightly acid soils.  Their tolerances to air 
pollution make  it a good choice for urban sites.  
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.

Establishment 
Under natural conditions Eastern May Hawthorn seed s do 
not germinate until overwintered. Successful  seed 
germination  requires acid stratification followed by warm 
stratification and chilling.  Propagation can also be done 
using softwood stem cuttings rooted  under an intermittent 
mist. The use of a rooting hormone will increase rooting 
success.    
 
Propagation from hardwood and root cuttings is also 
possible.  Grafting to  English Hawthorn    (Crataegus 
oxyacantha  or Single Seeded Hawthorn ( Crataegus 
monogyna    rootstock  is possible but s hould be done in 
winter or early spring.  
Management  
Annual pruning in the winter to open up the tree canopy 
will be beneficial in increasing fruit production.  In 
addition weak branches and sucker stems should be 
removed at this t ime. 
Pests and Potential Problems  
May Hawthorn is susceptible to some of the same insects 
and diseases that attack other pome fruits. These include 
insects such as the  hawthorn  lace  bug  and  roundheaded 
a ppletree  borer along with l eafminers and mealy  bugs . 
Diseases affecting May Hawthorn include fire -blight, 
ced ar-hawthorn  blight, cedar quince blight and fruit rot.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Commercially available Crataegus  aestivalis  include : 
Lori  -80% harvest at one ti me and Linsey also with 
concentrated ripening.   
Prepared By   
Michael Woody Biological Science Technician, East 
Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogodoches Texas  
Citation  
Woody , Michael  L . 2012. Plant  fact sheet for  May 
Hawthorn  ( Crataegus  aestivalis).  USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant 
Material Center . Nacogdoches , Texas,  75964.  
Published   January 2012 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>   
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER