Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAT SANDBUR 
Cenchrus spinifex  Cav. 
Plant Symbol = CESP4  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Warning: A noxious weed and invasive in some 
states and the burs are injurious to livestock. 
 
Alternate Names 
Cenchrus pauciflorus, coastal sandbur, Cenchrus 
incertus  
 
Uses  
Before seedheads form, cattle and sheep graze mat 
sandbur.  Forage is of fair quality, but is seldom of 
significant quantity. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.  In 2005, it was considered 
threatened in two states, a noxious weed in two 
states, and invasive by several sources. 
 
Weediness  This plant may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Serv ice office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.   Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  
Mat sandbur is a native, 
warm season annual and at times, short-lived 
perennial.  The height ranges 8 to 24 inches.  The leaf 
blade is 2 to 6 inches long and flat.  The leaf sheath is 
flattened and hairy along marg ins.  The stem is erect 
or grows along ground.  The seedhead is a raceme 
with 6 to 20 spiny burs covered with fine hair, each 
enclosing 2 spikelets, and often topped by leaves. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass is usually managed to reduce or eliminate 
it from the plant community.  Heavy grazing of mat 
sandbur in the spring when it is palatable and 
deferred grazing until fall  allow more favorable 
associated deep-rooted pere nnial grasses to crowd it 
out.  Because the burs are injurious to livestock and 
greatly reduce the value of wool and mohair, 
livestock should be removed from ranges before bur 
forms.   
 
Establishment 
Mat sandbur growth starts in early spring.  The 
seedheads first appear about July.  Plants may 
become semi-dormant when moisture is scarce and 
green up and produce seed again after a rain.  It 
grows in tufts or dense mats and is best adapted to 
dry sandy and sandy loam soils, but grows on  soils of 
heavier texture.  This grass is particularly well 
adapted to waste places, old fields, and sandy flood 
plains.  It is an invader.   Its presence indicates a 
severely overused range. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.