Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWAMP DOGWOOD 
Cornus foemina P. Mill. 
Plant Symbol = COFO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Fruits are eaten by several species of birds 
including quail, catbirds, mockingbirds, robins, and 
brown thrashers. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Excellent landscape 
tree for its very attractive form and profuse white 
flowers.  Frequently used for massing or naturalizing, 
screen and border. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Cornus foemina  P. Mill., swamp dogwood, is 
primarily found along the coastal plain from eastern 
Virginia to central Florid a, west to Louisiana and 
north to southeastern Missouri.  It is a deciduous 
small tree to large shrub, growing to 15 ft in height, 
with multiple trunks, 4 inches in diameter.  Its bark is 
thick and smooth, frequently furrowed with shallow 
ridges exposing gray inner bark. The plant’s leaves 
are opposite and oval-shaped, with smooth margins.  
Flowers are creamy white, loose, and small; they 
occur in flat topped clusters without showy bracts.  
Fruits are small, open clus ters of bluish to purple 
drupes (fleshy, one-seeded fruits).  
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA, NRCS 1995 
Midwestern Wetland Flora  @ USDA NRCS
 PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Swamp dogwood generally grows in swampy, low 
wetland habitats, barrier islands, and along streams, 
riverbanks, marshes and creeks.  It is found growing 
along ditches on the second  road back from the ocean 
at Emerald Isle and found to exhibit moderate salt 
tolerance. 
 
Swamp dogwood is distributed throughout most of 
the southeast United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Like most dogwoods, this species can be grown 
easily from seeds collected from mature, native trees 
and from softwood cuttings.  Seeds at maturity must 
be either planted immediately or prechilled.  Seeds 
sown in nursery beds should be covered with ¼ to ½ 
inch of soil and mulched during the winter. 
 
Management  
Plant in moist soils in full sun to partial shade as it is 
tolerant to wet and/or low fertility soils. It requires 
little maintenance in naturalized settings. When used 
for massing, pruning to within a few inches of the 
ground every few years promotes fullness. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant has no serious insects and diseases except 
occasional infestation by scale insects and leaf spot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None recommended.  Plants are not readily available 
from nurseries.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program   Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.