Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MULTIFLOWER FALSE RHODES  GRASS  
Chloris pluriflora  (Fourn.) 
W.D. Clayton  
Plant Symbol = CHPL2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternate Name 
Trichloris pluriflora, four-flower trichloris 
 
Uses 
Multiflower false Rhodes grass is grazed by livestock 
and occasionally by deer.  Birds eat the seed.   
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  The multiflower false 
rhodes grass is a native, warm-seasoned, erect, tufted 
perennial.  The height ranges from 1 to 2 feet.  The 
leaf blade is wide and flat  with a strong midrib.  The 
leaf sheath is open and shor ter than the internodes.  
The ligule has a few hairs.   The stem has branches at 
the lower nodes with enlarged nodes.  The seedhead 
has several spikes, 2 to 3 inches long.  It is looser and 
less feathery than two-flower trichloris ( Chloris 
crinita ).  The spiklets are 3 to 5 flowered, usually 4-
flowered.   
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass decreases on  ranges grazed throughout the 
summer.  Periodic grazing deferments of 60 to 70 
days throughout the year, especially during spring 
and summer, are needed to  maintain plant vigor.   
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the late spring and it grows 
throughout summer, if moisture is available.  It 
produces seed several times in one season and has a 
shallow, fibrous root system .  The high ratio of seed 
stalks to leaves and the unpalatable stems help 
protect the plant from clos e grazing.  Growing points 
are 3 to 4 inches above ground.  It is best adapted to 
sandy loam soils but grows on heavier soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.