Plant Fact Sheet
KANSAS HAWTHORN 
Crataegus coccinioides Ashe 
Plant Symbol = CRCO2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
   
Figures  1 and 2: Example of fruit and leaf of Kansas hawthorn.  
Photographer Bob Walker pbase.com web site  
Alternate Names: red hawthorn  and Eggert thorn  
 
Uses   
Erosion Control : Planted to stabilize a variety of sites due 
to its tolerance of various soils and climatic conditions. 
Used in shelterbelts and to stabilize areas from wind and 
water erosion.   
 
Timber : Since it is a rather  small tree the lumber is of no 
commercial value  except to fashion tool handles and other 
small items.   
 
Aesthetics : Produces an excellent small specimen tree in a 
landscape or provides shrub border or screen along a 
property line. It is tolerant of atmospheric pollutants and 
performs admirably in urban  settings.  Foliage turns red to 
bright orange in the fall. Bright red round fruit is also an 
attractive attribute of this plant.  
 
Wildlife: It provides excellent cover and protected nesting 
sites for small birds. In general, the fruits of this species 
are eaten by birds, rodents  and other small mammals. 
White -tail deer browse young twigs and foliage.   
 
Status  
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web si te and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  Description
 and Adaptation 
 
 
Kansas hawthorn distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
General: A spiny large shrub or small tree that is reported 
to be up to 20 feet tall. However, a specimen tree planted 
in the Brooklyn Botanical Garden in 1912 is officially 
recognized as the biggest tree of  its species on record in 
the state of New York. The tre e topped out at 31 feet tall 
and has  a  36 inch basal circumference. Leaves are 
alternate, simple, broadly ovate 2.4 to 3.0 inches long and 
2.0 to 2.4 inches wide, pubescent when young, turning 
glab rous with age, dull dark green above, paler beneath, 
base v ariable, apex acute, margin serrate or doubly serrate 
with several shallow lobes above the middle. The bark is 
dark brown and scaly. The  twigs are lustrous brown, 
glab rous with many spines up to two inches long. Flowers 
are white and produced in flat toppe d inflorescences, 
termed  corymbs , of 5 to 7 flowers. The flowers have five 
petals and styles and 20 stamens with rose colored 
anthers. Fruits are pomes that are nearly globe shaped and 
bright red  at maturity,  each contain s five seeds  or nutlets .    
 
Adaptation:  Kansas hawthorn is best adapted to dry 
uplands on li mestone hillsides. While it can  succeed in 
partial shade and various soil types it prefers full sun and 
well drained loamy soils.   
 
Distribution:  Kansas hawthorn grows from southern 
Illinois and Missouri to eastern Kansas and  Oklahoma and 
in to  Arkansas.  This species is u ncommon in Oklahoma.  
 
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.