Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE MISTFLOWER 
Conoclinium coelestinum (L.) 
DC. 
Plant Symbol = COCO13  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Eupatorium coelestinum L., wild ageratum 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Sunflower Family (Asteraceae).  Mistflower is an 
erect (to 3 feet), rhizomatous perennial, often forming 
colonies.  It is a U.S. nativ e.  The opposite leaves are 
oval-shaped, hairy, and have toothed edges.  The 
small flower heads are clustered at the top of the 
plant.  They are powder blue to violet and fluffy in 
appearance, similar to Ageratums used as garden 
bedding plants.  The tiny seeds are black, elongated, 
and have long white hairs attached to one end. 
© William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Mistflower is adapted to most soil types, but is 
especially suited to heavy textured and to highly 
organic soils.  Natural stands are found on moist to 
wet sites, such as low woods, wet meadows, and 
ditches.  It grows best in full sun, but will tolerate 
light shade. 
 
Blue mistflower is distributed throughout the eastern 
and midwest United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A clean, firm seedbed is essential.  The site should be 
treated with a herbicide to control existing 
vegetation, tilled, cultipacked once or twice, and 
allowed to settle thoroughly before sowing.  
Broadcast ½ to ¾ gram seed per 100 square feet (½ 
to ¾ lb/acre).  Bulk sowing rates usually need to be 
increased to allow for low purity values.  The seed 
can be mixed with sand or rice hulls to increase 
volume so that it will be easier to spread uniformly 
over the planting site.  Seed must remain on the soil 
surface because they are easily smothered when 
buried in the soil.  The seed will not germinate until 
the following spring, but will benefit from the cool, 
moist winter environment.

Management 
Apply fertilizer according to soil test 
recommendations.  If not available, a rate of 3½ to 
5½ oz/100 square feet (100 to 150 lbs/acre) of 13-13-
13 should be applied after the seedlings are 
established and annually thereafter.  Stands can be 
mowed in the spring and early summer.  Later 
mowings should be delayed until the plants have set 
seed. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, MS
 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.