Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
HACKBERRY  
Celtis occidentalis  L. 
Plant Symbol = CEOC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Wildlife: Birds use the mature trees for nesting sites 
and feed on the fruit.  Young stands also provide 
shelter for game birds, rabbits, and deer. 
 
Erosion control : Hackberry has been used as an 
ornamental tree and in multi-row windbreaks.  
 
Livestock : Grazing understory species can be helpful 
in reducing weed competition, however if young 
seedlings are grazed tree defects could occur 
resulting in low quality timber. 
 
Timber : Hackberry has limited value in the 
manufacture of paneling and furniture. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Celtis occidentalis  L., common hackberry, varies in 
size from a shrub to a tree in  excess of 100 feet tall.  
It is widespread in the United States east of the 
Rocky Mountains.  Hackberry grows best on moist 
alluvial soils, and occurs only as scattered trees 
mixed with other hardwoods.  The leaves are 2 ½ to 4 
inches long, and 1 ½ inches wide, oval to lance-
shaped, and resemble those of the elm but are more 
sharply pointed.  The bark is grayish brown, with 
characteristic corky warts or ridges becoming 
somewhat scaly.  The fruit is 1/4 inch to 1/3 inch in 
diameter, oval to somewhat round, dark red or purple, 
ripening in September and October, but remaining on 
the tree for several months. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Hackberry is commonly found on rich, moist sites 
along stream banks or on flood plains, but will 
perform well under more adverse conditions.  It 
tolerates alkaline or acid soil conditions, full sun, and 
wind.  It grows in winter hardiness zones 2 through 8.  
New growth is subject to spring frost injury.  
Common hackberry requires at  least 14 inches annual 
precipitation. 
 © William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Hackberry is distributed throughout the eastern and 
midwestern United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Bareroot seedlings of hackberry grown under 
standard nursery practices exhibit a degree of 
dormancy.  Planting material should be spring lifted 
followed by sweat treatments for one week at 60  °F, 
just prior to planting.  The sweating procedure 
involves placing the seedlings in moist sand or peat 
moss and covering with plastic.  Conservation grade 
stock can be either 1 or 2 years old and 12 to 24 
inches tall, with a caliper of 3/16 to 1/2 inch. 
 
Management  
Grazing should be controlled during establishment.  
Without protective netting, deer and rabbits will

severely damage the young seedlings.  Weed 
competition should be controlled by grazing or by 
using approved herbicides. 
 
Mature seeds can be hand-picked in September and 
October.  Hackberry seeds exhibit dormancy which 
can be overcome with stratification in moist sand at 
41 °F for 90 days or by fall planting.  Fermenting the 
fruit for 3 days and de-pulping before stratification 
improves germination. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The most common diseases found on hackberry are 
nipple gall and witches broom gall.  These diseases 
are not fatal, but do aff ect the appearance and vigor 
of the plant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings are available at most hardwood nurseries.  
‘Oahe’ (South Dakota) is recommended for use as 
farmstead, field and wildlife windbreaks in the 
Northern Great Plains.  ‘Prairie Pride’ was selected in 
Illinois and is not known to develop witches broom 
gall. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.