Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TUMBLE WINDMILL GRASS 
Chloris verticillata Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = CHVE2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternate Name 
Tumble finger grass, windmill grass, tumble 
windmillgrass. 
 
Uses  
All livestock graze tumble  windmill grass in spring 
and early summer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Tumble windmill grass is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 4 to 12 inches.  The leaf blade is 
crowded at the base, 3 to 7 inches long, tightly 
folded, abruptly pointed, and light green.  The leaf 
sheath is shorter than the internodes, compressed, and 
flattened.  The stem is erect or decumbent and 
sometimes roots at the lower nodes.  The seedhead 
has 7 to 10 slender spikes, 2 to 6 inches long, 
arranged in 1 to 3 whorls, finally widely spreading, 
and each spikelet is tipped with a short awn.  
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
If grazed during dormancy,  supplement with protein 
and mineral concentrates.  Its quality is moderately 
high, but production is low.  It is not a choice forage 
plant, but is important as an indicator of fair to poor 
range condition.  This grass is seldom, if ever, a key 
management species.  When it is, it responds to 
proper grazing use and deferred grazing periods of 50 
to 60 days. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in spring and it becomes dormant in the 
fall.  It may produce two seed crops during the 
growing season, the first from May to July and then 
the second in September.  The seedheads break off at 
maturity and tumble in the wind.  It is adapted to a 
wide range of soils, though it is best adapted to acid 
to neutral medium- and coarse-textured soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.