Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAYHAW 
Crataegus opaca Hook. & Arn.
Plant Symbol = CROP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 USDA Forest Service Collection Hunt Botanical Institute 
Alternate Names 
riverflat hawthorn 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Mayhaw’s fruits is eaten by wildlife and the 
plant provides cover. 
 
Food: The large, edible fruit is very popular for 
jellies, preserves and syrups.  Other products made 
from mayhaw are juices, candies, pastries and wine. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Crataegus opaca Hook. & Arn., mayhaw, grows 
from southwest Alabama west to southern Arkansas 
and east Texas.  It is a small tree or a large shrub with 
a relatively large trunk that grows up to 30 feet tall 
and 8 inches in diameter, with narrow, rounded 
crown.  Leaves are oval, pointed, narrowing toward 
the stem, finely toothed from the middle to the tip  (sometimes slightly lobed), dull green and downy 
beneath.  Mayhaw’s bark is dark reddish-brown, 
fissured and divided into dark brown scales.  Flowers 
are 1 inch wide, white and borne in clusters of 2 or 3.  
Fruits are cranberry-like, 
small, round, yellow to 
bright red, fragrant and juicy. 
 
Adaptation 
Mayhaw grows best in pure stands in moist, well-
drained soils of riverbanks and borders of swamps.  
However, they may be found growing naturally in 
low, wet areas of North Florida.  A fairly acid soil is 
necessary for successful growth. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Although mayhaw is tolerant of wet, very acid soils, 
better growth is achieved when it is planted on well 
drained, slightly acid soils.  Mayhaw trees are long-
lived and may have a 30 f eet canopy diameter after 
20 years.  Because of the growth potential, 
recommended tree spacing for a permanent orchard is 
15 to 20 feet in the row and 18 to 20 feet between 
rows (giving 109 to 161 trees per acre).  
 
Management  
Train trees to a single trunk at the base for easier 
operation of equipment under the trees.  Prune plants 
each year to open up the canopy for more light 
needed by most cultivars.  Central leader and 
modified central leader tr aining systems used on 
apples can be used on mayhaws. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Although there are no serious insect pest that feed on 
the young leaves and twigs, mayhaw is susceptible to 
diseases including brown rot caused by  Monilinia sp., 
cedar-quince rust caused by  Gymnosporangium 
clavipes, and fireblight caused by  Erwinia 
amylovora . 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Big Red,’ ‘Red & Yellow,’ ‘Heavy Mason’s Super 
Berry,’ ‘T.O. Super Berry,’ ‘Higway Super Berry,’ 
‘Super Spur.’  Seeds and seedlings are commercially 
available at forest seed companies and nurseries.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln Moore, Forest Biologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, LA 
 
Edited: 18Dec2000 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.