Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HOODED 
WINDMILLGRASS  
Chloris cucullata Bisch. 
Plant Symbol = CHCU2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
hooded windmill grass  
 
Uses 
Hooded windmillgrass is grazed moderately by all 
livestock and the forage quality is fairly high.  The 
amount of forage produced is relatively low 
compared with that of taller growing associated 
grasses.  It provides fair-quality forage during the 
winter, but should be supplemented with a protein 
concentrate. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Hooded windmillgrass is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height is between 1 and 2 feet.  The leaf blade is 2 to 
6 inches long, folded to a sharp point, and bluish 
green in color.  The leaf sheath is mostly basal, 
shorter than internodes, and compressed or flattened.  
The seedhead is 7 to 12 purplish spikes 1 to 2 inches 
long, clustered at end of stem.  The spikes turn straw  yellow to brownish gray at maturity and the lemma of 
each spikelet has a short awn. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Because of low productivity, this grass is seldom a 
key management species.  When it is, no more than 
50 percent of the current year's growth by weight 
should be removed by grazing. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov
 
Establishment 
New growth starts in early spring and stays green 
until fall.  It may produce several seed crops during 
the growing season, the earliest one about June.  
Sometimes this plant has a short rhizome.  The 
windmill appearance of the seedhead makes 
identification easy when flowering.  It is adapted to 
acid to neutral medium- and coarse-textured soils.  It 
does not do well on calcareous or clay soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.