Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HALFSHRUB 
SUNDROP  
Calylophus serrulatus  (Nutt.) 
Raven  
Plant symbol = CASE12  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
Alternate Names 
Yellow evening primrose, buttercup, and yellow 
sundrop 
 
Uses 
Halfshrub sundrop is very palatable for livestock and 
deer in range and pasture land. It is an attractive 
wildflower in landscape uses in rock gardens and 
meadows. Halfshrub sundrop can grow in gardens in 
part shade and full sun.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Evening Primrose family (Onagraceae). Halfshrub 
sundrop is a native, perennial, warm-season 
subshrub, shrub forb/herb which is more upright, 
bushy, and with numerous branches. Halfshrub 
sundrop grows into a large clump and up to 18 inches 
in height. The narrow leaves  are 3 ½ inches long and 
alternate from each other with toothed leaf margins.  
Each small yellow flower has four petals up to 1 ½ 
inches across which includ es the pistils (female  organs) and eight prominent stamens (the male 
organs). The flowers tube is usually no more than 1 
inch long. The flowers open in early morning and 
close in late afternoon and blooms from March to 
November. The old flowers can turn orange or pink 
and the plant leaves may stay green in mild winters. 
The mature fruit is a cylindrical capsule shape with 
small seeds enclosed.  
  
Adaptation 
Halfshrub sundrop occurs throughout Texas except in 
East Texas Piney woods and infrequent in open 
sandy or rocky places in the Panhandle and north-
central Texas. Its range ex
tends from Saskatchewan, 
Montana, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oklahoma, 
Colorado, New Mexico, easte rn-central Arizona, and 
south to Mexico. Halfshrub sundrop grows in clay 
and sandy loams, caliche, limestone, gypsum, and in 
well drain-soils. Established plants are extremely 
drought and heat tolerant. 
 Lynn Pace Texas Parks and Wildlife 
 
Establishment 
Halfshrub sundrop seed should be seeded early in the 
spring. Seed either by broadcasting or use grass drill 
equipped with a slick seed box. Mix seed with some 
type of carrier such as sa nd, if needed for proper 
distribution. Seeding at a depth of ¼ inch in a well 
prepared seedbed is sufficient.  Broadcasting the 
seeds on uneven soil surface in pastures or 
rangelands can work. The halfshrub sundrop seeds 
could be included in a grass mix for pastures or 
rangelands.  
 
Management  
Halfshrub sundrop needs to be properly managed, 
because it can be eliminated by livestock or deer. If 
the fruit capsule is allowed to mature and seed fall to 
the ground, it can germinate in ten to fifteen days 
with proper conditions, such as moisture and warm 
soils. Harvesting seed with a combine can be difficult 
due to indeterminate inflorescence.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No serious pests or diseases were observed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no cultiv ars of halfshrub sundrop 
in commercial production.   
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Rudy G. Esquivel , USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Knox City, Texas

Edited: 23mar2006 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.