Plant Fact Sheet     
 
GIANT SANDREED 
Calamovilfa gigantea (Nutt.) 
Scribn. & Merr. 
Plant symbol = CAGI3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Name 
Big sandreed, big sandreedgrass, big sandreed grass 
 
Uses  
Giant sandreed is valuable for controlling erosion on 
deep sands subject to severe wind erosion.  It cures 
well on stem, thus providing good winter forage for 
cattle.  It is sometimes cut for hay.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Giant sandreed is a native, 
warm-season robust rhizomatous perennial.  The 
height ranges between 4 to 6 feet.  The leaf blade is 
1/4 to 1/2 inch wide at the base and rolls inward 
tapering to a long tip.  The leaf sheath is mostly 
basal, overlapping, and smooth.  The seedhead is an 
open panicle 1 to 2 feet long with the lemma and 
palea hairy on the back.   
 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
When it grows on sites large enough to be managed 
as separate units, it is often reserved for winter use.  
If grazed during the summer, no more than 50 
percent of current year's growth by weight should be 
removed.  This maintains a vigorous healthy stand 
and leaves adequate mulch to control wind erosion.   
 
Establishment 
Growth starts several days before that of other 
warm-season grasses in the same locality.  It 
reproduces from seed and from rhizomes.  It grows in 
large colonies and if prop erly managed dominates the 
site.  It is adapted to deep sands and sand dunes.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.