Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
HORNBEAM  
Carpinus caroliniana  Walt. 
Plant Symbol = CACA18  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
ironwood, musclewood, muscle beech, blue beech, 
water beech 
 
Uses 
The wood of Carpinus is of minor economic 
importance because of the small size of the trees.  It 
is whitish, extremely hard, and heavy and has been 
used for making mallet heads, tool handles, levers, 
and other small, hard, wooden objects.  The wood is 
not subject to cracking or splitting and was used by 
American pioneers fo r bowls and dishes. 
 
American hornbeam is planted in landscapes and 
naturalized areas.  It prefers deep, fertile, moist, 
acidic soil and grows best in partial shade, but will 
grow in full sun.  Its chief liabilities in cultivation are 
a relatively slow growth rate and difficulty in 
transplantation.  It is not drought-tolerant.  
 
Seeds, buds, or catkins are eaten by a number of 
songbirds, ruffed grouse, ring-necked pheasants, 
bobwhite, turkey, fox, and gray squirrels.  
Cottontails, beaver, and white-tailed deer eat the 
leaves, twigs, and larger stems.  American hornbeam 
is heavily used by beaver, because it is readily 
available in typical beaver habitat. 
 ©  William S. Justice Dept. of Botany, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
American hornbeam is a na tive, large shrub or small 
tree with a wide-spreading , flat-topped crown, the 
stems are slender, dark brown, hairy; bark gray, thin, 
usually smooth, with smooth, longitudinal fluting 
(resembling a flexed muscle).  Its leaves are 
deciduous, arranged alternately along stems, egg-
shaped to elliptical in outline, ¾ to 4¾ inches long, 
with doubly-serrate edges.  They are glabrous above, 
slightly to moderately pubescent beneath, especially 
on major veins, with or without conspicuous dark 
glands.  During the growin g season, leaves are dark 
green but turn yellow to orange or red in the fall.  The 
flowers are unisexual, in catkins.  The male catkins 
are 1 to 2½ inches long, female catkins are somewhat 
shorter.  Both types occur on the same plant).  Fruits 
are nutlets surrounded by a 3-winged, narrow, leaf-
like bract.  Numerous nutlets are held together in 
pendulous chain-like clusters, changing from green to 
brown in September-October.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
American hornbeam occu rs primarily as an 
understory species in bottomland mixed-hardwood 
forests.  Best sites are in the transition between mesic 
and wet areas -- near lakes and swamps, on well-
drained terraces of rivers, terraces or steep slopes of 
minor streams with some gradient, coves, ravine 
bottoms, and rises in lowlands.  These sites generally 
have abundant soil moisture but sufficient drainage to 
prevent saturation and poor aeration during the

growing season, although trees may also grow on 
sites flooded for up to about 20% of the growing 
season. 
 
American hornbeam is distributed throughout most of 
the eastern United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Establishment 
American hornbeam is planted in landscapes and 
naturalized areas.  It prefers deep, fertile, moist, 
acidic soil and grows best in partial shade, but will 
grow in full sun.  Its chief liabilities in cultivation are 
a relatively slow growth rate and difficulty in 
transplantation.  It is not drought-tolerant. 
 
American hornbeam begins to produce seeds at about 
15 years and peaks at 25  to 50 years, probably 
ceasing at about 75 years.   Large seed crops are 
produced at 3-5-year inte rvals.  Seeds are mainly 
dispersed by birds.  Seed establishment will occur on 
leaf litter in deep shade.  Flooding, drought, damping 
off, proximity to an adult of the same species, and 
herbivory are important causes of mortality for first-
year seedlings.  Reproduc tion also may occur by 
sprouts from the root crown and by root sprouts, 
although the latter apparently is not common.   
 
American hornbeam is best suited to establishment in 
bottomlands that have already been stabilized by 
pioneer species.  It is shade-tolerant and persists in 
the understory of mature plant communities.  Shade 
tolerance declines with ag e and American hornbeam 
is likely to become dominant, with other subcanopy 
species, at some sites after overstory removal.  
 
Management  
Because of its thin bark, American hornbeam is 
probably either top-killed or completely killed by 
most fires.  It occurs mostly in communities that 
rarely experience fire.  It sprouts after top-kill by fire 
and repeated fires at a cl osely spaced interval will 
quickly eliminate the species.  The wood rots very 
rapidly and dying trees usually disappear naturally 
within a decade. 
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Rebecca Briggs 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 13Nov2003 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.