Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FALSE RHODES GRASS  
Chloris crinita  Lag. 
Plant Symbol = CHCR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Chloris mendocina Phil., Trichloris crinita  (Lag.) 
Parodi,  Trichloris mendocina  (Phil.) Kurtz, two 
flower trichloris 
 
Uses 
False Rhodes grass should be used primarily as a 
component in seed mixtures for range restoration.  It 
has potential for use in pasture plantings, filterstrips, 
erosion control plantings, and landscaping. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
False Rhodes grass ( Chloris crinita) is a native, 
warm-season perennial bunchgrass.  It grows 1 to 2 
feet tall, with leaves 3 to 8 inches long.  The upper 
sides of the leaf blades are hairy near the base.  Plants 
produce dense, feathery, 1- to 2-inch long seedheads 
that turn from green to light brown at maturity.   
 
USDA NRCS Kika de la Gar za Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
Adaptation and Distribution 
False Rhodes grass grows best on sandy to sandy 
loam soils, and it will tolerate soils that are weakly 
saline.  Its natural range is south of San Antonio, 
Texas in the western two-thirds of the Rio Grande 
Plain of Texas on west to Arizona. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
or where there are few cool-season weeds, false 
Rhodes grass can be planted in the fall.  Establish a 
clean, weed-free seedbed by either tillage or 
herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site should be firm 
and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
False Rhodes grass is best seeded using a native-
grass drill with picker wheels to ensure a good 
planting of the fluffy seed.  Broadcast seeding may 
be used in areas not easily planted with a drill, but 
some type of additional coverage will be beneficial to 
ensure good seed to soil contact. 
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is 
better to plant too shallow than too deep.  A seeding 
rate of 1 pound of pure live seed (PLS) per acre is 
recommended.  In planting mixtures reduce the rate 
according to the percent of false Rhodes grass in the 
mixture.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be 
applied until the stand is established.  If 1 to 2 plants 
per square foot are present than the planting has been 
successful.

Management 
False Rhodes grass should not be grazed the first 
year.  After a stand is established, either continuous 
or rotational grazing can be used.  It is recommended 
that a minimum 6-inch stubble height be maintained 
under continuous grazing.  For rotational grazing, 
forage height should be utilized between 4 to 10 
inches. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Kinney Germplasm (Brackettville, Kinney County, 
Texas) false Rhodes grass was released by the Kika 
de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 1999.  It was 
selected for its survivability, good seedling and plant 
vigor, forage production and drought tolerance.  It is 
predominantly adapted to cl ay loam, claypan prairie, 
and tight sandy loam range sites. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.