Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHOWY PARTRIDGE PEA 
Chamaecrista fasiculata  
(Michx.) Greene  
Plant Symbol = CHFA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program and the Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Cassia chamaecrista L., C. fasiculata  Michx., 
sleeping plant, prairie part ridge pea,  prairie senna, 
large-flowered sensitive-pea, dwarf cassia, partridge 
pea senna, locust weed, golden cassia 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : This plant provides food for birds. The seed 
is one of the major food items of northern bobwhite 
and quail because it remains in sound condition 
throughout the winter and early spring.     
Erosion control : The plant can be used along road 
banks and stream banks to control erosion.    Recreation and beautification
: The flowers of this 
plant can be used to beautify areas where wildflowers 
are planted.  Partridge p ea is commonly grown as an 
ornamental.  The bright yellow flowers make it a 
popular choice for use in native gardens.   
 
Livestock Caution : Although partridge pea foliage is 
nutritious, it can be poisonous and should be 
considered potentially dangerous to cattle.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Showy partridge pea  [ Chamaecrista fasciculata  
(Michx.) Greene] is an annu al erect legume plant that 
reaches a height of 1 to 3 feet. The leaves consist of 
10 to 16 pairs of small, narrow leaflets that are 
somewhat  delicate to the touch.  The showy yellow 
flowers, about 1 inch across, grow 2 to 4 together in 
clusters on the stem.  Flowers normally bloom July-
September.  The fruit is a straight, narrow pod 1½ to 
2½ inches long, which splits along 2 sutures as it 
dries; the pod sides spiral to expel the seeds some 
distance from the parent plant.  The highest seed 
production has been obtained under 30% shade, 
followed in decreasing order by 55% shade, full 
sunlight, and dense shade. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This plant grows on a wide range of soils that are 
slightly acid to moderately alkaline.  However, it 
grows best on moderately lime, well drained soils.  It 
is important to use an adapted strain to ensure that 
successful reseeding will occur. 
 
Showy partridge pea is distributed throughout the 
Midwestern and eastern United States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Established stands should be disked lightly in the 
spring to expose mineral soil on which the seed can 
germinate.  Drill seeds at 1/4 to 3/4 inch deep at a 
rate of 10 lbs/ac pure live seed.  If the seed is 
broadcast, increase seeding rate and cover seed by 
lightly disking or by cultipacking.  Planting should be 
conducted late winter (March) to late spring (May)

while soil moisture is still high.  Germination is 
improved by scarification of the seed prior to 
planting.  Seed should also be inoculated with the 
correct species of rhizobium before planting.  
Fertilizer should be applied at the recommended rate, 
based on soil samples, at time of planting. 
 
Management  
Partridge pea usually reseeds but will gradually 
disappear without regular maintenance.  Light 
disking to remove weeds, small brush, and old sod is 
necessary for healthy plantings or natural stands.  In 
areas where prescribed burning is permitted, 
controlled fire is an excellent method for controlling 
unwanted vegetation.  Fire or disking should be done 
in late winter for best results.  Weeds can also be 
controlled during the growing season by mowing 
over the top of the partridge pea. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No pests reported at this time.  Some sources report 
that this species has invasive qualities.  See the 
PLANTS Plant Profile for this species.   Although 
partridge pea foliage is nutritious, it can be 
poisonous and should be considered potentially 
dangerous to cattle.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Comanche’ (TX), ‘Riley’  (KS), and Lark Selection 
(AR), Comanche (cultivar) was released by the James 
E. ‘Bud’ Smith Plant Materials Center (PMC), Knox 
City, Texas, Riley (cultivar) was released by the 
Manhattan PMC, Manhattan, Kansas.  Lark Selection 
is a selected class release from the Jamie L. Whitten 
PMC, Coffeeville, Mississippi. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Plant Ma terials Program and John M. 
Row , Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Species Coordinator: 
Morris J. Houck , USDA NRCS, Alexandria, 
Louisiana 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK;  01jun06 jsp; 070820 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities  who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.