Plant Fact Sheet
SUGARBERRY 
Celtis laevigata Willd.  
Plant Symbol = CELA  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS P lant Materials Program  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock . USDA SCS, 1989. Midwest wetland flora: 
Field office illustrated guide to plant species . Midwest National 
Technical Center, Lincoln. Courtesy of 
USDA NRCS Wetland Science Institute
 
. 
Alternate Names  
Texas sugarberry, sugar hackberry, hackberry, palo 
blanco, southern hackberry, and lowland hackberry 
 
Uses  
Conservation:  Sugarberry is us ed in native landscaping 
and habitat restorations, and windbreaks.  
 
Ethnobotanic :  Sugarberry was used by a variety of 
Native American tr ibes.  The Houma used a concentrate 
made from the bark to treat sore throats and a decoction 
made from the bark and ground up shells to treat venereal 
disease.  The Comanche would beat the fruits of 
sugarberry to a pulp.  The pulp was then mixed with 
anima l fat, rolled into balls, and roasted in the fire for 
food.  The Acoma, Navajo, and Tewa all consumed the 
berries for food.  The Navajo boiled the leaves and 
branches to make dark brown and red dye for wool.  
  Wildlife
: Many species of songbirds including 
mockingbirds and robins eat the fruit and use the tree for 
nesting habitat.  It is a larval and nectar host for two 
butterflies: hackberry emperor ( Asterocampa celtis ) and 
American snout ( Libytheana carineta).  White -tailed deer 
browse the leaves and fruit . 
 
Other Uses:  Sugarberry is used for furniture, athletic 
goods, firewood, and plywood. It has limited use for 
flooring, creating, and for wood posts.  It is used as an 
ornamental and as a street tree in residential areas in the 
lower South  
 
Status  
Please  consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Sugarberry is a native tree that can grow up to 80 feet in 
height and up to 3 feet in diameter.  It is a short lived tree, 
probably living not more than 150 years.  It has a broad 
crown formed by spreading branches that are often 
drooped.  The bark is light gray in color and can be 
s mooth or covered with corky warts.  The branchlets are 
covered with short hairs at first and eventually they 
become smooth.  The leaves are alternated, simple, and 
slightly serrate.  The leaves are 2 -4 inches long and 1 to 2 
inches wide.  The lance- shaped leaves gradually taper to a 
point that is often curved.  They are pale green on both 
the upper and lower surfaces with conspicuous veins.  The 
flowers appear just before or with the leaves in the spring.  
The drupes or fruit have a thick skin and the surfa ce has a 
netlike pattern.  They will range in color from orange to 
reddish -brown.    
 
  Sugarberry is found growing in sandy loam or rocky soils 
along streams, in bottomlands, and in woodlands.    
 
Distribution : Sugarberry ranges south from southeastern 
Virginia to southern Florida, west to central Texas and 
northeastern Mexico, and north to western Oklahoma, 
southern Kansas, Missouri, southern Illinois, southern 
Indiana, and western Kentucky.  It is localized in 
Maryland, the Rio Grande Valley, and north eastern 
Mexico.  Its range overlaps the southern part of the range 
of common hackberry (C. occidentalis). Please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.