Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TOOTHACHE GRASS
Ctenium aromaticum (Walt.) 
Wood  
Plant Symbol = CTAR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
toothachegrass 
 
Uses  
Livestock grazes toothache grass most readily during 
spring and summer.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Toothache grass is a 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height is 
between 2 and 3 feet.  The leaf blade is 1/4 to 1/2 
inch wide, 6 to 10 inches long, pale green on bottom, 
and darker green on top.  The leaf sheath is mostly 
basal and shorter than internodes.  The ligule is small 
membrane with short hair.  The stem, when erect, has 
an enlarged base and contains a substance that 
deadens the tongue and gums when chewed.  The 
seedhead is a curved spike with spikelets sessile on 
one side of rachis, giving it a comb-like appearance. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass responds to same management as major 
associated grasses.  An abundance of this grass 
indicates good range condition on wet sites. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in early spring and again in October or 
November.  The seed ripens in late May or early 
June.  Occasionally, it grows in pure stands.  Each 
plant produces many seed stalks.  This grass produces 
an abundant seed crop the fi rst growing season after a 
burn.  It is adapted to wet, poorly drained, acid soils.  
Typical sites are flatwoods  with clayey subsoil and 
sloughs, which have standing or slow-moving water 
following heavy rains. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.