Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
REDOSIER 
DOGWOOD  
Cornus sericea  L. ssp. sericea 
Plant Symbol = COSES  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Cornus stolonifera Michx. 
 
Uses 
The primary use of this sp ecies is for streambank 
protection.  It can be planted alone or with other 
species, such as willows.  Other beneficial uses are 
for fish and wildlife habitat improvement, 
windbreaks, slope stabilization, borders, and as an 
ornamental. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Redosier dogwood is a large shrub, often 6-9 feet in 
height.  The growth habit is upright rounded, but 
where stems are in contact  with the ground, roots are 
formed.  This behavior creates thickets.  This 
dogwood has bright red stems in the fall, winter and 
early spring, which turn greenish in the summer.  It  also has white pith, dark green ovate leaves, white 
flowers, and whitish colored 
fruit.  There are 18,500 
seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Redosier dogwood is adapted from Ohio to Maine 
and south to northern Virginia and New Jersey.  It 
performs best in soils that are moist, somewhat 
poorly drained, moderately acidic to neutral, and in 
areas that have medium to coarse soils.  It is tolerant 
of some shade but not of droughty conditions. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Streambanks that have steep slopes must first be 
graded.  The slope should be 1:1 or flatter.  Any trees 
considered unstable should  be removed.  One year 
old rooted cuttings should be used for planting.  Plant 
in early spring, preferably  before May.  Do not plant 
after June 1.  Plant the cuttings two feet apart for 
streambank erosion control, four to six feet apart for 
wildlife habitat.  Establishment with other species, 
such as willow and other riparian species, is a good 
practice.  On sites with  banks that may become dry 
over the summer, utilize redosier dogwood next to 
the water, with willows ab ove.  Immediately after 
planting, grasses and legumes may be planted to 
provide initial stabilization.  After 2 or 3 years the 
dogwoods will become effec tive.  The cultivar 'Ruby' 
is vulnerable to livestock browsing.  In order to 
ensure survival, fencing must be incorporated into the 
plan. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989. 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Redosier dogwood can also be mixed with willows in 
soil bioengineering methods.  Stems can be used in 
live fascines, brush layering and brush mattressing. 
 
Rooted hardwood cuttings are taken in January, 
allowed to develop callus in refrigerated storage, and 
planted in mid-May in well drained soil 2 inches 
apart.  The cuttings should be 1/4-1/2 inch in 
diameter and 9 to 12 inches long.  They should be 
planted with about 2 inches exposed above ground 
level.  Rooting hormone is recommended to enhance 
success in the nursery. 
 
Management  
Erosion is a continuous process and, because of this, 
careful management is required at these streambank

plantings.  The areas should be examined each spring 
after the major runoff period has ended.  Areas where 
vegetation has been destroyed must be immediately 
replaced with new plants.  If any mechanical 
measures are being used to prevent erosion, they 
must also be maintained to prevent any more damage. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
'Ruby' redosier dogwood has few problems with 
disease or insect pests.  There has been some problem 
with cicadas stinging the stems.  Lesions and cankers 
may also occur.  However, these are not pathogenic 
and are thought to just be  the tree's reaction to injury. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Ruby' (NY) redosier dogwood was released in 1988 
from the Big Flats, NY Plant Materials Center.  It is 
available from commercial nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.