Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILKY DOGWOOD 
Cornus amomum Mill. 
Plant Symbol = COAM2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Swida amomum (P. Mill.) Small 
 
Uses 
The primary use of this  species is for field and 
farmstead windbreaks and wild life borders.  It is also 
being used with willows for streambank protection.  
Other beneficial uses are for fish and wildlife habitat 
improvement, slope stabilization, borders, and as an 
ornamental. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Silky dogwood is a large shrub, often 6-10 feet in 
height.  The growth habit is upright rounded, but 
where stems are in contact  with the ground, roots are 
formed.  This behavior creates thickets.  Young 
dogwoods have bright red stems in the fall, winter 
and early spring, which turn reddish-brown in the 
summer.  As the shrub matures, the stems turn 
reddish-brown year-round and later gray.  Silky and 
redosier dogwood, though very similar, can be 
distinguished by their pith and fruit color.  Silky 
dogwood has a brown pith in 1-2 year old stems, dark 
green ovate leaves, yellowi sh-white flowers which 
bloom in mid-June, and bluish colored fruit which 
matures in September.  Redosier dogwood has a 
white pith, dark green ovat e leaves, white flowers, 
and whitish colored fruit.  There are approximately 
12,000 seeds per pound. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS 1991. 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Silky dogwood is adapted from Michigan and 
Wisconsin to Maine and south to Georgia, Florida, 
and Tennessee.  It has done exceptionally well in the 
Lake states, but poorly outside it’s natural range.  It 
performs best in soils that are moist, somewhat 
poorly drained, moderately acidic to neutral, and in 
areas that have medium to coarse soils.  It is highly 
tolerant of shade but not of droughty conditions. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Windbreaks: The site must be prepared by reducing 
weed competition.  If equipment can be used, plow or 
disc the site first.  If equipment cannot be used, clear 
sod from a one foot square  area and plant as soon as 
frost is gone in the Spring.  For bare root plants, holes 
should be dug deep e nough to accommodate the 
entire root system.  Space plants 5-6 feet apart in a 
row.  If planting in a cluster, 8x10 or 10x10 foot 
spacing is advisable.  
 
Streambank stabilization : Steep slopes must first be 
graded.  The slope should be 1:1 or flatter.  Any trees  
considered unstable should  be removed.  One year 
old rooted cuttings should be used for planting.  Plant 
in early spring, preferably  before May.  Do not plant 
after June 1.  Plant the cuttings two feet apart for 
streambank erosion control, four to six feet apart for 
wildlife habitat.  Establishment with other species,

such as willow and other riparian species, is a good 
practice.  On sites with banks that may become dry 
over the summer, utilize silky dogwood next to the 
water, with  
willows above.  Immediately after planting, grasses 
and legumes may be planted to provide initial 
stabilization.  After 2 or 3 years the dogwoods will 
become effective. Silky dogwood is vulnerable to 
livestock browsing.  In order to ensure survival, 
fencing must be incorporated into the plan.  Rooted 
hardwood cuttings are taken in January, allowed to 
develop callus in refrigerated storage, and planted in 
mid-May in well drained soil 2 inches apart.  The 
cuttings should be 1/4-1/2 inch in diameter and 9 to 
12 inches long.  They should be planted with 
approximately 2 inches exposed above ground level. 
 
Management  
The planted areas should  be examined each spring 
after the major runoff period has ended.  Areas where 
vegetation has been destroyed must be immediately 
replaced with new plants.  If any mechanical 
measures are being used to prevent erosion, they 
must also be maintained to prevent any more damage. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
‘Indigo’ silky dogwood has few problems with 
disease or insect pests.  Webworm and scurfy scale 
have been observed.  There has been some problem 
with cicadas stinging the stems.  Lesions and cankers 
may also occur.  However, these are not pathogenic 
and are thought to just be  the tree's reaction to injury. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Indigo’ (MI) silky dogwood was released in 1982 
from the Rose Lake, Michigan Plant Materials Center 
in cooperation with the MI Department of Natural 
Resources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
  Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.