Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOUTHERN CATALPA  
Catalpa bignonioides  Walt. 
Plant Symbol = CABI8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center and Kansas State University 
Forestry Research. 
 
 R.A. Howard, © Smithsonian Institution 
 
Alternate Names 
Catalpa, katalpa, American catalpa, eastern catalpa, 
catawba, bean tree, Indian  bean, Indian cigar tree, 
Shawnee wood, caterpillar tree, worm tree, fish bait 
tree, fisherman’s tree 
 
Uses 
Southern catalpa is primarily used today as a large 
ornamental shade tree.  It is widely planted in urban 
areas as a street and lawn tree.  Conservation uses 
include being planted in windbreaks.  Some plant it 
to attract the catalpa worm, which are harvested and 
used as fish bait. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or  agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Trumpet-creeper Family (Bignoniaceae).   It is 
 a 
perennial deciduous tree which readily grows in 
USDA Hardiness Zones 5 to 9.  This is a U.S. native.  
At maturity, the height can vary from about 25 to 40 
feet.  Catalpas prefer moist, deep, well drained soil, 
but adapts to dry or wet so ils.  The soil pH may range 
from 5.5 to 7.0.  It prefers an open sunny space to 
partial shade.   The crown is often forked.  Its 
longevity is about 40 to 50 years. 
 
The tree bark is separated into irregular shallow 
fissures with reddish-brown scales.  On young tree 
seedlings the bark is thin and easily damaged by 
impact, or rodents. 
 
Twigs in winter have a unique identifying 
characteristic.  They have sunken leaf scars which 
resemble suction cups.   Their whorled arrangement 
of 3 “moon crater” scars per node is another trait 
easily identified.  They ar e grayish-brown in color. 
 
Leaves are simple, may be opposite or whorled (3 per 
node), pinnately veined, 5 to 12 inches long , 4 to 6 
inches broad, heart shaped at the base, and have a 
long petiole with entire margins and soft pubescence 
on the underside, which is also a lighter green than 
the top surface.  
 
The flowers of catalpa are  perfect.  Flowering takes 
place from May through July.  They occur in bell-
shaped corollas of 5 lobes.   Individual flowers are 
showy, with the 5 petals in each flower being unequal 
in size, white with purple spots and orange stripes at 
the throat, in branched, upright clusters.  The petals 
are up to 1.5 inches long. 
 
Seedpods are slender and green in the summer 
growing from 6 to 24 inches long, and ½ inch wide 
looking ‘cigar like’.  They mature in the autumn, turn 
brown, split open lengthwise to let seeds fall in the 
spring.  The seedpod genera lly stays attached to the 
tree limb over winter. 
 
It was first cultivated in 1726.  It was originally 
found in the Gulf Coast stat es of Florida, Georgia, 
Alabama, Mississippi, and Lo uisiana.  It has since 
spread to many states east of the Rocky Mountains.

Establishment 
When placed as an ornamental in a yard setting care 
must be taken to ensure it is not too close to a 
building, fence, property line or septic system.  
Ample space should be provided to let it reach a 
mature height. 
 
Management 
The biggest management problems with a catalpa tree 
used as an ornamental are litter and smell.  It will 
drop a heavy load of flow ers in the spring, then a 
plentiful supply of leaves in the fall, and finally a lot 
of large seedpods in the winter.  Green leaves give 
off a disagreeable odor when crushed. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Larva of the catalpa sphinx caterpillar ( Ceratomia 
catalpae ) eats leaves.  Almost complete defoliation 
may occur in some years.   
 
Verticillum wilt will make the branches die, and can 
eventually kill trees.   Powdery mildew causes a 
white powdery coating on th e leaves.  When severe 
the leaves turn yellow and drop.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
It is an invasive, we edy tree which escapes 
cultivation easily.  The flowers, long seedpods and 
seeds fall down from spring through winter, and 
create a mess on the ground anywhere near the tree. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two species of catalpa native to North 
America, northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa ) and 
southern catalpa (Catalpa bignonioides ).  They 
appear very similar but are two distinct species. Two 
varieties of  C. bignonioides  have been documented: 
‘Aurea’ and a dwarf variety named ‘Nana’. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dr. Wayne A. Geyer,  Kansas State University 
Forestry Division, Manhattan, Kansas    
Patrick J. Broyles, 
F
 ormerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John Row,  USDA NRCS Man
 hattan Plant Materials 
Center Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 27June05 rln; 01June 06  jsp; 081121 jsp; 090610 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.