Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INLAND SEA OATS 
Chasmanthium latifolium 
(Michx.) Yates 
Plant Symbol = CHLA5  
 
J.S. Peterson@USDA NRCS.PLANTS Database       
 
Alternate Names 
Uniola latifolia  Michaux; Indian woodoats,  broad-
leaf chasmanthium, northern sea oats, wild oats   
 
Uses 
Ornamental : Plant is used as ground cover in shady 
areas.  Dried plants and s eed heads popular for cut 
and dried arrangements.  Plants used to accent open 
woodland gardens.  In northern part of its range 
inland sea oats is used for texture and color contrast 
in plantings.  
 
Wildlife : Inland sea oats is a minor component of the 
woodland habitat used as cover in open areas.  The 
seed is used as food by birds and rodents.  Some 
butterflies use the leaves as host for eggs. 
 
Livestock : Cattle will graze inland sea oats, but 
accessibility and lack of abundance keep it from 
being and important forage species. 
 
Erosion Control : Inland sea oats provides ground 
cover vegetation for critically eroding shaded areas, 
thus reducing soil erosion and improving water 
quality.  Inland sea oats has proven salt tolerant and 
can prove useful in dune management where sunlight 
is not too intense. 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS website and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) 
 
Description 
Inland sea oats is a rhizomatous clump forming 
perennial with characteristic  drooping panicles.  The 
plant can reach four feet in  height, but is most often 
shorter.  The leaf blades ar e broadly lanceolate (up to 
one inch wide at base) giving it the common name 
broad-leafed chasmanthium.  Seed heads are borne in 
open panicles up to 10 inches long.  The drooping 
panicles are initially green turning straw colored as 
seed ripen.  Various shades of red sometimes occur 
as the fruiting spikelets mature.   
 
Adaptation 
Range 
Inland sea oats is found from Pennsylvania south 
through Florida, in the upper mid-west to Wisconsin 
and south through Iowa Missouri and Kansas.  In the 
south this species ranges from Florida through 
Arizona. 
 
Site 
Throughout its range, inland  sea oats is found in 
moderate or greater shade.   Its adaptation varies 
from moist to well drained sites in various parts of its 
range.  It is never found on droughty sites. In the 
mid-west and north central states (region 3), this 
species is considered a facultative wet site species 
growing on deep moist well drained sites.  In other 
regions of its range inland sea oats is variously rated 
as upland or facultative, which is indicative of the 
great adaptability. 
 
Establishment 
This species may be propagated from seed as plugs or 
vegetatively by divisions or plugs.  As an ornamental, 
place plants two to three feet apart along a garden 
border.  
 
Management 
Inland sea oats is moderately tolerant of drought 
conditions within its range of adaptation, and will 
accept partial shade  throughout most of its range.  In 
northern parts of its range, inland sea oats is 
considered a moist site sp ecies.  Plants will reseed 
and may become aggressive if not properly managed.

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None known, though it is commonly available from 
selected seed companies and nurseries Because of the 
wide range and variability in plants of inland sea oats 
plants or seeds should be from local sources. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Richard H. Neill , USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Galliano Louisiana 
 
Edited: Morris Houck, Scott Edwards, Gary Fine; 080930 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.