Plant Fact Sheet
FREMONT’S LEATHER 
FLOWER  
Clematis fremontii  S. Wats.  
Plant Symbol = CLFR  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Mike Haddock, Kansas State University   
 
Fremont’s leather flower was named for Gen. John C. 
Frémont, U.S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers, 
and famous explorer of the American West, who first 
cataloged this plant in the 1840s.   
 
Alternate Names  
Fremont’s clematis, Fremont’s crowsfoot, Fremont’s 
leather -plant, leatherplant, rattleweed    
 
Uses   
Ornamental :  Fremont’s leather flower has potential as a 
garden plant with its unique, showy, bell or urn -shaped 
flowers, ornamental fruit clusters, interes ting texture and 
long period of attractiveness.  It may be planted in large 
groups and is an attractive addition to rock gardens, 
border fronts, native plant gardens, prairies or meadows.  
Fremont’s leather flower combines well with other native 
herbaceous  spring bloomers, such as pasque flower and 
prairie smoke.  The dried plants, with fruit clusters and 
foliage intact have potential for dried arrangements.      
 
Status   
CAUTION!!  Described as one of our rarest plants, 
Fremont’s leather flower is protected in Missouri.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s Plant Materials   current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 
Description and Adaptation    
An herbaceous perennial, non -climbing, shrubby- type 
clematis, with broad ovate leathery green leaves to 5 
inches long with parallel veins, appearing alternate, 
simple, and sessile, on erect stems 12 to 18 inches tall, 
arising from a stout caud ex bearing many fibrous roots.  
Thick, non -spreading, often recurved sepals form an inch -
long solitary bell -shaped purple to white flower nodding 
on a slender stalk atop the foliage.  Blooming occurs late 
April into June, giving rise to large clusters of ac henes 
each tipped with a long, curled style.  The achenes and 
foliage turn brown in the fall and persist into the winter . 
 Large cluster of achenes   Mike Haddock, Kansas State University 
 
Fremont’s leather flower thrives in full sun on a lean 
alkaline soi l.  Although this species naturally occurs on 
rocky prairie sites such as Fort Hays Limestone and 
Smoky Hill Chalk, and on limestone glades in the eastern 
Ozark region, it has been found to be a hardy, very easy to 
grow, long lived garden plant given full sun to part shade 
and rich, well drained soil.  This species is adapted to the 
20 to 24 inch precipitation zone.  Distribution :  Fremont’s 
leather flower is limited in distribution to north central 
Kansas, south central Nebraska and the eastern Ozark 
regio n of Missouri.  A recent discovery from Tennessee 
near Chattanooga in 2006 and a nearby Georgia 
population has been reported.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat : Fremont’s le ather flower is native to limestone 
prairies and dolomite glades.