Plant Fact Sheet
AMERICAN 
BEAUTYBERRY  
Callicarpa americana  L.  
Plant Symbol = CAAM2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 Jeff McMillian@USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names  
American beautyberry is also known as French mulberry, 
sourbush, bunchberry, or purple beauty -berry. In Greek, 
the genus name Callicarpa means callos, “beauty” and 
carpos “fruit”.  
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic: The roots, leaves, and branches were used 
by various Native American tribes for medicinal purposes 
to treat malarial fevers and rheumatism. The roots were 
used to treat dizziness, stomachaches and dysentery.  
Roots and berries were boiled and  drunk to treat colic.  
 
In the early 20
th  century, farmers would crush the leaves 
and place them under the harnesses of horses and mules to 
repel mosquitoes. The farmers rubbed the crushed leaves 
on themselves to repel mosquitoes and biting bugs. 
Studies c onducted by the Agricultural Research Service 
has shown two compounds –  callicarpenal and 
intermedeol  - are responsible for the repellant.  
 
Wildlife: The fruit is high in moisture content and is an 
important food source for more than forty species of 
songbirds including the American Robin, Brown  Thrasher, Purple Finch, and Eastern Towhee. The drupes 
or clusters are eaten by armadillo, foxes, o
possum, 
raccoon and squirrels. White tailed deer consume the fruit 
in the fall after leaf drop. They also browse the leaves in 
summer when highly preferred foods are not available. 
Protein content of the leaves ranges from 18 percent in 
spring to 8 percent  in fall.  
 
Other: American beautyberry is used as an ornamental 
shrub in mass plantings, borders and container planting.  
 
Livestock: Cattle browse the twigs in winter and the 
leaves and twigs in the spring.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site; 
http://plants.usda.gov  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
American beautyberry is a fast growing native perennial 
shrub; growing five to eight feet tall and almost as wide 
with drooping branches. The elliptical to ovate shaped 
leaves have an opposite arrangement with saw toothed 
margins. The underside of the leaves may be covered with 
wooly like hairs. The stems are slender, gray to reddish 
brown, and terete or four sided. In late spring to early 
summer, inconspicuous flowers of blue, violet, pink, or 
white are arranged in clusters on the stems between the 
leaves . In August or September, clusters of small purple 
to blue berries or drupes encircle the woody stems. Each 
small berry in the cluster contains two to four seeds about 
1/16 in. long.  
 
This plant is distributed throughout the southeastern 
United States from  Texas and Oklahoma east to 
Maryland. It also grows in the Caribbean and northern 
Mexico. American beautyberry is found in woods, 
particularly on moist areas under open pine canopies, 
thickets, right of ways, and fence rows. It is adapted to 
moist, loam, s andy or shallow upland sites and a wide pH 
range. The shrub is considered a pioneer species and is 
characteristic of the mid stages of plant succession. This 
plant is very tolerant of fire. However, it is intolerant of 
deep shade and declines in number whe n mid-story 
vegetation is dense.