Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LANCE-LEAF COREOPSIS  
Coreopsis lanceolata  L. 
Plant Symbol = COLA5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
This plant is a clump-forming perennial herb with 
short rhizomes.  Leaves may or may not be hairy; 
basal leaves are divided and the upper leaves are 
entire and oval-shaped.  Th e flower heads are borne 
singularly or in small gr oups on upright stems from 
April to June.  They are 1-2 inches in diameter and 
yellow with a yellow center.  The seed are dark 
brown, winged, and curved to almost semi-circular. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Lance-leaf coreopsis prefers  full sun, but will tolerate 
light shade.  On sites that  are heavily shaded, plants  produce fewer flowers and the stems grow taller.  It 
can grow on many soil types, but prefers a well-
drained soil.  Natural stands are often found on dry, 
infertile sites. 
 
Lance-leaf is distributed 
throughout the eastern and 
midwestern United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A firm seedbed is required.  Seed may be planted into 
a closely mowed, chemically-killed, or burned sod 
area with a light disking or harrowing that scratches 
the soil surface.  When seed is sown onto a clean-
tilled site, culti-packing the soil before planting is 
recommended.  A thick layer of plant residue on the 
soil surface may interfere with seed germination.  
Broadcast or shallowly drill 5-7 grams of seed per 
100 square feet (5-7 lb/acre).  Planting depth should 
range from at the soil surf ace to one-eighth inch 
deep.  Cultipacking after planting is recommended.  
Seed germination should occur by fall, and the plants 
will remain as a low-growing rosette throughout the 
winter. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Management 
Apply fertilizer according to soil test 
recommendations.  If not available, a rate of 3.5-5.5 
oz per 100 square feet (100-150 lb/acre) of 13-13-13 
should be applied after the seedlings are established 
and annually thereafter.  The initial mowing should 
be delayed until after seed set.  Lance-leaf coreopsis 
can tolerate regular mowing during the summer and 
fall.  However, if the plan ts are allowed to regrow 
after the initial mowing, they will usually flower 
sporadically throughout the summer.  A fall mowing 
is recommended. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds of lance-leaf coreopsis are available from 
commercial suppliers. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service 
Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials Center, Coffeeville, 
MS
 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.