Plant Fact Sheet
FIELD THISTLE 
Cirsium discolor (Muhl. ex Willd.) 
Spreng. 
Plant Symbol = CIDI  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
Field thistle flower and hummingbird clearwing moth. © Randy Pheobus 
   
Alternate Names  
Carduus  discolor  (Muhl. ex Willd.) Nutt
 
Uses  
Wildlife:  The large flowers and abundant nectar are very 
attractive to many species of butterflies, hummingbirds, 
bees and moths.   Many other species will also use other 
plant parts for food, including the leaves, stems, roots, 
flower heads and seeds.  Seeds are at tractive to seed 
eating birds such as such as the American goldfinch.      
 
Ethnobotanical :  Field thistle, like other Cirsium  species, 
has edible roots, inner stems, young leaves, young inner 
parts of flower buds and seeds.  Native Americans used a 
paste of the roots for treating wounds, boils , and piles , 
and also used an infusion of the root for treating stomach 
ache.  Native Americans also used the thistle down (or 
pappus) from the seeds to fletch the tail end of blow darts.       
Status  
Arkansas a nd Iowa list the  entire  genus  of  Cirsium  as a 
noxious weed, including all native as well as non- native 
species in the genus.   Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for  this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).
 
Weediness  
Seeds are naturally wind dispersed although most seeds 
fall fairly close to the original plant.  Field thistle can 
sometimes be found in pastures (usually over grazed), but 
unlike non -native thistles it is not invasive and weedy in 
properly managed agricultural fields.  Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department r egarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
Field thistle is a  native biennial or short lived perennial 
(monocarpic)  thistle growing in much of the eastern 
half of the U.S. and Canada.   It can be found growing 
in meadows, wood edges and openings, field  borders, 
abandoned fields, pastures and roadsides.  Field thistle 
initially grows in a basal rosette form (circle of leaves 
originating from one growing point at the soil surface).   
 
Plants only form flowering stems after growing through 
at least one win ter and sometimes two  or three .  Stems 
grow  2–8 inches  tall  and are branched on the upper 
third.  Stems have white hairs, and  lack the spiny wings 
found on many non- native thistles.  L eaves  alternate on 
the stem and have deep spine -tipped lobes.  Leaves 
have a distinctive white mat of fine hairs on the 
undersides and sparse, week hairs on the upper surface.     
 
The lavender pink to light pink, or rarely white f lower 
heads are about 2  inches  a cross  and consist of many  
narrow tube -shaped flowers about 1½  inches  long.   
Flowers billow out from a narrow base, forming a 
distinctive mushroom shape.   The flower base has 
overlapping green bracts with white  center -lines and 
sharply angled, thin needle l ike spines.  Field thistle 
can be found blooming from late summer to fall, with 
individual plants  bloom for about a month.   Seeds have 
long downy plumes that aid dispersal by the wind.  
Plants typically have a large central taproot with some 
coarse rope- like secondary roots.