Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CROWNVETCH 
Coronilla varia L. 
Plant Symbol = COVA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternative Names 
Securigera varia (L.) Lassen 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Crownvetch is a useful but overused 
erosion control plant.  Its spreading growth habit, and 
strong root system provide soil holding ability and 
ground cover.  The dark green foliage and profuse 
flower have aesthetic value.  It is a good plant for 
road bank stabilization in areas where rocky 
conditions predominate, but on steep slopes in the 
East, it may conceal the prob lem, since rill and gully 
erosion can occur under the crownvetch canopy in 
these areas.  Crown vetch has been successfully used 
with switchgrass on dry sites in the East, forming an 
understory but providing nitrogen.  Rapid soil 
organic matter improvement has occured with this 
species combination, which stabilizes soil better than 
crownvetch used alone; in general, however, 
crownvetch dominates other plants and tends toward 
a monoculture.   
 
Livestock : Crownvetch produces palatable high 
quality forage for all classes of livestock either as hay 
or pasture.  There is little or no bloat hazard in 
grazing crownvetch. 
 
Wildlife : Crownvetch provides good forage for deer 
and
 elk.  Deer have been known to paw through snow 
to forage on crownvetch in the winter.  It provides 
good cover for ground-nesting birds and is used by 
rabbits for both food and cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
© Jim Stasz 
MD-National Capital  Park 
& Planning Commission 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Description 
Coronilla varia L., crownvetch, is a herbaceous, 
perennial legume introduced from  the Mediterranean 
region.  Leaves are dark green and pinnately 
compound, usually with 15 ovate-oblong leaflets.  It 
has coarse, strongly branched stems that are 2 to 6 
feet long and upright to trailing.  Crownvetch has a 
multi-branched root system and spreads by strong 
fleshy rhizomes.  Flowers are pinkish-white to deep 
pink in long-stalked clusters.  Seed pods are 
segmented, pointed, borne in crown-like clusters.  It 
is not a true vetch and does not have tendrils for 
climbing.  It normally grows to a height of 1½ to 2 
feet. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Crownvetch has a broad adaptation to soil texture, 
but does not persist where soil fines (passing 200 
mesh) are less than 15 percent.  It does well on sand, 
gravely-rocky soils, loams, an d clays.  It will grow on 
low fertility sites and on acid soils with a pH of 5.0 to 
5.5.  It is not very tolerant of salt and alkali.  
Crownvetch requires good moisture, at least for part 
of the growing season.  Established crownvetch will 
withstand long periods of drought.  It should be used 
in areas with 18 inches or  more annual precipitation 
or where supplemental irrigation is provided.  
Crownvetch is cold-tolerant, however young

seedlings will winter kill, so plants should be well 
established before fall. 
 
Crownvetch is distributed throughout the majority of 
the United States.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Correct acidity to a pH of 5.5 or higher and where 
possible, scarify the soil 2 to 4 inches deep.  Apply 
fertilizer according to soil tests.  Apply seed 
uniformly, cover seed up to 1/2  inch deep, mulch 
with 1-1/2 tons of straw per acre.  For best results, 
seeds should be inoculated with the appropriate 
legume bacteria before sowing. 
 
In mix plantings, use 15 to 20 pounds of crownvetch 
with either tall fescue or ryegrass at 30 pounds per 
acre.  These grasses provides quick growth and 
protect the site while the slower growing legume is 
getting established.  Seeding in the spring is best.  Do 
not seed after mid-summer.   Sites ready for seeding 
in late summer or fall ca n be seeded to grass and 
mulched, and the crownvetch over-seeded the 
following spring.  Sites too steep or stony to use 
mechanical equipment usually  can be seeded without 
site preparation if “frost  seeded”.  Soil conditions 
must have a favorable soil reaction of pH 5.5 and be 
of moderate fertility.  Broadcast seed in late winter 
while there is still frost action in the soil.  Frost 
heaving will work seed into the soil.  A seeding rate 
of 15 to 20 pounds of crownvetch with a grass 
usually is adequate. 
 
Management  
Normally, crownvetch will not make sufficient 
growth for use the first year, but should be clipped 
for weed control.  Remove first hay harvest about 10 
to 14 days after first flowers appear.  Leave a six inch 
stubble as new growth will come from buds on the 
stems.  The second harvest will come about 8 to 9 
weeks later.  Drying the hay may be more of a 
problem than with other legumes.  Artificial means 
should be utilized.  Begin grazing about the same 
time as cutting for hay.  Recovery may be more rapid 
after grazing than after hay cutting as livestock will 
eat the leaves and let the long stems remain.  New 
growth will initiate from the many buds on the stems.  
Rotate grazing and regraze after 10 to 14 inches of 
growth is made.  Mature crownvetch is a little more 
palatable than most other legumes, therefore it can be 
stockpiled to take advantage of other forages.  
Nutritional value decreases with maturity. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Chemung’, ‘Emerald’ (USSR), and ‘Penngift’.  
Seeds are available from most commercial seed 
suppliers. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.