Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
BUTTONBUSH  
Cephalanthus occidentalis  L. 
Plant Symbol = CEOC2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Buttonbush is an obligate wetland shrub suitable for 
wetland restoration, created wetlands, and riparian 
zones.  It has exceptional wildlife benefits.  The seed 
is eaten by eight species of waterfowl and the twigs 
by three species of mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Buttonbush is a large, multi-stemmed shrub that 
grows to a mature height of twelve feet.  It has 
opposite, entire leaves 2-6 inches long and 1-3 inches 
wide.  They are glabrous and green above.  The 
flowers occur in dense, round, 1 inch diameter 
clusters which bloom from June to September.  The 
seed matures in the round clusters that resemble those 
of the sycamore tree.  This plant spreads by seed 
dispersal and resulting seedling establishment. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The natural range of this shrub is from Florida to 
Mexico and north to Nova Scotia and Ontario.  
Buttonbush is best adapted to shorelines and swamps 
with saturated soil and full sunlight.  It will tolerate 
water depths up to three feet.  Flowering is poor in 
the shade or in dry soils. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
One year old seedlings or rooted cuttings can be 
established at a two foot spacing for erosion control, 
or a wider spacing for wetland mitigation or habitat 
development. Controlling competition during the first 
growing season is the biggest establishment 
challenge. Scalp the existing vegetation from a two 
foot diameter area on which the seedling is being 
established. Unrooted cuttings can be established by 
pushing cuttings into the soil one foot apart for 
erosion control or wider for mitigation or habitat 
development. 
 
Management  
Buttonbush may be fertilized with a slow release 
fertilizer to enhance flowering and seed production. 
Plants on areas with fluctuating water levels may 
need debris cleared out of the canopy. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and  
area of origin) 
‘Keystone’ (composite from PA, WV, NY) was 
released by the Big Flats, NY Plant Materials Center. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program  
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.