Plant Fact Sheet
EASTERN REDBUD  
Cercis canadensis L.  
Plant Symbol = CECA4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center. 
 Melinda Brakie -USDA NRCS Plant Materials   
Alternate Names  
The  alternate names for eastern redbud include Judas tree 
and redbud.  
Uses  
The Henry’s elfin butterfly ( Callophyrus henrici) and 
hummingbirds utilize eastern redbud for nectar. 
Honeybees use the flowers for pollen.  
Native Americans boiled the bark to make tea  to treat 
whooping cough. Dysentery was treated using an 
astringent from the bark. The roots and inner bark were 
utilized for fevers, congestion, and vomiting. The flowers 
can be fried and eaten.  
Whitetail deer browse the foliage and twigs during the 
sprin g and summer. Squirrels occasionally eat the buds, 
bark, and seed. Bobwhite quail and songbirds eat the 
seeds. However, for the animals which utilize eastern 
redbud, it is considered a less desirable or emergency 
food. Livestock will infrequently graze on the foliage and 
twigs.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Description
 and A daptation  
Eastern redbud is a native, perennial, deciduous tree 
which grows 15 to 30 feet tall and spreads 15 to 25 feet. 
Older trees generally resemble a vase shape. This tree is a 
member of  Fabaceae or pea  family. Eastern redbud is 
found throughout the l ower Great Plains and eastern 
United States.  For  updated  distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page  for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Eastern redbud distribution  from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
Eastern redbud is usually one of the first trees to bloom in 
spring. Pink to reddish purple flowers are grown on old 
twigs, branches, and trunks. Flowering occurs in March to 
May before leaf grow th. After bloom, the le aves begin 
growing and gradually  turn  dark green. When mature, the 
alternately arranged leaves are about four inches long, 
four inches wide and heart shaped with prominent 
venation. The twigs are slender, spreading, zigzag with 
short or dark brown knotty spurs. Eastern redbud 
produces clusters  of flat green pods (~3.5 inches long, 
~0.5 inches wide) that change to brown when mature. 
Each pod contains four to ten small hard black or brown 
seeds.  
Eastern redbud occurs as scattered trees or small 
population s. It is an understory species i n open woods and 
is found on moist, loam or sandy soils in valleys or 
bottomlands.  Usually this tree is more numerous on south 
facing slopes with more sunlight. Eastern redbud grows 
on a wide range of pH;  however, it  grows best on soils 
with a pH of 7.5 or above. It  is not found on inundated 
sites, poorly aerated soils, or coarse sands. The  tree is fire 
tolerant and root  sprouts after fire.