Plant Fact Sheet
FAREWELL TO SPRING  
Clarkia amoena (Lehm.) A. 
Nelson & J.F. Macbr.  
Plant Symbol = CLAM  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Corvallis Plant  Materials 
Center,  Oregon   
 Photo by A. Young -Mathews , Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011  
Alternative Names  
Alternate  Common Names:  farewell -to -spring, summer’s 
darling , herald -of -summer , atlas flower, lovely farewell -
to -spring,  Rocky Mountain garland flower , godetia, satin 
flower , red ribbons, fairy fans  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Godetia  amoena  (Lehm.) G. 
Don , Oenothera amoena  Lehm., Oenothera prismatica 
var.  amoena  (Lehm.) H. Lév.  
Uses  
Ornamental:  As the Latin name suggests  (a moena 
meaning  beautiful or pleasing ),  this  plant  makes a 
beautiful  addition to  many types of gardens including 
beds, borders , containers,  dry bank s, cottage gardens,  rock 
garden s and wildflower meadows .  The  flowers  make 
excellent, long -lasting  bouquets . 
Pollinators : Flowers ser ve as a nectar source for 
European  honey bees, as well as native  bumble bees , 
mason bees,  butterflies and other beneficial insects .  
Farewell to spring is often included in native wildflower 
mixes for bee and butterfly meadows or gardens , and 
should be planted in patches  at least 3 to 6 ft in diameter 
for best attraction .      Ethnobotanic: 
Clarkia amoena  seeds were parched and 
then pounded into a dry seed meal and eaten by the Sierra 
Miwok in the Sierra Nevada foothills of Calif ornia. 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Farewell to spring , a member of the evening primros e 
family (Onagraceae),  is a common,  native, annual 
wildflower that grows ½  to 3 feet  tall.  Stems are upright 
to spreading , leafy, covered in fine, short hairs,  somewhat 
grayish -green,  often reddish below,  and may be branched 
or  simple .  The alternate  leaves are  linear to lance -shaped,  
usually 1 to 3 inches long, smooth -edged, with lower 
leaves often falling by flowering time ,  while the upper 
leaves are more persistent and often folded .   The f lower s 
are single or in open to dense inflorescences with  buds 
he ld erect.  Flowers  are cup -shaped, pale pink to deep 
wine red, and  have four  petal s that are usually less than 
1½  inches long, with more or less notched edges, often 
with a  crimson  to scarlet or purplish marking  in  their 
center.  Flowers have eight  stamens and a single pistil 
with a 4 -lobed stigma.   Flowering period is late spring to 
mid -summer.   Fruits are long, narrow, straight to curved, 
pod- like dry capsules ¼ to 1 ½ inches long that ripen in 
the fall.   There are five generally  recognized subspecies of 
C. amoena,  although intermediates among subspecies are 
common : Hunt’s clarkia ( C. a. ssp. huntiana), Lindley’s 
clarkia ( C. a. ssp. lindleyi),  northwestern farewell to 
spring  (C. a . ssp. caurina) , Whitney’s clarkia ( C. a. ssp. 
whitneyi), and farewell  to spring ( C. a. ssp. amoena ).  
 Farewell to spring  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.