Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARIZONA CYPRESS 
Cupressus arizonica Greene 
Plant Symbol = CUAR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Uses 
Livestock: This tree can be harvested, processed, and 
used for fence posts because it is quite durable when 
seasoned. 
 
Timber : Arizona cypress has little value when grown 
for timber but has been used for Christmas trees and 
for some hobby and craft items. 
 
Erosion control : This tree has been used for 
windbreaks in desert areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Cupressus arizonica  Greene, Arizona cypress, is the 
only cypress native to the southwest.  It is a medium 
sized tree 50 to 60 feet tall and 15 to 30 inches in 
diameter.  It is evergreen,  with a dense, upright, cone-
shaped crown and smooth reddish-brown bark that 
sometimes becomes fibrous w ith flat ridges.  Leaves 
are scale-like and grayish- green, bluish-green, or 
silvery, arranged opposite in  pairs and tightly 
clasping the cord-like or four-sided twigs; they emit a 
fetid odor when crushed.  The cones are 3/4 to 1 inch 
in diameter, somewhat round, dark reddish brown, 
with 6 to 8 shield-shaped woody scales.  The cones 
mature in autumn of the second season but persist on 
the tree for many years. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is found naturally on dry, sterile, rocky mountain 
slopes and canyon walls, but does very well when 
planted on better soils or when irrigated.  It requires a 
minimum of 10 to 12 inches of water annually.  It is 
not recommended for elevations of over 3,000 feet 
nor is it recommended for soils with a high water 
table.  It requires full sunlight for best development, 
but is subject to sunscald when grown as an 
ornamental. Though it grows slowly under natural 
dry conditions, it is a rapid grower (up to 3 feet per 
year) on better soils with a good moisture regime. 
 
Arizona cypress is distributed throughout the 
Southwest.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. © W. L. Wagnerr 
Smithsonian Institution 
@USDA NRCS PLANTSS 
 
Establishment 
Arizona cypress is usually available as 1 year old 
potted stock.  It should be planted in areas where 
there is at least 10 to 12 inches of water available 
annually either naturally or through irrigation.  Early 
spring is the best time for planting.  For windbreaks 
6-foot spacing in rows is recommended.  Open 
sunlight is required for best growth. 
 
Management  
Arizona cypress generally requires little maintenance.  
Deep watering at least every other week is necessary 
for desert planting during the growing season.  
Arizona cypress is especially susceptible to fire and 
needs proper protection.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Arizona cypress ordinarily has few disease pests, but 
when grown in areas of high humidity, incidence of 
disease increases.  Principal enemies are mistletoes 
and rusts.  The cypress bark beetle may be 
troublesome by mining twigs on ornamentals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are known, but Arizona cypress plants 
are available from most commercial conifer nurseries 
in the west. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Editied: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.