Plant Fact Sheet
CALIFORNIA HAZELNUT 
Corylus cornuta Marsh.  var . 
californica  (A. DC.) Sharp  
Plant Symbol = COCOC  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter  
 
© 2008 Neal Kramer 
Alternative Names  
Alternative common names:   California hazel,  California 
filbert, beaked hazelnut , western beaked hazel  
Alternative scientific names:   Corylus californica (A. DC.) 
Rose,  Corylus cornuta  ssp. californica  (A. DC.) E. Murray  
Uses  
Wildlife : California  hazelnut is used in hedgerow, riparian and 
wildlife habitat plantings to provide cover and food.  The nuts  
are eaten by  many animals including squirrels , chipmunks , 
jays,  grouse  and pheasant.   Plants may be browsed by mule 
deer and domestic livestock.   
Landscaping: California hazelnut can be incorporated into 
garden plantings or woodland parks.  It is the first native shrub 
to come into bloom in the spring ,  with  attractive  yellow 
catkins hangi ng from the bare branches , and its leaves turn 
bright  yellow in the fall.   The Oregon  Department of 
Agriculture  currently has restrictions on the import and sale  of 
all  Corylus  species  within the state  in  order to control the 
spread of E astern filbert blig ht (EFB).  California hazelnut is 
resistant to EFB,  but  check to see if  a  ban is in effect  in your 
area  prior to planting.  
Ethnobotanic : Many Native  American tribes of the Pacific 
Northwest  and California  used the nuts as a food source, 
picking them in late summer to early autumn, storing  until 
fully ripe, and then roasting  or eating them raw.  The nuts  
were  also pounded into cakes  containing berries, meat, or  animal fat
, or  boiled to extract the oil, which  was used as 
flavoring.  The nut s’ milk was used to cure coughs and colds, 
to heal cuts, and as an astringent.   Roots were used to make a 
bluish dye.   The wood was fashioned into arrows, fishing 
traps, hooks, and spoons , and the long, flexible shoots were 
twisted into rope  or used for bask etry.  Plants were burned to 
the ground periodically  (about every five years)  to maintain 
productivity.  The nuts were also used as a  trade item among 
tribes because of their sporadic distribution.    
Status  
California hazelnut is listed as a facultative up land species in 
Oregon and Washington, meaning it usually occurs in  non-
wetlands,  but  is occasionally  found in  wetlands.   Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., 
threatened or  endangered species, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Birch family (Betulaceae) : Native , deciduous  shrubs or small 
trees growing 3  to  50 feet  tall and  forming thickets; main 
stems straight, with spreading, ascending branches, and  light 
brown  twigs  that are  often glandular -hairy  when young.  
Leaves are simple , alternate, often velvety- hairy, paler below 
than above,  nearly round to ovate , 1.6 -4  inches  lon g, with   
  doubly toothed  margins.  
Male and female flowers 
are separate, but both 
types  are  present on 
each plant .  Male 
flowers  are numerous in 
long,  hanging  stalks 
(catkins)  2-3  inches  
long, in clusters of 2 or 
3 near branch tips, 
appearing in the fall but 
opening  early the 
following spr ing (Jan.-
Mar.) before leaves 
develop.  F emale 
flowers  are  several in a 
scaly bud, tiny and 
inconspicuous ,  with 
only bright red stigma 
and styles protru ding 
fro m the otherwise gray-
brown buds  near the end 
of the  twigs.  Fruit is a hard -shelled,  acorn -like nut  ½ -  ¾  inch 
in diameter, completely concealed by two  leafy, coarsely 
toothed, husk -like  bracts fused at the tip and forming an 
extended tubular beak.   California hazelnut typically has 
glandular hairs on twigs and petioles  and has a shorter husk 
Reprinted with permission of University of Washington Press.