Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BERMUDAGRASS 
Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers. 
Plant Symbol = CYDA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Caution: This plant is considered noxious in 
several states and invasive by several sources.  
Please check the Noxious and Invasive portion of 
PLANTS for additional information.  Please 
consult with your local re source specialist prior to 
using. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control : Bermudagrass is used for critical 
area planting (including channels and pond banks), 
grassed waterways, and vegetated flumes.  
 
Turf : This grass is suitable for lawns and public 
areas, and is recommended for problem soils and 
heavy traffic areas. 
 
Livestock : Bermudagrass provides fair to good 
pasture and hay with proper management.  Forage 
quality is dependent on soil fertility and stage of 
growth. 
 
Wildlife : Bermudagrass has forage value for deer, 
geese and ducks in open, sunny areas. 
 
Recreation : Turf types of the grass form attractive, 
traffic-resistant, weed-f ree, and low maintenance 
ground covers for areas with half to full day sun. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Bermudagrass, is of probable Asian origin and was 
documented as an important grass in the United 
States by l807.  It is  a long-lived, warm season 
perennial that spreads by rhizomes, stolons, and seed.  
Stems are leafy, branched, and 4 to 6 inches tall.  
Under favorable conditions, stems may be 12 to 18 
inches high.  Stems are short  jointed.  Leaves are flat 
and spreading.  The ligule is a circle of white hairs.  
Leaves may be hairy or smooth.  Seedheads are 
usually in one whorl of 3 to 7 spikes, each about 1 to 
2-1/2 inches long.  Some robust forms may have up 
to 10 spikes in 2 whorls. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Although a few hardy strains of Bermudagrass persist 
in areas with sub-zero winter temperatures, it has 
achieved importance only in  areas of relatively mild 
winters.  Once established on moderately deep to 
deep soils, Bermudagrass maintains dense sod, non-
irrigated, with 16 inches of rainfall.  It can withstand 
sedimentation and long periods of inundation.  It 
prefers full sun and can grow rapidly at air 
temperatures exceeding 100°F. 
 
Bermudagrass prefers deep soils but produces well on 
moderately shallow sites under irrigation and good 
management.  It persists on poor soils but require 
high nitrogen levels for best appearance.  It 
withstands pH ranges from about 5.0 to 8.5 and is 
boron tolerant.  It tolerates saline soils with up to 18 
millimhos of electrical conductivity in the soil 
solution.

Bermudagrass is distributed throughout the majority 
of the United States.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Stands may be established by use of seed, sprigs, or 
plugs planted during mid-spring to mid-summer 
followed by frequent applications of fertilizer and 
water.  Early planting is most important in areas of 
marginal adaptability. 
 
Beds for seeding or planting should be firm, smooth, 
and free of weed seed.  Fo r turf plantings, absolute 
smoothness is necessary for close mowing following 
establishment.  Seed, sprigs, or plugs should be 
placed into moist soil.  
 
For pasture or hay, drill 3 pounds pure live seed per 
acre at 1/2 inch depth or less.  For turf, use 10 pounds 
of seed per acre.  Higher  seeding rates are advisable 
if seed must be broadcast.  If using sprigs, broadcast 
by hand or with hydro-equipment.  Punching and 
irrigation, if needed, must be done immediately 
following spreading to keep the sprigs from drying 
out.  Surface soil moisture must be kept high while 
roots and shoots develop at the sprig nodes. 
 
Fifteen bushels of sprigs per acre disk punched or 
covered with 1-1/2 inches of soil followed by 
irrigation as needed ordinarily gives fully established 
stands in one growing season.  On saline soils 
planting in the side of furrows is desirable so salts 
will accumulate on the ri dges above grass rows. 
 
Use of sod rolls or plugs cut from sod is often a 
preferred method of establishing turf-type Bermuda 
on critical sites.  Plugs of 3 inch diameter planted on 
15 to 18 inch centers will ordinarily establish 
complete cover in 1 growing season with adequate 
fertilizer, moisture and half-day to full sun.  
Complete sodding is preferred for very critical areas 
or where immediate foot tr affic is contemplated.  
Care immediately following planting is less critical 
on plantings of sod or plugs than turf-type sprigs. 
 
Management  
High quality turf will requi re frequent very low 
mowing, fertilizer, and water for vigorous growth.  
Clippings must be removed.  A sharp reel-type 
mower will avoid unsightly scalping.  Good to fair 
quality turf can be maintained on short water and low 
fertilizer schedules, thereby reducing mowing 
frequency. 
 
Bermudagrass will persist as a weed-free ground 
cover on soils of moderate to high water-holding 
capacity. Where desirable  and permissible, mid-
winter controlled burning can be used to reduce 
thatch.  Most herbicides  used at recommended rates 
with reasonable care ca n be used to control 
undesirable plants without destroying fully 
established Bermudagrass.  Applications of nitrogen 
every 2 to 5 years will be needed to maintain 
vigorous stands on most sites. 
 
Both pasture and hay require good rainfall and heavy 
fertilizer application for high yield and quality.  
Thirty to forty pounds of nitrogen should be applied 
in split increments for each ton of anticipated dry 
forage yield.  Highest yields are obtained on good 
soils in areas of high av erage annual temperature 
with ample water.  Harvest or graze at 3 to 4 week 
intervals for best yields of total digestible nutrient 
and protein. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Several white grubs are known to feed on the root 
system, however they are normally not a major pest. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Santa Ana’, ‘Tifway’, ‘Tifgreen’, ‘Tifdwarf’, 
‘Tufcote’, ‘Brazos’, ‘Quickstand’, ‘Coastal’, 
‘Coastcross-1’, and ‘Midland’.  All form dense, fine-
textured, weed-free sods and tolerate drought, close 
mowing and heavy traffic, even on problem soils.  
Seeds, springs, and sod are all commercially 
available. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 10Aug2000 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.