Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ALLEGHENY CHINKAPIN  
Castanea pumila  (L.) P. Mill. 
Plant Symbol = CAPU9  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
The primary use of chinkapin is for wildlife food and 
cover.  The nuts are an excellent food source during 
the fall and winter.  Squirrels, deer, grouse, bobwhite 
quail, and wild turkey particularly enjoy the nuts.  It 
can be used as a wildlife component for stabilizing 
disturbed areas.  It can al so be planted as a field 
border, hedgerow, or in backyards and recreational 
areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Allegheny chinkapin is a spreading shrub or small 
tree reaching a mature height  of 20 feet under ideal 
conditions.  The leaves are similar to the Chinese or 
American chestnut only smaller.  They are 3-6 inches 
long with pointed teeth. 
 
The nuts are enclosed in sp iny burs about an inch in 
diameter and golden in colo r.  By contrast, chestnuts  are about twice as large and flattened on one side.  
The nuts of Allegheny chinkapin range from 
chocolate brown to blackish-brown.  Nuts mature in 
late August in the South and in September and 
October farther north.  Under favorable conditions, 
seedlings may produce nuts as early as the end of the 
second or third growing season. However, nut 
production is not significant until the fourth or fifth 
year.  Six year old plants 
at the former Quicksand, 
Kentucky Plant Materials Center produced 1200-
1500 nuts per plant. 
 
©William S. Justice Smithsonian Institute @USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Allegheny chinkapin is adapted to most soil textures, 
except heavy clays.  It performs best on well-drained 
soils in full sun or partial shade and worst on poorly-
drained soils.  Its range of adaptation is from northern 
Florida, west to Texas and Oklahoma, north to 
Kentucky, Virginia, Maryland, and along the Atlantic 
coastal plain to Cape Cod, Massachusetts. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
One year old seedlings should  be planted in the early 
spring.  For maximum fruit production, space plants 
at least eight feet apart in a row to ideally get at least 
50% sunlight. When multiple rows are planted, space 
rows twenty feet apart. Wh en planting in a sod, scalp 
the area at least three f eet across from each plant. 
Spread a handful of 10-10-10 fertilizer in the bottom 
of each planting hole and co ver with two inches of 
soil. Do not allow the roots of the plant to contact the 
fertilizer material when placing in the hole. Mulch 
each plant with two to fo ur inches of woodchips, 
sawdust, or straw. 
 
Management  
Control weeds around the newly established plants 
for at least two years. If growth is not satisfactory in 
the first two years, apply another handful of fertilizer 
and work into the soil around the plant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Golden’ (GA) was released by the USDA-NRCS 
Plant Materials Center in Quicksand, Kentucky 
cooperatively with the Kentucky Agricultural 
Experiment Station and the Kentucky Department of

Fish & Wildlife. Nursery grown plants are available 
from selected nurseries in the region. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program   Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.