Plant Fact Sheet
AWEOWEO 
Chenopodium oahuense (Meyen)  
Aellen   
Plant Symbol = CHOA  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant Materials 
Program 
  
David Duvauchelle  
USDA  NRCS 2003 
Alternate Names   
Aheahea, ahea, ahewahewa, alaweo, alaweo huna 
(Niihau), kahaihai, goosefoot, pigweed, lamb’s quarters   
   
Uses   
Conservation:    
The potential uses for aweoweo include ecosystem 
restoration, erosion control, and enhancing diversity  in 
riparian and other communities.  
   
Wildlife Habitat:    
On Moku Manu, Oahu, sooty terns and red -foot boobies 
use ‘aweoweo as cover and also its dead branches for 
nests.    
   
Hawaiian Cultural :
   
During ancient Hawaiian times, Aweoweo  wood was used 
to make shark hooks and its leaves were cooked and eaten 
like spinach.
   
  
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
    Description and Adaptation  
A weakly scented shrub, the aweoweo can reach 5
-20m in 
height.  Its leaves are 3 -lobed and somewhat fleshy.  
Leaves are also pubescent with the bottom half more 
pubescent and a lighter green as well.  Flowers are small 
on leafless panicles producing seeds that are dark -bro wn 
and about 0.8mm in diameter.   
   
Aweoweo is endemic to the Hawaiian Islands.  It can be 
found on the northwestern Hawaiian islands of Lisianski, 
Laysan, French Frigate Shoals, Necker, and Nihoa.  It is 
also found throughout the main Hawaiian Islands, but  
according to the 
Manual of the Flowering Plants of 
Hawaii (1999)
    , aweoweo has not been observed to be 
occurring naturally on the island of Kahoolawe.  
Aweoweo is adapted to dry habitats of coastal and dry 
forests and can also be found in subalpine shrubla nds as 
well, ranging in elevation from 0 –  2,520 meters.   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Aweoweo can be propagated either by seed or by 
vegetative cuttings.  Dibble tubes wit h sterile planting 
medium are recommended for starting cuttings.  Seedlings 
should be started in 200- cell flats and then transplanted to 
dibble tubes.  Seeds germinate within 5 -10 days. 
Propagules should be ready to plant in the field by 5 -6 
months after s tarting in a shade -house.  It is recommended 
that they be placed in direct sunlight about a month before 
planting.  Irrigation is recommended for the first 6 months 
after planting in the field at which time the plants should 
be able to survive simply on na tural rainfall.  
   
Management   
Aweoweo is a hardy plant that requires very little 
management.  It is well adapted to low rainfall situations 
having a very high drought tolerance.  It can also tolerate 
nutrient depleted soils as well.   Aweoweo does very we ll 
under cultivation as well.  With the addition of moisture 
and fertilizer supplements, shrubs are able to grow with 
relatively high vigor.    
   
Pests and Potential Problems  
There are no known pests that are detrimental to the 
aweoweo life cycle.     
   
St udies show that cultivated aweoweo produces seed with 
very low germination rates.  This is overcome by the fact 
that it produces a large amount of seed.  It is speculated 
that because aweoweo produces seed throughout the year, 
the majority of the seed harv ested might be immature.