Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUEJOINT  
Calamagrostis canadensis  
(Michx.) P. Beauv.  
Plant Symbol = CACA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names:  Other common names include 
bluejoint reedgrass, Canada bluejoint, Canadian 
reedgrass, meadow pinegrass, marsh reedgrass, and 
marsh pinegrass.  There are four botanical varieties.  
 
Uses:  Bluejoint is a mid-sized to tall native grass 
useful for wetland restoration and enhancement as 
well as shoreline and streambank stabilization.  
Creeping underground shoots (rhizomes) improve the 
plants ability to bind soil, especially along higher 
gradient streams and waterways.  It is included in 
hydroseeding mixtures for drainage ditches designed 
to filter stormwater.  This species provides forage for 
bison, elk, and deer, as well as food and habitat for 
small mammals, waterfowl,  birds, and bears.  It 
furnishes substantial amounts of herbage and stands 
have been hayed in the  Midwestern states.  Forage  value varies widely by region with ratings from poor 
to good for all classes of livestock.  Palatability is 
considered fair at best regardless of livestock type.  It 
is highest in the spring prior to maturity.   
 
Status:  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious stat us, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
Description and Adaptation:   Bluejoint is a long 
lived, perennial cool season grass with stout stems 
that grows 60 to 180 cm tall.  There are 3 to 8 
prominent joints (nodes) along the stems.  This 
species spreads slowly (5 to 15 cm/year) by rhizomes 
forming a sod.  Leaves are  ribbed, lax, rough to the 
touch, and 3 to 8 mm wide. The flower head (panicle) 
is rather narrow to open and loosely branched, 
upright to drooping when mature, and 10 to 20 (30) 
cm long.  Flowering occurs in late June or July and 
the seed matures in August.  The tiny seeds have fine 
hairs attached at one end of their hull and are easily 
windborne. They remain viable in the soil for up to 5 
(7) years.  Bluejoint occurs from low to mid-
elevation across most of Canada and the United 
States, except for the Southeast.   
 
Adaptation:  Bluejoint can be found in a wide variety 
of environments including meadows, open woods, 
wet thickets or swamps, marshes, bogs, ditches, and 
the margins of streams and lakes.  It can readily 
colonize disturbed areas especi ally in colder northern 
forests following logging or fire. This species thrives 
in more nutrient rich, saturated soils, peat, or deep, 
fine textured substrates that are moist all summer.  
Reportedly, bluejoint only withstands seasonal 
inundation and temporary spring flooding up to 15 
cm deep.  However, stands have maintained 
themselves for several years in permanent standing 
water at similar depths. This species is adapted to 
very acid to slightly alkaline soils (pH 3.5 to 8).  
 
Key to identification:  This species resembles reed 
canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea ) but the latter is 
coarser textured, has much larger, smooth seed, and 
produces reddish rhizomes near the soil surface.   
Consult a botanical key to distinguish bluejoint from 
other  Calamagrostis  species. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Common in many 
areas of the northern boreal  and temperate forests, it 
is scarce to nonexistent in the Willamette Valley of 
Oregon, but more common along the Pacific Coast

near lakes, in the Puget lowlands of Washington, and 
at mid-elevations in the Mountains.  Seed ripens in 
late summer.  Collection can be difficult due to poor 
or erratic seed production.  
Establishment: 
Bluejoint seed has 
no dormancy and 
germinates when 
fall or spring 
sown.  The basal 
hairs on the seed 
should be removed 
with a debearder to 
improve seed flow.  
Hulls may be 
removed in the 
process, resulting 
in approximately 4 
million seeds/lb 
(+/- 20%).  A 
seeding rate of 1/lb 
per acre will result 
in about 92 seeds 
per square foot.  
Because seed is 
expensive, it 
typically 
comprises 1 to 20 
percent of a 
wetland mix.  
Rates as low as 
0.03 to 0.06 lbs/ac 
are suggested.  
Rhizomes and 
plugs are more successful. One source recommends a 
spacing of 6, 12 or 18 inches for uniform aerial 
coverage in 1, 2 or 3 years.  The planting density is 
3500 to 7000 plants/ac. 
 
Management:   This species is sensitive to 
overgrazing in some regions and multiple cuttings 
can reduce forage yields.  Foliage is most palatable 
when young, prior to seed head maturation. 
Coincidently, moist soil conditions may restrict 
spring grazing.  Therefore, livestock utilization 
should be timed according to how dry the soils are 
and the stage of  plant maturity.  
 
Weediness and control:   This plant may become 
weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and 
may exclude desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Methods of control for reforestation 
include using herbicide applications, biological 
control with diseases, minimal or specialized 
mechanical site preparation methods, and deep  burning, hot fires.  If bluejoint is a problem in your 
area, please consult your
 local NRCS, Extension 
Service, state forestry or agriculture department 
offices regarding the plants  use and control measures. 
 
Environmental Concerns:   Poor seed fill can occur 
in many populations.  In contrast, regeneration and 
spread from seed and rhizomes can be highly prolific 
on moist sites in the northern boreal forests of 
Canada.  As a result, bluejoint is a serious competitor 
to white spruce seedlings and other conifer 
reforestation efforts in that region.  After logging, 
light fires, or other disturbances, it can increase 
quickly, forming a complete stand with a thick layer 
of thatch that restricts esta blishment of other species.  
Bluejoint is a minor weed in cranberry bogs.  When 
used for forage or hay, its value is limited by high 
silica content and a rapid loss of nutritional quality 
following seed head formation.  Some strains are 
apparently susceptible to a  fungal or bacterial disease 
of the stems called white top. 
 Line drawing reprinted with  permission, University of 
Washington Press   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin):  
Seed is expensive and sources 
specific to Oregon, Washington, and California are 
lacking.  Nursery stock and seed are more readily 
available in other parts of the West, Midwest, and 
Northeast United States.     
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 Edited: 23mar2006 jsp, 16sept2008 dcd.; 080917jsp  
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service
.