Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAY DOGWOOD 
Cornus racemosa Lam. 
Plant Symbol = CORA6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Uses 
Gray dogwood is useful as a low-growing wild hedge 
which provides summer food and some cover for 
small animals and birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Cornus racemosa  Lam, gray dogwood, is a thickly 
branched, slow growing dogwood seldom more than 
6 feet high at maturity.  Its flowers, which bloom in 
June or July, are white and loosely clustered, and its 
white fruit, which appears in September and October, 
is set off by bright red fruit-stalks.  Its leaves are 
opposite, taper-pointed and oval. 
 
Adaptation 
Gray dogwood has a range of adaptability equaled by 
few other shrubs, and it tolerates many climatic 
conditions.  Tolerance to shade is considered  intermediate.  It is not well adapted to
 coastal  plain 
conditions. 
 
Gray dogwood is distributed throughout the 
northeastern United States.   For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Only seedlings of gray dogwood are practical.  All 
should be planted as early in the spring as possible.  
When using dogwood for streambank planting, 
eroded or steep banks should be graded before 
planting.  Plant in the early spring with dormant 
planting stock. Planting after May will severely 
reduce chances for success.   One-year rooted cuttings 
or seedlings can be planted vertically into the bank 
with one or two inches of cutting wood protruding.  
They should be stuck in a hole large enough to 
accommodate the root system when well spread.  The 
soil must be tamped well around the roots.  Fresh, 
unrooted hardwood cuttings, easier to handle but less 
reliable, should be stuck vertically into the bank, 
leaving one to two inches above ground.  A dibble 
can be used to make a hole.  Tamp adequately to 
provide complete contact between the cutting and the 
soil.  Cuttings may also be buried horizontally two 
inches deep in damp soil, if the ground is stony.  
Fresh hardwood cuttings, 3/8 to 1/2 inch at the thick 
end, 9 inches long, and made while dormant, are 
ideal.  Without cold storage, planting should be done  
as soon as possible after cutting.  Plant both rooted 
cuttings and unrooted hardwood cuttings on 2 feet 
spacing in a diamond pattern. 
Chris Miller 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
When using for wildlife or screening purposes, the 
planting site should be cultivated to destroy existing 
vegetation.  If not, the sod should be removed from 
an area two feet across for each plant. The holes 
should be deep enough to allow for the full extension 
of the roots.  Spacing for  hedges and screens should 
be staggered and 2 x 2 feet, and 4 to 5 feet for 
windbreaks.  A small handful of fertilizer can be 
placed around each plant. 
 
Management  
Dogwoods used on streambanks are subject to 
mechanical damage.  The  site should be inspected 
annually for needed repairs in the spring after heavy 
runoff or ice floes.  Fill in gaps by replanting or by 
laying down and covering branches of nearby plants.  
Any mechanical measures used to control the bank,

such as riprap, must be kept in repair to maintain 
effective protection. 
 
Competing vegetation should be controlled around all 
dogwood plants used for hedges, screens, etc.  This is 
particularly important during the first few years after 
planting. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are currently no serious pests of gray dogwood. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are available at this time, however 
common seedlings are available at most commercial 
hardwood nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.