Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEBRASKA SEDGE 
Carex nebrascensis Dewey 
Plant symbol = CANE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC 
 
 Robert Mohlenbrock USDA NRCS. 1992. Western wetland flora. 
 
Uses 
Nebraska sedge is suitable for erosion control, 
constructed wetland system applications, wildlife 
food and cover, wetland restoration and creation and 
improvement of plant diversity in wetland and 
riparian communities. Plants produce a dense root 
system (over 200 cm of roots /cm³ of soil) which 
makes this an excellent species for soil stabilization 
and bioengineering applications in wetland sites.  
 
Plants also have approximately half the protein level 
of alfalfa and are thus a valuable forage species for 
big game and livestock later in the growing season. 
Shoots are grazed by muskrat and geese, while seeds 
are eaten by small mammals and birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Nebraska sedge is a perennial, strongly rhizomatous 
wetland plant that is found in low valleys to mid-
elevations. It will form dense stands, and is often the 
dominant member of the wetland community. Stems 
are erect and triangular from  20 to 110 cm (8 to 43 
in) tall. Leaves are alternate, up to 12 mm (0.5 in) 
wide and can be longer or shorter than the stem. 
Foliage is green or often a glaucus blue. Spikes can 
be pistillate, staminate or androgynous (staminate 
flowers above). The fruit is a light brown achene (2 
mm long) surrounded by a perigynium. Perigynia are 
elliptic to ovate, 3 to 4 mm long and yellowish brown 
to light brown in color. 
 
Nebraska sedge is a commonly occurring wetland 
species found from Canada to Mexico and California 
to Illinois. 
 
Nebraska sedge is found in wet meadows, marshes, 
streams, ditches, seeps, ponds and lakes throughout 
the western U.S. Plants ca n handle standing water for 
long periods of time as long as there are periods 
when the soils are dry. 
 
Plants are best adapted to  slightly acidic to somewhat 
alkaline conditions tolerating pH levels from 5.7 to 
7.4. They are also tolerant of medium levels of 
salinity (EC<14). 
 
Establishment 
Germination can be enhanced by removing the 
perigynia and by wet pre-chilling the seeds in a 
mixture of water and sphagnum moss at 2º C (35º F) 
for 30 days. Seed requires  light, moisture and heat for 
germination. For greenhous e propagation, place seed 
on soil surface and press in lig htly to assure good soil 
contact. Do not cover seed. Soil should be kept moist, 
and the greenhouse should be kept hot, 32 to 38ºC 
(90 to 100º F). Germination should begin within one 
week. Maintain soil moisture until transplanting. 
Plugs should be transplanted at 30 to 45 cm (12 to 18 
in) spacing. This allows plants to fill in within one 
growing season. Soils should be kept saturated with 
no more than 2.5 to 5 cm (1 to 2 in) of standing water 
at any time until the plants are well established and

over 30 cm tall. Fluctuating water levels during the 
establishment year will facilitate spreading. Seed can 
be collected by hand stripping, clipping with hand 
shears or by using a gas powered seed stripper. 
 
Management 
Nebraska sedge grows in areas that are saturated.  It 
can handle standing water for long periods of time as 
long as there are periods when  the soils are dry.  It is 
rarely found where the water table will drop more 
than 1 m below the root zone late in the growing 
season and can tolerate total inundation for about 3 
months.  Water levels can be managed to facilitate 
rhizome spread and control weeds. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known probl ems with insects or 
diseases. Aphids will feed on the stems, but rarely 
cause significant damage. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
These selected class releases are from a species 
native to the Intermountain West and have no known 
negative impacts on wild or domestic animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Aberdeen PMC has rele ased four performance 
tested ecotypes of Nebraska sedge from the PMC 
service area. Centennial Se lection was collected from 
the Centennial Marsh Wildlife Management Area 
(WMA) in Camas County, ID. It was selected for use 
in Land Resource Region (LRR) B West. The Modoc 
Selection was selected for  use in LRR D North. It 
was collected from the Modoc National Wildlife 
Refuge (NWR) near Alturas, CA. The Sterling 
Selection comes from the Sterling WMA, north of 
Aberdeen, ID and was selected for use in LRR B 
East. The Ruby Lake Selection was selected for use 
in LRR D South. The collection site was at the Ruby 
Lake NWR in Elko County, NV. 
 
Twenty-one Nebraska sedge collections were 
evaluated at the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
from 1991 to 1995. All collections were evaluated for 
survival, vigor, overall growth and spread, potential 
seed production, above ground biomass production, 
stability of land ownership, and public accessibility. 
The PMC released one sel ection from each LRR in 
the PMC service area. The released selections are the 
accessions with the best overall rating against others 
from within its respective LRR. 
 
Generation 0 (G0) seed is maintained at Aberdeen 
PMC. Later generation seed (ie G1) is not produced, 
maintained or available through the USDA-NRCS  Plant Materials Center. To make collections of these 
Nebraska sedge releases, contact the appropriate 
managing agency for the original collection site. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC, Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
J. Chris Hoag, USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC, 
Aberdeen, ID. 
 Edited: 23May06jsp 
 For more information about this 
and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.