Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE SANDREED 
Calamovilfa longifolia (Hook.) 
Scribn.  
Plant Symbol = CALO  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS Manhattan, Kansas 
Plant Materials Center 
 
 Copyright Mike Haddock  
Kansas Wildflowers and grasses 
 
Alternate Names 
Sand reed, prairie sandgrass, big sandgrass 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/hayland:  Prairie sandreed is a 
native, sod forming, warm-season grass commonly 
found on sandy rangeland sites throughout the 
Central and Northern Plains. This grass species is 
considered a key species in  grazing programs because 
of its abundance, yield potential and distribution of 
forage production during the growing season. Prairie 
sandreed begins growth earlier in the spring than 
most other warm-season grass species, thus it 
provides forage for early livestock grazing. 
  Wildlife Value:
 Prairie sandreed provides fair forage 
for grazing and browsing wildlife in early spring and 
summer. The plants fora ge value increases in 
importance in late fall and winter as the plant cures 
well on the stem and provides upright and accessible 
forage. Seeds are used by songbirds and small 
rodents. 
 
Erosion Control:  The rhizomatous growth habit and 
extensive fibrous root system of this species makes it 
an excellent stabilizer of sandy sites.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Prairie sandreed is a tall, coarse, stemmy, open, sod 
forming grass found on sandy soil sites in typically 
low precipitation zones. Its coarsely fibrous root 
system augmented by scaly, spreading rhizomes 
produces an effective sand  binding species. Its culms 
are 3 to 5 feet tall, arisin g singularly and are attached 
to its stout spreading rhizomes. Leaves are pale green 
to straw colored. Leaf blades are rigid, flat to rolled, 
hairless, 12 inches long or longer and tapered to a 
drawn out tip. The ligule is short and hairy and the 
collar is hairy inside. Inflorescence is a panicle 6 to 
13 inches long, semi-open and wider in the middle. 
Spikelets are pale, shiny and one flowered. The 
lemmas are awnless and densely hairy at the base. It 
flowers from August to September and like most 
grasses is wind pollinated. 
 
Prairie sandreed is drought tolerant and adapted to an 
average annual precipitation  of from 10 to 20 inches. 
It is predominantly found growing in clumps or 
colonies on coarse, sandy so il types. It will grow on 
soils that are somewhat alkaline, but it does not 
tolerate salt. It also is intolerant of high water tables 
and early spring flooding. Prairie sandreed occurs 
naturally in mixed native stands with sand bluestem 
Andropogon hallii , little bluestem Schizachyrium 
scoparium, and sand lovegrass Eragrostis trichoides  
on sandy range sites. Several shrubs, including yucca, 
Yucca glauca, and sand sage,  Artimesia filifolia, and 
a variety of forbs occur inte rmixed on these sites. It 
has been found growing on blow out sites in the 
Nebraska Sandhills.

Establishment 
Propagation of Calamovilfa longifolia can be 
accomplished by seed and vegetative means. Planting 
of prairie sandreed should be accomplished with a 
drill equipped with depth bands to control depth of 
seeding. Seed should be planted at a depth of 1 inch 
on coarse textured soils and ½ inch or less on 
medium to fine textured soils. Seedbed preparation 
should provide a weed free, firm surface on which to 
plant. Seedling vigor of this species is only fair and 
stands develop rather slowly. Seeding rate will vary 
by region and may be influenced by degree of 
processing provided by the seed vendor. Some seed 
vendors process the seed to the bare caryopsis level. 
This will influence the seeding rate that is utilized.  
 
Management 
Forage production of ND-95 at Pierre, SD was 
reported at 5,279 pounds per acre. June and August 
defoliations of prairie sandreed produced the greatest 
forage yields over a three year period. Generally 
concentrations of crude protein decreased with 
increased maturity of the forage. Dry matter 
digestibility also declined with advanced maturity of 
the plant. Prairie sandreed responds positively to 
early spring burns. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshopper infestations can damage seedlings. 
Gophers have been known to under cut and utilize the 
forage. Leaf rust,  Puccinia amphigena,  was identified 
as a potential anti-quality factor in the forage 
production of prairie sandreed. Prairie sandreed 
plants with origins in the dryer sections of the Great 
Plains become increasingly susceptible to rust as they 
are moved eastward into higher precipitation zones. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Prairie sandreed does not pose any known negative 
concerns to the environment. It can form dense 
colonies on coarse textured soils where it is well 
adapted. This attribute is often looked at as a positive 
trait for increasing ground cover which reduces both 
wind and water erosion on these sites. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Goshen’ prairie sandreed was cooperatively named 
and released in 1976 by the Soil Conservation 
Service Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana and 
the Montana and Wyoming Agriculture Experiment 
Stations. The original germplasm was collected in 
1959 near Torrington, Wyoming. It was released 
without selection and tested under the experimental 
designation WY-17 and P-15588. 
  ‘Pronghorn’ prairie sandreed was cooperatively 
released in 1988 by the USDA-ARS, University of 
Nebraska and the USDA-SCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS. An assembly of 48 
accessions was collected in 1968 from Kansas, 
Nebraska, and South Dakota and established in a 
field space plant nursery at Manhattan, Kansas. The 
top ranked accessions from the nursery were 
provided to L.C. Newell, ARS Agronomist, for 
further evaluation for vigor, forage production and 
rust tolerance. Evaluation trials comparing Goshen 
and Pronghorn revealed that Pronghorn produced 
stands and forage amounts equivalent to Goshen, but 
was significantly superior with respect to leaf rust 
resistance.  
 
ND-95 (Bowman) was sel
ected at the USDA-SCS 
Plant Materials center, Bismarck, North Dakota. ND-
95 is an informal release  of materials collected in 
1956 from southwestern North Dakota (Bowman 
County). Seed production is  average for the species. 
Forage production is comparable to Goshen, in the 
northern U.S., but ND-95 has demonstrated improved 
performance in parts of Canada. Its dense, wiry root 
mass makes it well adapted for stabilizing sandy soil. 
 
Koch Germplasm prairie sandreed was released by 
USDA-NRCS Rose Lake Plan t Materials Center and 
the Michigan Association of Conservation Districts 
in 2007.  Original germ plasm was collected from 
native stands in costal zones along Lakes Michigan 
and Huron and subjected to  three cycles of recurrent 
phenotypic selection for upright growth habit, seed 
production, and general vigor. 
 
Prepared By:  Richard Wynia, USDA-NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS. 
 
Species Coordinator:  Wayne Duckwitz, USDA-
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND. 
 
Edited: 070730 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and

Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.