Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN CATALPA  
Catalpa speciosa  (Warder) 
Warder ex Englm.  
Plant Symbol = CASP8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center and Kansas State University 
Forestry Research 
 
J.S. Peterson @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Alternate Names 
Hardy catalpa, western catalpa, Catawba, cigar tree, 
Indian bean tree, Indian cigar  
 
Uses 
Northern catalpa is primarily used today as a large 
ornamental shade tree.  It is widely planted in urban 
areas as a street and lawn tree.  Conservation uses 
include plantings in mined-land reclamation projects 
and shelterbelts. 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
A member of the Trumpet-creeper Family 
(Bignoniaceae), northern catalpa is a perennial 
deciduous tree which readily grows in USDA 
Hardiness Zones 4 to 8.  The height at 20 years is 
about 20 feet.  Catalpas prefer moist, deep, well 
drained soil, but adapts to dry or wet soils.  The soil 
pH may range from 5.5 to 7.0.  It prefers an open 
sunny space to partial shade.    It is tall with an 
irregular, open-rounded to narrow-oval crown.  This 
tree comes into leaf very late in the spring and it is 
one of the first to lose its leaves in the fall.  Its 
longevity is about 60 years. 
 
The tree bark ranges from scaly to ridged, to blocky 
plates.  On young tree seedlings the bark is thin and 
easily damaged by impact, or rodents. 
 
Twigs in winter have a unique identifying 
characteristic.  They have sunken leaf scars which 
resemble suction cups.   Their whorled arrangement 
of 3 scars per node is another trait easily identified. 
 
Leaves are simple, large ovate to ovate-oblong, from 
8 to 12 inches long, heart-shaped tropical looking 
without any lobes and are yellowish green in color.  
Leaves are generally opposite on large branches and 
often whorled in 3 on young stems.  They turn an 
undistinguished yellow in the fall before dropping.   
 
The flowers of catalpa are  perfect.  Flowering takes 
place in late spring to early  summer.  They occur as 
large clusters of showy, white, bell-shaped corollas of 
5 lobes with ruffled edges and yellow, orange or 
purple interior spotting or streaking.   Individual 
flowers are showy, tubular up to ½ inch broad.  They

are branched in about 10 inch clusters at the stem 
tips.   
Seedpods are slender and green in the summer 
growing from 10 to 24 inches long, looking similar to 
an exaggerated green bean.  They mature in the fall, 
turn dark brown, split open lengthwise to let seeds 
fall in the spring.  The shape and color of the mature 
seedpod gives rise to the common name of cigar tree.   
It has been extensively propagated for over 200 
years.  It can now be found in most states east of the 
Rocky Mountains and in Utah.   
 
Establishment 
When placed as an ornamental in a yard setting, care 
must be taken to ensure it is not too close to a 
building, fence, property line or septic system.  
Ample space should be provided to let it reach a 
mature height. 
 
Management  
The biggest management problem with a catalpa tree 
used as an ornamental is litter.  It will drop a heavy 
load of flowers in the spring, then a plentiful supply 
of leaves in the fall and fi nally a lot of large seedpods 
in the winter. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Larva of the catalpa sphinx caterpillar ( Ceratomia 
catalpae ) eats leaves.  Almost complete defoliation 
may occur in some years.   
 
Immature seeds in the pods are often destroyed by a 
small yellow grub, the larva of a gnat. 
 
Brown leaf spots on leaves  are often created by the 
fungi  Macrosporium catalpae .   Catalpa is also 
susceptible to the decay fungus  Polystictus 
versicolor .  Powdery mildew cau ses a white powdery 
coating on the leaves.  When  severe the leaves turn 
yellow and drop.  Verticillum wilt will make the 
branches die, and can eventually kill trees.  Catalpa 
midge (Cecidomyia catalpae  Comstock) causes leaf 
spots, injures terminal buds and branch tips, as well 
as seeds in the pods. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
It is an invasive, we edy tree which escapes 
cultivation easily.  The flowers, long seedpods and 
seeds fall down from spring through winter, and 
create a mess on the ground anywhere near the tree. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are two species of catalpa native to North 
America, northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa ) and southern catalpa (Catalpa bignonioides
).  They 
appear very similar but are two distinct species.  One 
variety of C. speciosa  has been documented:  
‘Pulverulenta’ from Paul & Son. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dr. Wayne A. Geyer,  Kansas State University 
Forestry Division, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Patrick J. Broyles,  Formerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John Row,  USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 27June05 rln; 01June 06 jsp; 081121 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.