Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA REDBUD 
Cercis orbiculata  Greene 
Plant Symbol = CEOR9  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Cercis canadensis L. var. orbiculata  (Greene) 
Barneby,  Cercis occidentalis  Torr. ex Gray var. 
orbiculata  (Greene) Tidestrom, western redbud 
 
Uses 
California redbud is a good soil stabilizer along 
streams, and can withstand periodic flooding.  The 
flowers provide nectar to bees and the young shoots, 
leaves, and seedpods are browsed by goats, and to a 
limited extent by deer, sheep, and cattle.  The browse 
rating for sheep and cattle is poor.  Horticulturists 
have planted redbud in informal and formal gardens 
and landscapes since 1886  and it has been called one 
of California's most attractive flowering shrubs in 
gardeners' manuals and horticultural guides.  
California redbud is highly valued by native 
American basket weavers for their young, wine-red 
branches, harvested and used in the designs of 
baskets. 
 Brother Alfred Brousseau  ©  Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College @ CalPhotos 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
California redbud, is a leguminous shrub that grows 
from 7 to 20 feet tall with a dense rounded crown that 
almost reaches the ground.  California redbud, also 
known as western redbud, is currently recognized as 
Cercis orbiculata  Greene.  The leaves are simple, 
thick, and rounded or heart-shaped, and have from 7 
to 9 prominent veins.  They are deciduous; their 
autumn display of yellow turning to red and brown 
rivals that of some eastern hardwoods.  The striking 
sweetpea-like flowers appear before the leaves, in 
small clusters along the branches.  Each flower has 5 
petals that range in color from magenta pink to 
reddish purple.  Pollination is by bumble bees 
( Bombus  sp.) and orchard mason bees  (Osmia 
lignaria) .  Although the pink sprays can be seen from 
February through April, any one shrub will remain in 
flower only about 2 weeks.   In autumn the branches 
often bear many clusters of pointed, flat, very thin 
pods, the upper suture with a conspicuous winged 
margin.  In ripening, the pods are first purple and 
then russet-brown, each containing an average of 7 
hard, bean-like seeds.  The mature pods persist into 
the next winter. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Native to California, Arizona, and Utah, redbud is 
found in at least five plant communities including 
oak woodland, chaparral, mixed conifer forest, 
riparian woodland, and closed cone forest.  It grows

at elevations of 4,000 feet or less, in canyons and on 
rather steep slopes, in grav elly and rocky soils along 
streams where it is never flooded.  It also grows in 
the bottom of ephemeral streambeds in little pockets, 
benches, or crannies of boulder outcroppings.  The 
plant is drought tolerant, sun-loving, and grows in a 
wide variety of soils, but it is usually found in rather 
harsh environments with coarse, nutrient-poor soils 
that are well-drained.  It grows mostly singly, but 
sometimes, in sheltered situations, in shrubby 
clumps. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
If possible, gather the seed from local sources, to 
maintain genetic diversity of redbud.  The seedpods 
can be collected from September to November from 
redbud branches.  Redbud seeds are adapted to 
prolonged periods of dryness and cold and they 
require special pretreatment  to germinate, owing to 
an impervious seed coat pl us a dormant embryo.  One 
method is to place the seeds into a container and pour 
boiling water over them and let the seeds soak 
overnight.  They can then be covered with damp peat 
moss and refrigerated for two months or they can be 
planted right away.  The germination of redbud seed 
in the wild is favored by  fire, which cracks the seed 
coat and generates the h eat needed to stimulate 
germination. 
     Plant the treated seed in the fall in flats, spacing 
the seeds approximately 1 to 2 inches apart.  Use a 
slow-release fertilizer in the planting mix.  Cover 
with about 1/4 inch of soil (approximately 3 to 4 
times the width of the seed).  To reduce the 
possibility of damping off, keep the flats outdoors in 
a protected area with partial shade and little wind.  
Water the flats through the winter and then let the 
plants grow 1 full year before planting them out.  The 
seedlings will be about 3 inches to 1 foot tall by the 
following fall.   Plant the seedlings in a sunny 
location with good drainage.  If gophers are a 
problem, plant redbud seedlings in cages.  Watering 
is not necessary until the  following summer, in a 
normal rainfall year.  Give the young plants summer 
water for the first 3 years in the ground.  This 
amounts to once every 2 weeks in a hot climate and 
less in a coastal climate. Do not overwater, as redbud 
will not tolerate summer water in the root crown area 
(at the soil level) and will suffer crown rot 
( Phytophthora  sp.) if watered too frequently.  When 
redbud leaves first emerge in the spring, use a liquid 
fertilizer to boost its growth.   
 
Management  
Pruning: Periodic pruning of redbud, after it has  
reached the minimum age of 5 years, can be 
accomplished to remove dead or dying branches that 
might harbor diseases or insects.  Pruning should take 
place in the fall, winter, or early spring, after leaf 
drop and during the dormant period.  Contemporary 
Native American weavers  practice two types of 
pruning.  One technique is coppicing, where the 
whole plant is cut to within several inches of the 
ground.  Redbud vigorously resprouts from the 
coppice stool, sending up young straight shoots with 
a beautiful red pigment.  This can bring added color 
to gardens and also these sh oots are highly valued for 
basket weaving.  Coppicing, however, should only be 
done on mature shrubs--at least a decade old.  
Flowering will be lost, until the young sprouts are 
two to three years old and shed the red pigment and 
form true bark.  The other technique is selective 
pruning within the canopy to direct the growth of the 
plant.  This pruning leaves some older flowering 
branches, important for bees and butterflies.   
 
Burning : Before Euro-American settlement of 
California, Native American s conducted purposeful 
burning of hillsides in the fall of the year, after 
redbud has shed its leaves,  to encourage the growth 
of young, straight shoots used extensively in 
basketry.  Redbud also resprouts vigorously after 
fires. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A pathogen that infects redbud leaves is  Alternaria 
sp. and  Botrytis  sp. is a gray mold that causes foliage 
or flower blight.  Two fungi that cause root rot in 
redbud include  Fusarium solani  and Verticillium 
dahliae.   A fungus that infects old seedpods is 
Didymella leguminis-cytisis.  Most of these diseases 
will debilitate but not kill redbud.  Fire is an effective 
tool to use to eliminate the above-ground pathogens 
inhabiting redbud. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
While there are no cultivars recommended at this 
time, plants are available from nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California

Edited: 24Jun2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.