Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ATLANTIC WHITE CEDAR  
Chamaecyparis thyoides  (L.) 
B.S.P.  
Plant Symbol = CHTH2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uses 
Buffers: Atlantic white cedar is not often used due to 
its exacting site requirements, but has potential for 
use on coastal buffer sites, in wetlands, and for re-
creating cedar swamps. 
 
Wildlife : This species is a highly preferred food of 
deer during winter stress periods.  It can easily be 
browsed out as seedlings or saplings with extensive 
damage done. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Atlantic white cedar is one of only six species in this 
genus.  Only three of the six are native to the 
continent, and two of them are west coast species.  
This leaves Atlantic white cedar as the only 
representative in the East, where it occurs in a narrow 
band along the Atlantic coast.  Atlantic white cedar is 
an evergreen with scaly leav es that occur in a flat 
fern-like appearance.  This species usually grows in 
very dense, solid stands, and has small rounded 
cones.   
 
However, Atlantic white ced ar can be confused with 
arborvitae (also called northern white cedar -Thuja 
occidentalis ) which also occurs in the region where 
the ranges overlap in New York and New England.  
In Atlantic white cedar,  the evergreen leaves are 
paired and have short points on the tip.  Arborvitae 
has leaves that are more rounded-appearing to the 
naked eye but also have short points when viewed 
closely or with a lens.  Arborvitae has cones of 
similar size but are more elongated than those of 
Atlantic white cedar. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995. Northeastern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Atlantic white cedar is adapted to acid (pH 5.5 or 
lower), wet, lowland sites within 200 feet elevation 
of seas level. The growing season is about 140 days 
or longer.  The habitat of this species is very limited, 
and increasingly rare due to coastal development.  
Associated trees include red maple, black gum, white 
pine, hemlock, gray birch, and pitch pine.  Associated 
shrubs include lowbush and highbush blueberry.  The 
great range in latitude that white cedar occupies 
(from Maine to Florida)  helps account for the broad 
species association. 
 
Arborvitae has a much broader longitudinal and 
elevational range, and is adapted to soils that are 
slightly acid to alkaline.  Arborvitae grows on upland 
and lowland sites, and in  areas with growing seasons 
as short as 30 days up to 200 days. 
 
Both species can be grown on wet, lowland sites with 
moderate acidity. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.

Establishment 
Due to the dense stands which white cedar often 
creates, it should not be surprising that 8-9 million 
seeds per acre may be disbursed in a decent seed 
crop.  These seeds are winged and very light, and 
may be carried long distances by strong winds.  Seed 
dormancy is common and seed can remain viable in 
the forest litter for many years.  Light and moisture 
are required for germinati on to occur, and continuous 
moisture appears to be mandatory.  Seedlings grow to 
saplings at the rate of about 12 inches per year on 
favorable sites with open but moist conditions.  
Seedlings are very vulnerable to crowding from other 
species. 
 
White cedar seedlings are not commonly grown in 
the nursery, so little is documented about the size and 
age of transplants.  It is  likely that the 1-0 class 
would be preferred as bare-root stock.  White cedar 
has a shallow root system,  so suitable planting sites 
must have abundant moisture very close to the 
surface. 
 
Management  
Site selection is critical to  the success of white cedar.  
Moisture must be reliable, and competition from 
other species must be contro lled.  The site must also 
have protection from high winds or else severe wind-
throw will result.  Fire will readily kill white cedar if 
it gets into the crowns.  Finally, heavy ice and snow 
will often break or topple young trees.  Deer will 
preferentially browse white  cedar. Beaver presence 
favors white cedar as deciduous species are 
preferentially cut by them, leaving the cedar saplings 
or poles.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No insect or diseases pose serious threats. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None are known to exist. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson , Retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office, Syracuse, New 
York 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 01jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.