Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CAROLINA 
CRABGRASS 
Digitaria cognata  (J.A. 
Schultes) Pilger  
Plant Symbol = DICO6  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Alternate Names 
fall witchgrass, Leptoloma cognatum  
 
Uses 
Carolina crabgrass is grazed by all domestic livestock 
and by deer and antelope.  Upland game birds eat the 
seed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Carolina crabgrass is a 
native, warm-season, short-lived, perennial bunch 
grass.  The height ranges from 1 to 2 feet.  The leaf 
blade is narrow, generally less than 4 inches long, 
one side wavy, and the other smooth.  The leaf sheath 
is rounded and shorter than the internodes.  The stem 
is knotty and hairy at the base.  The seedhead has an 
open purplish panicle one-third to one-half as tall as 
the plant.  The panicle bran
ches are hairy in the axils 
and the spikelets are 1-flowered and solitary at the 
end of a long pedicel. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Proper use and management of associated grasses 
maintains this grass in the plant community. 
 
Establishment 
Carolina crabgrass growth starts in the spring.  The 
seedheads are produced a month later with the foliage 
remaining green for 2 to 3 weeks longer.  When 
climate is favorable, it make s some fall growth.  Seed 
remain on the plant until winter.  This plant is 
shallow rooted.  Individual plants are usually widely 
scattered in any plant community.  It grows best on 
sandy loams with heavier subsoil. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03  ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.