Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DEERTONGUE 
Dichanthelium clandestinum  
(L.) Gould  
Plant Symbol = DICL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
The major use of deertongue is for revegetating 
disturbed areas where site conditions limit the use of 
other species.  It is tolerant of sites with: (1) a pH as 
low as 3.8, (2) aluminum concentration which limits 
growth of other species, and (3) light textured soil 
which is droughty and infertile.  These tolerances 
allow deertongue to excel  when revegetating acid 
coal and other surface mine spoils, and sandy infertile 
disturbed areas. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Deertongue is a perennial, warm season grass native 
to the Eastern United States and Southeastern 
Canada.  The midsummer growth normally reaches a 
height of one to three feet.  The leaf sheath and stem 
are hairy.  Leaves are one-half to one and one-quarter 
inches wide and four to eight inches long.  In autumn 
culms form a very leafy rosette, four to six inches in  height.  Deertongue produces short, strong rhizomes.  
Two seed crops are produced 
annually: an early crop 
on an open terminal panicle and a later crop in a 
panicle enclosed in the swollen leaf sheath.  The 
second crop, produced in the enclosed panicle, 
produces an abundance of seed.  Deertongue has 
about 400,000 seeds per pound.  Deertongue lodges 
over winter and forms a mat of vegetative cover.  
Some of the stems break off and are carried away by 
wind or water.  Much of the seed is retained in the 
leaf sheaths of the old stems. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The natural distribution is Nova Scotia, Quebec, and 
Maine to Kansas, south to northern Florida and 
Texas.  Deertongue is widely scattered throughout 
this area volunteering onto denuded sites.  It grows 
well on non-cultivated  soil.  Because of its tolerance 
to low pH, high concentrations of aluminum, and 
droughty infertile conditions, it is commonly found to 
volunteer on such sites. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
The type of sites where deertongue is recommended 
and its seed dormancy char acteristics influence the 
method and timing of establishment.  Deertongue 
should be seeded as early as possible in the spring.  
Seed dormancy is easily overcome when deertongue 
is planted during cool weather, so that natural 
stratification in the soil will occur.  If the site 
conditions restrict early spring planting, it is 
advisable to sow seed in the late fall or early winter, 
while dormant. 
 
On sites where conventional farm equipment can 
operate, prepare seedbed as normal for a pasture 
planting.  Use a grain or grass drill; do not place seed 
deeper than one inch.  In  sand and gravel pits, the 
method of choice is to broadcast, then 'track' the seed 
with lime and fertilizer  in with a bulldozer.  
Hydroseed steep or rough areas, but expect this 
method to result in less success than those outlined 
above.  Expect slow es tablishment of seedings. 
 
Mulching is beneficial for seedling establishment and 
erosion control, except in sand and gravel pits.  Two 
tons of straw or hay tacked down is the most

desirable method.  Where this is not possible, wood 
fiber mulch should be used at 1,500 pounds per acre. 
 
Deertongue is most often planted in mixtures with 
other warm season grasses such as switchgrass with 
the total rate of 12-15 pounds per acre.  Typically, 
deertongue does not exceed 3 pounds of the per-acre 
mix. 
 
Management  
In lieu of a soil test, two tons of lime and 300 to 400 
pounds of 10-10-10 fertilizer per acre are suggested 
for deertongue plantings on  critical areas.  Where 
conditions permit, these materials should be worked 
into the soil surface during  site preparation.  
Additional fertilizer applications may be needed after 
a stand has emerged in order to develop a vigorous 
plant cover.  Once good cover has developed, plant 
vigor will be maintained without additional fertilizer 
treatments. It can be mowed (1-2 times per year) if 
necessary to improve appearance. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Tioga’ (northeast US) is the only variety of 
deertongue.  It was developed by the Big Flats Plant 
Materials Center and released for commercial 
production in 1975.  Seed is available from 
commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.