Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ORCHARDGRASS 
Dactylis glomerata L. 
Plant Symbol = DAGL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Uses 
Livestock: The primary use of orchardgrass is for 
forage production.  It is highly palatable to all classes 
of livestock.  Orchardgrass  is one of the best forage 
grasses for use in the Northeast in intensive rotational 
grazing systems. 
 
Erosion control : Because of its dense network of 
roots, orchardgrass provides good erosion control on 
those soils to which it is particularly adapted. 
 
Wildlife : Orchardgrass is used  in grass-legume mixes 
for nesting, broad rearing, escape and winter cover in 
upland wildlife and conservation plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Dactylis glomerata  L., orchardgrass, is a persistent, 
cool season bunchgrass.  Under dry land conditions, 
it usually develops distinct clumps and flower culms 
15 to 18 inches tall.  Leaves are usually less than 12 
inches in height.  When grown under irrigation or in 
more moist situations, it attains a much larger stature 
and grows together in a cl ose stand.  No vegetative 
spread has been observed.  Orchardgrass is one of the 
earliest species to grow in the spring, making 
tremendous growth during cool conditions.  Due to 
deep roots it also is capable of strong summer growth 
when conditions are favorable.  Orchardgrass has 
487,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Orchardgrass is found from Maine to the Gulf Coast 
states and from the Atlan tic Coast to the eastern 
Great Plains.  It is common throughout the 
Appalachian Mountains and is especially well-
adapted to Maryland, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, 
Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee.  It is also found 
in the high-rainfall regions of the western mountains 
and in irrigated areas throughout the West.  Areas of 
greatest adaptability in the West are the sagebrush, 
grass, and pinyon-juniper communities, although the 
plant has performed well when seeded in the aspen 
and Douglas fir communities.  In the Northeast, 
orchardgrass is adapted to somewhat poorly drained 
to well-drained soils.  
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
 
Orchardgrass performs well on different textured 
soils ranging from clay to  gravely loams and on 
shallow to deep soils.  It does not grow well in saline 
soils and areas with high water tables.  It has the 
ability to establish and persist in areas that receive as 
little as 11 inches of annual precipitation.   
Orchardgrass performs best in a pH range of 5.8 – 
7.0. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
A clean, firm, weed-free se edbed is recommended.  
Range and erosion control seedings should be made 
in the late fall or very early spring.  Do not seed after 
the spring moisture period is well advanced or a 
failure may occur because of drought and hot 
summer conditions before the grass is well

established.  A deep furrow or range drill with press 
wheels may be used; orchardgrass is easily 
established with common agricultural drills in the 
Northeast.  For range an d critical area treatment a 
seeding rate of 3 to 4 pounds per acre is 
recommended.  If broadcast, double the seeding rate.  
Adjustments in seeding rate should be made when 
seeding in mixtures.  Seeding depth should not be 
more than 1/2 inch.  When seeding for seed increase, 
planting should be in 28 to 40 inch rows.  Seed at 1-
1/2 to 2 pounds per acre.  Seed matures evenly and is 
ready for harvest in mid-August.  When direct 
combining the seed should be dried before storing. 
 
Management  
Under dry land conditions the planting should not be 
grazed until late summer or fall  of the second 
growing season.  The plants may be severely 
damaged by overgrazing especially in the seedling 
year.  Use no more than 60% of the annual growth 
during the winter season or 50% during the growing 
season.  This plant responds well to a rotation-
deferred grazing system.  Periodically the grass 
should be allowed to mature and produce seed for 
continuation of the stand. 
 
Orchardgrass responds to good fertility management.  
One strategy to even out the forage production is to 
fertilize the stand after the first and second cutting or 
grazing to boost late spring and summer production.  
Apply fertilizer based upon regular soil tests. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Brown stripe, scald, rust and leaf spot are the most 
prevalent and destructive disease in orchardgrass.  
Resistance to these varies among cultivars.  Japanese 
and green June beetle larv ae feed on orchardgrass 
roots; sawflies feed on their tops.  Little is known, 
however, about the economic loss caused by these 
insects. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Latar’ has a lower lignin (fiber) content than other 
orchardgrass cultivars and is 10% higher in 
digestibility.  It matures 10 to 14 days later than 
common orchardgrass and is usually in the pre-bloom 
stage when alfalfa is at th e optimum growth stage for 
making hay.  Therefore a mixture of ‘Latar’ and 
alfalfa makes a high quality hay.  Forage yields of 
‘Latar’ are at least as much per acre as the earlier 
maturing varieties and forage quality is generally 
superior. 
 
‘Potomac’ is a productive, persistent, rust-resistant 
cultivar that produces good yields but matures too  early to be compatible with alfalfa for hay.  When 
alfalfa is ready to cut, ‘Potomac’ is too mature to 
produce good quality hay.  This variety should be 
used where early maturity is needed. 
 
‘Paiute’ is a cultivar that produces an abundance of 
basal leaves and leafy upright stems.  It’s intended 
use is for forage production on arid rangelands. 
 
‘Akaroa’, ‘Berber’, ‘Pomar’, and ‘Sandia’ are other 
orchardgrass cultivars.  Ma
ny cultivars are available 
for forage production. 
 
Seeds are available from most commercial seed 
suppliers. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Tony Bush  
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan  Edited: 10Aug2000 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.