Plant Fact Sheet
VELVET PANICUM 
Dichanthelium scoparium   
(Lam.) Gould  
Plant Symbol = DISC3  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 
 
 Melinda Brakie  - NRCS   
 Alternate Names   
Velvet rosettegrass and broom panic -grass are two other 
names for this plant.  
Uses   
Potential uses of velvet panicum include revegetation of 
disturbed areas. This specie provides a source of food for 
songbirds, sma ll mammals, and game birds. The basal 
rosettes provide winter forage for wild turkey and white 
tailed deer.   
Status   
Throughout the adaptation area of the United States, 
velvet panicum is identified as either a facultative (FAC -
equally likely to occur in  wetlands or non-wetlands) or 
facultative wetland (FACW - usually occurs in wetlands, 
but occasionally found as a non- wetlands) plant. Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
thr eatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator value.   
 
 
 
 
  Description and Adaptation  
 
This species is distinguished from other North American 
grasses by its unique growth pattern. A basal rosette is 
produced during fall and winter with stems developing in 
the spring.   
 
Winter basal rosette  
Velvet panicum is a native perennial bunchgrass that 
actively grows during the summer. However, the plant’s 
lifespan is considered to be short when compared to other 
perennial plants. It has erect coarse stems up to 4.5 feet 
tall. The gray -green stems and leaves are covered with 
fine hairs. The leaves are  .25 to 1.0 inch wide. Velvet 
panicum tends to flower later than the other 
Dichanthelium species if they are present in a stand.
 
There are approximately 380,000 seeds per pound.   
Velvet panicum is adapted to the eastern United States 
from New York to Flori da west to Kansas and Texas. In 
East Texas, this plant is predominantly found in woods 
and post oak savannahs. This adaptation area corresponds 
to USDA Hardiness Zones 5b to 10b. Velvet panicum 
grows in areas with precipitation ranging from 30 to 55 
inches . It prefers coarse and medium textured soils with 
pH range of 4.5 to 7.5. Velvet panicum is not tolerant of 
salinity. This plant is found in sandy woods, low areas, 
and disturbed sites.  
  Establishment   
Fertilize planting area according to soil test for 
es tablishment. Maintain fertility levels at medium 
conditions and soil pH near 6.0. To reduce weed 
competition, do not over apply nitrogen.   
Plant the seed at a rate of 3.0 pure live seed pounds per 
acre in the fall when the ground is moist. Drill or hand 
pl ant seeds at a depth of ½” or less. If broadcasting, use a 
cultipacker to increase seed to soil contact.  
Management   
If managing as a planting: Do not over apply nitrogen 
fertilizer or keep soil fertility at a high level. Seed 
production maybe decreased b y high fertility levels.