Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VIOLET PRAIRIE CLOVER  
Dalea purpurea  Vent. 
Plant Symbol = DAPU5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
purple prairie clover 
 
Uses 
Violet prairie clover can be used in roadside 
plantings, as wildlife food an d habitat, in wildflower 
gardens because of its attractive flowers, and as a 
small component in a seeding mixture for prairie 
restoration.  Tea can be made from vigorous taproot 
to reduce fever in measles victims.  This plant is 
highly palatable and nutritious.  It is grazed often and 
tends to decrease under heavy use.  Violet prairie 
clover fixes nitrogen in the soil. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species,  state noxious status, and we
tland indicator values).  
Considered threatened in several states. 
 
Description 
Violet prairie clover is a native, warm-season legume 
which grows to a height of 30 to 90 cm.  Several 
stems may grow from a single base.  The flowers are 
pinkish-purple on elongated spikes which are 2-4 cm 
long.  The flower head at  the end of a wiry stem is 
cylindrical, with a fringe of rosy petals on a partly 
bare cone.  Violet prairie clover flowers the last of 
May through September. The leaves are divided into 
3-5 narrow leaflets which may be sparingly hairy. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Violet prairie clover occurs  in prairies, rocky open 
glades, along railroads, and rocky or open woods. 
It ranges from Indiana to Saskatchewan and 
Montana, south to Tennessee, Arkansas, Texas and 
New Mexico; also in Alabama and introduced east to 
New York.  It is most abundant in the upland of the 
true prairie.  It also occurs in sand prairies, hill 
prairies, and gravel-hill prairies. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing.  Firm the seedbed by cultipacking.  The 
seedbed should be firm enough to allow the seed to 
be planted ¼ inch deep.  A seeder with a legume box 
works well in the seeding operation, although other 
types of seeders or drills may be used.  Violet prairie 
clover is easily propagated from seed.  Seed sown in 
spring will produce transplants in one season.  For 
permanent plantings, sow unstratified inoculated 
(Inoculum –F) seed in fall, stratified inoculated seed 
in spring.  Plants are largely cross-pollinated.  Violet 
prairie clover grows well on well-drained or dry soils. © W.L. Wagner 
Smithsonian Institution 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Seeding rates for violet prairie clover should be about 
two pounds of pure live seed (PLS) per acre for seed 
production in 36-inch rows.  For solid stand 
production, drill three times the seeding rate of row 
production to maintain 40 PLS per square foot.  For 
prairie restoration or dive rse plantings for wildlife, 
use at least five species of native grasses and ten 
species of native forbs or legumes.  Plant purple 
prairie clover at a rate of  eight ounces/acre PLS when 
this species is 0-5% of  the combined mixture.

Scarified inoculated seed should be used in spring 
plantings and unscarified inoculated seed should be 
used to make fall plantings.  There are approximately 
300,000 clean seeds in one pound of violet prairie 
clover. 
 
Apply no fertilizer the establishment year unless a 
soil test indicates a severe  deficiency of potassium 
and/or phosphorus.  Use no nitrogen during the 
establishment year as this can encourage weed 
competition. 
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing at a height that 
will not affect the purple prairie clover seedlings.  
For grassy weed control use Poast herbicide and 
follow label recommendations, as herbicide weed 
control will encourage a good stand.  For pre-
emergence or post emergence, Plateau herbicide is 
labeled; follow label recommendations.   Note:  
These herbicide products may not be registered on 
this legume species in your state.  NRCS does not 
endorse the use of any product.  At the time of 
publication the PMC staff was aware of only these 
products.  There may be ot hers available.  Refer 
to product label for specific application 
information. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Kaneb’ (Riley County, Kansas) violet prairie clover 
was released by the Manhattan, Kansas Plant 
Materials Center because of its superior vigor and 
seed production.  Bismarck Germplasm (Lyman 
County, South Dakota) is a selected release from the 
Bismarck, North Dakota Plant Materials Center; it 
was chosen for its superior vigor, forage abundance 
and above average seed yield.  Central Iowa 
Germplasm is a source identified release from the 
Elsberry, Missouri Plant Materials Center; it is a 
composite of collections made throughout central 
Iowa. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Jimmy Henry , Manager 
Elsberry Plant Materials Center 
Elsberry, Missouri 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.