Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHOWY 
TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium candense   (L.) DC.
Plant Symbol = DECA7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Jennifer Anderson USDA NRCS Iowa State Office  
Alternate Names 
showy trefoil, beggars lice, stick tights 
 
Uses 
Showy ticktrefoil is used for wildlife food and cover 
(quail, pheasants, turkey, ground birds, and deer), 
and as a small component in seeding mixtures for 
prairie restoration. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Showy ticktrefoil is a tall (over 4 feet in height), 
native, perennial warm-season legume.  Its leaves are 
clover-like, made up of 3 long-oval leaflets that are ½ 
to 4 inches long (usually 3 to 8 times as long as 
broad).  The lower surface of the leaflets is covered 
with dense hairs; stems have fewer hairs.  Showy 
ticktrefoil flowers are small and purple; the ½-inch 
blossoms occur in clusters atop hairy stems.  Showy 
ticktrefoil is open-pollinated.  Seed pods are flat, 
deeply lobed or jointed, the joints often breaking 
apart and adhering to clothing and to animals by 
means of small hooked hairs; the pods have three or 
more segments, resembling a flattened chain of 
beads.  There are approx imately 72,500 clean seeds 
in 1 pound of showy ticktrefoil.   
 
The branched inflorescence with larger flowers that 
are rose-purple and change to blue with age 
distinguish Desmodium canadense  from Desmodium 
illinoense , which has a single, terminal white-
flowered inflorescence with few branches.   D. 
canadense  is also a more robust plant and has a seed 
pod with one straight margin and one curved margin.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Showy ticktrefoil occurs in prairies and wet 
meadows, along spring branches, and in open 
thickets.  It ranges from Quebec to North Dakota and 
Saskatchewan, south to Virginia, West Virginia, 
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, and Oklahoma. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.   
 
Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing.  Firm the seedbed by cultipacking.  The 
seedbed should be firm enough to allow the seed to 
be planted ¼ inch deep.  Seeding rates for showy 
ticktrefoil should be about 3 to 4 pounds pure live 
seed (PLS) per acre for wild life planting.  Scarified 
inoculated (“EL” Culture) seed should always be 
used. Showy ticktrefoil is seeded at 0.5% to 1% of a 
total seed mixture for prairie restoration.  A brillion 
seeder works well in the seeding operation, although 
other types of seeders or drills may be used.  Showy 
ticktrefoil grows well on a wide range of soil types.  
Seed can be planted in the spring, early fall or 
dormant seeded in the winter.  The seedlings are 
vigorous; therefore, new plantings can be established

quickly.  This makes showy ticktrefoil especially 
useful in mixtures with warm-season grasses, many 
of which do not produce ground cover rapidly.  
Apply no fertilizer the establishment year unless a 
soil test indicates a severe deficiency of potassium 
and/or phosphorus.  Use no nitrogen during the 
establishment year as this can encourage weed 
competition. 
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing at a height that 
will not affect the ticktrefoil seedlings.  For grassy 
weed control use a grass herbicide and follow label 
recommendations, as herbicide weed control will 
encourage a good stand.   Note: Some herbicide 
products may not be registered on this legume 
species in your state. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None known at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Alexander Germplasm showy ticktrefoil is a source-
identified release from the Elsberry, Missouri Plant 
Materials Center.  It was collected from a native 
stand in Alexander County in southern Illinois. 
 
Prepared By:  
Jimmy Henry , Manager 
Steve Bruckerhoff , Assistant Manager 
Elsberry Plant Materials  Center, Elsberry, Missouri 
 
Jerry Kaiser, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Elsberry, Missouri 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Jimmy Henry , Manager 
Elsberry Plant Materials  Center, Elsberry, Missouri 
 
Edited: 20nov2003 jlk; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.