Plant Fact Sheet
SALTGRASS 
DISTICHLIS SPICATA  
(L.) GREENE   
Plant Symbol = DISP  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Photo by William Skaradek USDA NRCS  
 
Alternate Names 
Inland saltgrass, seashore saltgrass, spike grass and alkali 
grass.  
 
Uses  
L ivestock: Under favorable soil and moisture conditions, 
studies have shown Saltgrass favorable for pastures 
irrigated with saline water. The total dry matter yields 
were 9081 kg/ha with a total protein production of 1300 
kg/ha.  Saltgrass is grazed by both  cattle and horses and it 
has a forage value of fair to good because it remains green 
when most other grasses are dry during the drought 
periods and it is resistant to grazing and trampling.  It is 
cropped both when green and in the dry state; however, it 
is most commonly used the winter for livestock feed.  
Saltgrass along the Atlantic coast was the primary source 
of hay for the early colonists.  
Wildlife
Distichlis spicata is significant in the salt marshes, which 
provide nesting grounds for birds, fish and larvae of many 
species of marine invertebrate animals. As salt marsh 
plants  decompose, their stored nutrients provide a steady 
source of food for clams, crabs, and fish.  
: Saltgrass is a larval foodplant for the Wandering 
Skipper (Panoquina panoquinoides errans) butterfly.  It is 
also an important food in the diet of waterfowl and the 
Florida salt marsh vole ( Microtus pennsylvanicus 
dukecampbelli ), which is on the Endangered and 
Threatened Species List of Southeastern United States. 
Ducks are reported to occasionally eat the  dried seeds and 
controlled burning provides tender forages for wild geese.  
 
Wetland Restoration: The thick entangled roots of salt 
marsh plants acts as a guard between the ocean and the 
shore protecting the land from pollutants and othe r 
chemicals associated with runoff water.  It is particularly 
useful in saline/alkaline wetlands.  
 
Medicine : Saltgrass is a respiratory allergenic plant that is 
offered by Miles Pharmaceutical and used by Florida 
physicians to treat respiratory allergies.  
 
Spice : Indians that inhabited California used saltgrass as a 
seasoning.  They collected the salt crystals by threshing 
the blades.  The seasoning provided is gray -green and said 
to have tasted like a salty dill pickle.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description   
Saltgrass is a native perennial from 15” to 35” in height.  
It  forms dense mats with rhizomes and sometimes stolons.  
It is a dioecious species with male and female 
reproductive parts on separate plants.  
 
It is widespread and in the eastern United  States is most 
commonly found along estuaries and the troughs of back 
d une areas along the shorelines.  
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Adaptation: Saltgrass is found in saline areas, brackish 
marshes, and in salt flats along the coasts of the Atlant ic 
and Pacific Oceans, the Gulf of Mexico and the along the 
coast of South America.  It inhabits upper/high marsh