Plant Fact Sheet
HOPBUSH 
Dodonaea viscosa  (L.) Jacq.  
Plant Symbol = DOVI  
 
Contributed by: Hoolehua Plant Materials Center  
 
David Duvauchelle  
USDA NRCS 2004
   
Alternate Names   
Aalii, lampuaye, togovao, hopseed bush, and varnish- leaf.   
   
Uses   
Conservation:   The fibrous spreading root system, rapid 
growth, and spreading canopy make D. viscosa  an 
effective soil stabilizer which is particularly useful in 
controlling gully and coastal dune erosion.  It is drought -
tolerant and has the ability to withstand wildfires.  D. 
viscosa  shrubs are somewhat shade tolerant and suitable 
for riparian and restoration projects.  They are also very 
wind hardy and useful as an in -fie ld windbreak system.   
   
Landscape:   D. viscosa  is an aesthetically pleasing plant.  
It has lush green foliage and deep red capsules that make 
it pleasing to the eye.  D. viscosa  may be used as a hedge, 
specimen plant, or maybe a small patio tree.  It is ideal for 
xeriscape gardens.  
   
Cultural:  In Hawaii, its bright colored capsules were 
woven into lei and also used dye.  The wood was used for 
house timbers and for making weapons.  Medicinally, the 
leaves were crushed and applied to treat rashes.  
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status,  and wetland indicator values).   
    Description and Adaptation  
Dodonaea viscosa 
is a shrub or sometimes a small tree 
ranging in height from 6 -25 feet.  Its long and slender 
leaves have margins that are usually wavy or crinkled.  
Plants usually bloom in the  early part of the year and seed 
before summer.  The flowers are fairly small and the 
female flowers develop into papery capsules that may be 
red, pink, green, yellow, or tan.  Seeds are roundish, black 
and very small; about 
1/16  inch wide.  There are abou t 
84,200 seeds per pound.  D. viscosa  is adapted to a wide 
range of habitats, from sea -level to nearly 8,000 feet and 
tolerating annual rainfall of 12 -98 inches.  D. viscosa  is 
found throughout the tropical regions of the world 
including Arizona, Californi a, Florida, Hawaii, and Puerto 
Rico.   
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
It is recommended that D. viscosa  be propagated in a 
shade house with 50 percent shade, after the last fr ost.  To 
aid in germination, seeds can be soaked overnight in hot 
tap water or scarified.  Seeds are planted ¼ inch deep in a 
sterile medium and irrigated daily.  Dibble tubes are 
recommended.  Germination should occur within 10 days.  
Fertilizer can be ap plied to seedlings at four weeks after 
germination.  After four months, seedlings should be 
exposed to direct sunlight and allowed to adjust to the 
new environment.  The seedlings should be ready for 
planting into the field after one month of exposure to 
d irect sunlight.  Some advantageous attributes of  D. 
viscosa,  if considering it for conservation use, are that it 
takes well in any kind of soil and it tolerates ocean winds 
and also dry dessert  heat.  Water regularly to establish the 
plant, but once it is established it requires very little 
water.     
   
Management   
Trials at the Hoolehua PMC suggest that D. viscosa  can 
be planted in single rows at 1 -3 foot spacing or six -foot -
staggered double row s, to serve as in-field windbreaks or 
visual screens.  With very light watering D. viscosa will 
remain a smaller 6 -8ft shrub.  On the other hand, it may 
attain heights above 15ft if more water is available.  
Mulch paper or some other sort of mulching is 
re commended to aid with weed suppression.  It tolerates 
regular pruning very well if a uniform hedge is desired.  It 
is an ideal plant for conservation because it requires very 
little effort to manage.