Plant Fact Sheet
PANICLEDLEAF 
TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium paniculatum (L.) DC. 
Plant Symbol = DEPA6 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD      
 
Photo by Rick Mark rick.mark@comcast.net  image used with permission  
 
Alternate Names  
Panicled Tick Trefoil  
Uses  
Ethnobotanical:  The Houma Indians of Louisiana used an 
infusion of the roots in whiskey to treat  weakness and 
cramps.  
Landscaping and wildlife:  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil 
attracts birds and is a good grazing and browsing plant for 
livestock.  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil enriches the soil 
through nitrogen fixation.  Long -tongued bumblebees 
( Bombus impatien  and Bombus pensylvanica  ) collect 
pollen from the flowers.  Other long tongued bee 
pollinators include leaf -cutting bees ( Megachile brevis 
brevis, Megachile mendica , and Megachile petulans ), and 
digger bees ( Melissodes bimaculata bimaculata  ). Short 
tongued bee pollinators include: sweat bees ( Nomia 
nortoni nortoni ) and Campus bees ( Calliopsis 
andreniformis ). The caterpillars of several skippers feed 
on the leaves: Hoary Edge  (Achalarus lyciades) , Silver-
Spotted Skipper ( Epargyreus clarus) , Southern 
Cloudywing ( Thorybes bathyllus) , and Northern 
Cloudywing ( Thorybes pylades) .  The caterpillars of the 
butterfly Eastern Tailed Blue ( Everes comyntas) also feed 
on the foliage, while the caterpillars of the butterfly Gray  Hairstreak (
Strymon melinus ) eat the flowers and 
developing seedpods. Other insect feeders include many 
kinds of beetles, and some species of thrips, aphids, moth 
caterpillars, and stinkbugs.  The seeds are eaten by some 
upland gamebirds (Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and 
small rode nts (White-Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while 
the foliage is readily eaten by White -Tailed Deer and 
other hoofed mammalian herbivores. The Cottontail 
Rabbit also consumes the foliage .
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Nat ural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description and Adaptation  
Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil is a native, perennial, wildflower 
that grows up to 3 feet tall. The genus Desmodium : 
originates from Greek meaning "long branch or chain," 
probably from the shape and attachment of the seedpods.  
The central stem is green with clover -like, oblong, 
multiple green leaflets proceeding singly up the stem.  
The showy purp le flowers appear in late summer and 
grow arranged on a stem maturing from the bottom 
upwards.  In early fall, the flowers produce leguminous 
seed pods approximately  ⅛ inch long.  Panicledleaf 
Ticktrefoil plants have a single crown.  This wildflower is 
a p ioneer species that prefers some disturbance from 
wildfires, selective logging, and others causes.   The sticky 
seedpods  cling to the fur of animals and the clothing of 
humans  and  are carried to new locations . 
 
Figure 1  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil distribution 
from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.