Plant Fact Sheet
HAIRY SMALL-LEAF 
TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium ciliare   
( Muhl.  ex Willd. ) DC.  
Plant Symbol = DECI  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD   
 
Larry Allain@USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
 
Alternate Names  
Hedysarum ciliare (L.)  
Hedysarum barbatum (L.)  
 
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanical : The Houma Indians of Louisiana  used an 
infusion of the roots in whiskey to treat weakness and 
cramps.  
Landscaping and wildlife:   Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil 
attracts birds and is a good grazing and browsing plant for 
livestock.   Hairy Small -Leaf Ticktrefoil enriches the soil 
through nitrogen fixation.   Long-tongued bumblebees 
(Bombus impatien s and Bombus pensylvanic us ) collect 
pollen from the flowers.   Other long -tongued bee 
pollinators include leaf -cutting bees (Megachile brevis 
brevis, Megachile mendica, and Megachile petulans), and 
digger bees (Melissodes bimaculata bimaculata). Short -tongued bee pollinators include: sweat bees (Nomia 
nortoni nortoni) and Campus bees (Calliopsis 
andreniformis).
  The caterpillars of several skippers feed 
on the leaves:   Hoary Edge (Achalarus lyciades), Silver -
Spotted Skipper (Epargyreus clarus), Southern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes bathyllus), and Northern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes pylades).   The caterpillars of the 
butterfly Eastern Tailed Blue (Everes comyntas) also feed 
on the foliage, while the caterpillars of the butterfly Gray 
Hairstreak (Strymon melinus) eat the flowers and 
developing seedpods.   Other insect feeders include many 
kinds of beetles, and some species of thrips, aphids, moth 
caterpillars, and stinkbugs.   The seeds are eaten by some 
upland game birds (Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and 
small rodents (White -Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while 
the foliage is readily eaten by White -Tailed Deer and 
other hoofed mammalian herbivores.   The Cottontail 
Rabbit also consumes the foliage.  
 
Status  
Pl ease consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Hairy Small -L eaf  Ticktrefoil is a native, perennial , 
wildflower that grows up to 3  feet tall.   The name of the 
genus  Desmodium  originates from Greek meaning "long 
branch or chain," probably from the shape of  the seedpods 
and the way they  attach to clothing and animals .  Th e 
central ste m is green with trifoliate (c lover-like), oblong, 
compound (made up of multiple green leaflets), green 
leaves proceeding singly up the stem.   The showy purple 
flowers appear in late summer and grow from panicles 
(flowers arranged on a stem) th at mature  from the bottom 
upwards.   In early fall, the flowers produce leguminous 
seed pods approximately  ⅛ inch long.   Hairy Small -Leaf 
Ticktrefoil plants have a single crown.   This wildflower is 
a pioneer species that prefers some disturbance from 
wildfire s, selective logging, and other  causes.   The sticky 
seedpods cling to the fur of animals and the clothing of 
humans ; as a result, the  seeds are carried to new locations.   
Hairy Small -Leaf  Ticktrefoil grows in upland habitats 
such
 as forests and savannahs.   It prefers coarse-  to 
medium - tex tured soils that are well -drained .