Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLENDER 
HAIRGRASS  
Deschampsia elongata  (Hook.) 
Munro  
Plant symbol = DEEL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names 
Another scientific name is  Aira  elongata. 
 
Uses 
Slender hairgrass is a moderate to fast growing native 
bunchgrass useful for erosion control along 
waterways, ditches, and streambanks, as well as on 
other seasonally wet or recently disturbed sites.  It 
can also be sown as cover after logging in ravines 
and other moist forest areas.  This species has 
potential as a nurse crop for slower establishing, 
longer lived species like California oatgrass 
( Danthonia californica ) or other native prairie and  woodland grasses and herbs.  Forage value is fair to 
good prior to maturity.  This is a versatile and 
underutilized native grass.  It is also regarded as an 
attractive ornamental grass because of its fine texture, 
wispy seed heads, and golden color in summer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
 Dale Darris USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
Slender hairgrass is a moderate sized, fine textured, 
cool season grass. It is generally a biennial or short-
lived perennial under most conditions.  Stems 
(culms) are 40 to 80 (100)  cm tall. Leaves are hair-
like, less than 1.5 mm wide, and form a basal tuft. 
The open sheaths are smooth and auricles are absent. 
The panicle (flowerhead) is  5 to 25 (30) cm long, 
narrow with slender upward-pointing branches, and a 
pale green to purple color.  This species occurs 
primarily from Alaska to California and east to 
Montana and New Mexico. 
 
Key to identification:  The slender, upright to arching 
seed head and fine leaves are indicative of its 
common name.  It should not be confused with tufted 
hairgrass ( Deschampsia caespitosa ) which is taller, 
coarser, and more robust.  In addition, the panicles of 
tufted hairgrass are more op en and branching, and the 
leaves are broader and flatte r than slender hairgrass. 
Annual hairgrass ( Deschampsia danthonioides ) is 
smaller and the panicle is also much broader and 
open compared to slender hairgrass. Because of the 
fine texture and small florets, it may loosely resemble 
a bentgrass (Agrostis  sp.) without closer inspection. 
 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Scattered to 
relatively common but rarely in large numbers.  
Slender hairgrass is occasionally found in drainage 
ways, seep areas, ditches, and damp open woods, as 
well as adjacent to moist pathways or other disturbed 
areas.  
 
Adaptation: Slender hairgrass can be found in wet 
meadows and along the margins of streams, ponds, 
and lakes. Habitat also includes moist slopes and the 
understory of open forests from lowland to alpine 
zones. It is also a component of coastal prairies. As a 
species of secondary pl ant succession, slender 
hairgrass re-establishes after logging in associated 
forest communities. It is found on fine sandy or

gravelly soils as well as heavier soil types.  This 
species tolerates full sun to partial shade. 
 
Establishment 
There is no seed 
dormancy and 
slender hairgrass 
establishes readily 
by sowing in the 
fall or early 
spring. Removal 
of surface hairs 
(pubescence) on 
the seed aids in 
further seed 
cleaning as well as 
sowing with a 
drill.  There are 
approximately 
2,300,000 seeds/lb 
(+/- 20%).  Each 
pound of live seed 
sown per acre 
applies about 54 
seeds per square 
foot.  Based on 
seed size and 
seedling vigor, 
suggested seeding 
rates are 2-4 lbs/ac 
when sown alone. Higher rates may be required when 
broadcasting to achieve full stands under more 
difficult conditions.  
 
Management 
Information on the management of this species is 
lacking.  Given its short-lived nature, grazing must be 
deferred during flowering and seed set every other 
year for stand regeneration.  Its ability to easily 
volunteer on moist, disturbed ground and readily 
produce seed makes it a candidate for moist soil 
management of wetland habitat for waterfowl, 
shorebirds, and other wildlife. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Short-lived and may not compete well with weedy 
herbaceous species.  There are no major concerns  
described for this species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Multiple sources of seed are readily available in 
California. One or more populations originating from 
western Oregon are on the market as well.  Seed 
sources from other regions for use in the same area 
may be lacking. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris and Robert Tracey, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
 Line drawing reprinted with 
permission, University of 
Washington Press 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 Edited: 20mar2006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.