Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CLASPING 
CONEFLOWER  
Dracopsis amplexicaulis   
(Vahl) Cass.  
Plant Symbol = DRAM  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center 
Thomas G. Barnes @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Clasping coneflower is an annual herb with 
elongated, bluish, waxy leaves that generally clasp 
around the stem at the base.  The flower heads are 
similar to those of black-eyed susans, but they are 
smaller (mostly 1 to 2 inches in diameter).  The 
yellow outer "petals" droop as the flowers mature, 
and the cylindrical black center (receptacle) is 
elongated up to 2 inches in length. 
 
Adaptation 
It is adapted to many soil types, but clasping 
coneflower generally prefers a moist site.  Natural 
stands are usually found on bottomland areas with a 
fairly rich soil and ample moisture.  It prefers full sun 
and will not persist in a shaded location. 
 
Clasping coneflower is distributed throughout the 
South.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A firm seedbed is required.  Clasping coneflower 
germinates best on a clean tilled site that has been 
firmed with a roller or finishing harrow before 
planting.  Seed can also be planted into a closely 
mowed, chemically-killed, or burned sod area with a 
light disking or harrowing that scratches the soil 
surface.  A layer of plan t residue on the soil will 
interfere with seed germination.  Broadcast or 
shallowly drill 2 to 3 grams per 100 square feet (2 to 
3 lb/acre) broadcast or shallowly drilled.  Seed should 
be placed close to the soil surface.  Cultipacking after 
planting will ensure good seed to soil contact.  Seed 
will germinate soon after planting and remain as a 
small, nondescript plant over the winter months. 
 
Management  
Plant growth and seed production are greatly 
improved by fertilization.  Fertilizer should be 
applied in the spring prior to flowering.  Apply 
according to soil test recommendations.  If test results 
are not available, a rate of 3.5 to 5.5 oz per 100 
square feet (100 to 150 lb/acre) of 13-13-13 is 
adequate for most plantings.  For seed production, 
increase the fertilizer rate to 9 oz per 100 square feet 
(250 lb/acre).  Stands will reseed prolifically for 
several years, but will gradually decline without soil 
disturbance.  Every two to three years, the site should 
be disked to control perennial weeds and promote 
clasping coneflower germination.  If necessary, 
plants can be mowed in the spring before stem 
elongation begins.  Stands that are not disked should 
be mowed in late summer, and a late fall mowing in 
is also recommended. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service 
Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials Center, Coffeeville, 
MS

Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.