Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARIZONA 
COTTONTOP  
Digitaria californica  (Benth.) 
Henr.  
Plant Symbol = DICA8  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Alternative Names 
Cottontop, cotton-top, Arizona cottongrass, cotton 
grass, punta blanca, California cottontop,  Trichachne 
californica  
 
Uses 
Arizona cottontop is grazed  by cattle, horses, and 
sometimes by sheep and goats.  It is most palatable 
when green.  It cures well on the stem and provides 
dry forage for cattle.  It has been used in range 
seedlings in south Texas following brush control. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Arizona cottontop is native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranges from 1-1/2 to 2 feet .  The leaf blade is flat, 
narrow, and usually less than 5 inches long.  The leaf 
sheath is covered with small hairs.  The stem has 
swollen base, scaly, and hairy.  The seedhead is an 
open panicle.  The second glume and sterile lemma 
are covered with long white (occasionally purple) 
hairs, giving it a silky cottony appearance after the 
seed ripens.    
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
To keep Arizona cottontop vigorous and maintain it 
in the plant community, defer grazing 60 to 70 days 
every 2 to 3 years before seed maturity.  No more 
than 50 percent of current year's growth by weight 
should be removed by grazing. 
 
Establishment 
It grows rapidly following late spring and summer 
rains and continues to grow as long as moisture is 
available.  It reproduces  primarily from seed and 
usually produces a good seed crop.  Seed remain 
viable for as long as 10 y ears.  It seldom grows in 
pure stands and grows best on gravelly and sandy 
loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana

Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.