Plant Fact Sheet
DILLENIUS’ TICK-
TREFOIL  
Desmodium glabellum  Michx 
Plant symbol = DEGL4 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS P lant Materials  Program  
 
David G. Smith, copyright 1997- 2009 
www.delawarewildf lowers.org 
 
Alternate Names  
Panicle tick -trefoil, perplexed tick -trefoil, tall tick clover, 
Diclinous'  tick -trefoil (Connecticut), smooth tick -trefoil   
   
Uses  
The seeds of the Dillenius’ Tick -Trefoil are eaten by 
upland game birds, small rodents, wild turkey, rabbits, 
groundhogs and livestock. It is also an excellent deer 
browse.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, stae noxious 
status, and wetland indica tor value.)  
 
Description  
Dillenius’ tick trefoil is a member of the pea family.  This 
native perennial forb grows between 2 ½ to 5 feet in 
height. Its tiny flowers are pink or purple and irregular in  shape and have no floral scent.  The flowers turn light 
blue when spent. Bloom time is from mid
-summer to 
early fall and lasts about a month.    The leaves are 
alternate, composed of three entire leaflets.  They are egg 
shaped with little or no point.  There is little or no stipule 
where the leaf is attac hed to the stem. The seed pods are 
covered with tiny hooked hairs that enable them to stick 
to the fur of passing animals and the fabric of humans, 
thus providing a mechanism for dispersal.  Long tongued 
bees are the primary pollinators.  
 
Adaptation a nd Distribution  
This tick trefoil prefers partial sun and dry to slightly dry 
conditions.  It usually grows in soil that contains loam, 
clay -loam, or some kind of rocky material.  Its habitats 
include savannas, rocky upland forest, edges of wooded 
areas,  thickets, and limestone glades. Its range is from 
New England to Minnesota and from Florida to Texas.  It 
is common  throughout the Midwest States.  
  For a current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web si te.  
 
Establishment  
A clean, firm seedbed is essential for establishing 
Dillenius’ Tick -Trefoil.  A good seedbed can be prepared 
by disking and harrowing, following by cultipacking.  
Planting into no -till conditions can be effective provided 
weeds are controlled and residue is managed prior to 
planting.  Good seed- to-soil contact is important for  
germination and establishment.  
 
The seedbed should be firm enough to allow the seed to 
be planted  ⅛”  to  ¼”  deep.    Cultipacker  seeders  and  band 
seeders follow ed by press wheels or a cultipacker help 
ensure shallow seed placement and good seed -to -soil 
contact.  Apply fertilizer (especially phosphorus or 
potassium) only as recommended by a soil test.  Nitrogen 
fertilizer is not recommended during establishment ye ar. 
 
Inoculating seeds with Rhizobium  before planting is 
recommended.  Consult inoculant supplier for 
recommendations on specific Rhizobium  strains for 
Dillenius’ tick -trefoil.   
 
Seeding  rates for Dillenius’ Tick -Trefoil should be 2 to 4 
oz. pure live seed per acre for wildlife planting or 0.5 to 
10% of a mix for prairie restoration.  Seed can be planted 
in the spring or early fall.  
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing at a h eight that will 
not affect the tick -trefoil seedlings.  For grassy weed 
control use a grass herbicide and follow label