Plant Fact Sheet
PURPLE PRAIRIE 
CLOVER  
 
Dalea purpurea Vent. var. purpurea    
Plant Symbol = DAPUP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas   
 
USDA NRCS   
 
Uses  
Erosion Control:   Purple prairie clover is used in a 
mixture with grass and forbs to prevent soil erosion on 
dam structures, roadsides, and other critical erodible 
areas.     
   
Wildlife:   Purple prairie clover is readily consumed by 
many types of wildlife.  During early gr owth stages, its 
foliage is consumed due to its high nutritional value.  
Purple prairie clover seed is consumed by birds and small 
mammals.  The purple flowers also attract many different 
species of pollinators such as bees and butterflies.   
   
Livestock:  Purple prairie clover can be grazed by 
livestock, primarily sheep and goats.  This plant is highly 
palatable and nutritious.   
   
Landscaping/Beautification:   Purple prairie clover is used 
in wildlife gardens, parks, prairie restorations, and 
recreation areas.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your  State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).    
 
Weediness    
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may d isplace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also availa ble 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
    .  Please consult this and 
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description    
Purple prairie clover is a native, warm -season, perennial 
legume.  The plant has one to many stems that grow up to 
2.5 feet long from a woody, stout taproot that branches 
near the surface.  The leaves are about one inch long and 
very narrow.  They alternate and have an average of five 
leaflets per pinnate compound.  The f lowers appear on the 
end of the stems and have cylindrical floral spikes about 
two inches long.  The flowers open beginning at the base 
of the flower head and progress up to the tip.  Seed is 
produced in a seed pod about ½ inch long.  The seed pod 
will con tain between one to two seed each.  Purple prairie 
clover blooms from April to June with the seed maturing 
from mid July to late August   
   
Adaptation   
Purple prairie clover is adapted to slopes along hillsides, 
prairies, and plains.  The plant is widely d istributed 
throughout central, south, and west Texas.  It occurs 
mostly on sandy, sandy loam, and other moderately 
drained soils  
 
 
Purple prairie clover area of distribution from PLANTS 
database.