Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE PRAIRIE CLOVER  
Dalea candida  Michx. ex 
Willd.  
Plant Symbol = DACA7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 Mike Haddock, Kansas wildflowers and Grasses, KSU Library 
Website 
 
Alternate Names 
Slender white prairie clover, prairie clover and 
Bloka (Lakota). 
 
Uses 
This leguminous forb produces palatable and 
nutritious forage for all classes of livestock and is an 
important browse species for antelope, deer, elk, and 
upland game birds, particularly sharp-tail grouse. 
Plains pocket gophers utilize the taproots and 
numerous birds and rodents eat the seed. This species 
will decrease and disappear under persistent 
overgrazing. It has an important ecological role in  native grasslands, because of its nitrogen fixing 
characteristic. This native le
gume can be used as the 
forb component in reclamation of drastically 
disturbed lands, range renovation and prairie 
restoration projects. It is also a potentially useful 
plant for roadside and rest area beautification, park 
plantings and recreational garden natural area 
plantings. Native Americans used the plant for both 
food and medicine. The Lakota chewed the roots for 
its pleasant, sweet taste, an d they made tea from dry 
leaves. Other Great Plains  Indians bruised the leaves 
and steeped them in water for application to fresh 
wounds.  The Pawnees calle d the plant broom weed 
because they bundled the  tough stems together to 
make a broom for sweeping their lodges. 
 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
General : Legume family (Fabaceae). White prairie 
clover is an attractive landscape plant that has fine 
textured leaves and grows 2 to 3 feet tall in small 
clumps. The stems tend to be single with a few 
upright branches near the  top. The stems are ridged 
or ribbed longitudinally. The bright green, alternately 
attached leaves are pinnat ely compound with an odd 
number (usually 5 to 9) of narrow leaflets. The 
leaflets have glandular do ts on their lower surface 
that can be seen with magnification. Flowering 
occurs from early to mid-June to July or August in 
Kansas. The small white flowers are packed into 
dense cylindrical spikes (3/8 to 2 1/8 inches) on the 
terminal ends of stems. The flowers are much 
simplified from the typical pea-like flowers of the 
legume family with most petals being reduced except 
for a single banner petal. The first flowers to open are 
at the bottom of the spike and progress upward 
toward the tip. Pollination is accomplished by 
numerous insects ranging from wasps to bumble 
bees. The fruit is a thin-walled pod (legume) 
approximately 1/8 of an inch long containing a single 
seed (rarely two). The greenish-brown seed is 
asymmetrically kidney shaped and a little more than 
1/16 inch long.  
 
This species is found growing primarily on well 
drained sandy, gravelly, and silt type soils, rarely on 
clay or lowland sites. It occurs on sites that receive 
10 to 18 inches of precipitation. Thus it would be

found growing  most commonly in mid to short grass 
prairie plant communities. It has been observed as a 
pioneer species on disturbed shallow soils or gravel.  
 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
White prairie clover is easy to propagate by seed. 
Scarification will improve total germination and 
speed of germination. Mechanical scarification using 
sandpaper or a laboratory scarifier is acceptable. 
White prairie clover should be planted on a prepared, 
weed free, firm seedbed. Th e seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow planting at a ¼ to ½ inch depth. Full 
seeding rate is 4 pounds per acre; however, this 
species will normally be planted as a minor 
component in a native seed mixture at a rate of .5 
pound per acre or less. Seeding of the forb 
component in alternate rows or cross planting with 
the grass component will ensure better forb 
establishment and stand longevity. Early spring 
seeding will produce the best results. The processed 
seed of Antelope Germplasm has 278,000 seeds per 
pound. With any planting containing forb and shrub 
species, broadleaf weed species can become a 
problem.  
   
Management  
Weed management during the first year 
establishment of native forbs is essential to produce a 
healthy stand. Mowing at a height that will not affect 
white prairie clover seedlings is one method of 
reducing weed competition. White prairie clover has 
good relative forage quality, but suffers from having 
relatively low forage yield when compared to other 
native legume species. White  prairie clover should 
improve forage digestibility when planted in pasture 
situations with native warm season grasses. Native 
legumes such as white prairie clover fix nitrogen 
from the atmosphere and make it available to grass 
species planted in association with it.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Rabbits prefer the foliage of this plant and can 
damage young plantings of this species. Plains pocket 
gophers can damage the tap root of this species. 
White prairie clover is a food plant for the larvae 
stage of the isola blue butterfly  Hemiagus isola. 
White prairie clover was discovered to be a host for 
Megacyllene angulifera  in Carbon County, Montana. 
Investigation of plant damage revealed 10 per cent of 
the root had extensive injury from the feeding of the 
cerambycid larvae.  Plant Pathologists at Kansas 
State University found  that the rust species Uropyxis 
petalostemonis  had an increased incidence of disease  on white prairie clover that had been irrigated. The 
rust disease had a profoun
d effect on the relative 
fitness and fecundity of the white clover population 
on the Konza Prairie Biological Station.    
 
Environmental Concerns 
White prairie clover should not cause any 
environmental concerns since it does not spread 
aggressively by seed or vegetative means.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Antelope Germplasm is a tested class release of 
slender white prairie clover from the North Dakota 
and Montana Plant Materials Centers (PMC). It was 
originally collected in 1947 in Stark County, North 
Dakota southwest of Dickinson. This collection was 
first evaluated as NDL-56 in Mandan, North Dakota 
Soil Conservation Service Nursery. The germplasm 
was sent to Montana in 1960 and compared to other 
white prairie clover accessions. It was released 
cooperatively in 2000 by th e two PMC’s. G1 seed is 
produced by the Bridger PMC and made available to 
commercial growers through the Foundation Seed 
Stock programs in Montana and Wyoming. Only a 
single generation (G2) beyond G1 is recognized in 
commercial production.  
  
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 080229 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal 
opportunitprovider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.