Plant Fact Sheet
WESTERN PRAIRIE 
CLOVER  
Dalea ornata  (Douglas) Eaton & 
Wright   
Plant Symbol = DAOR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
Kishor Bhattarai, Utah State University  
Alternate Names 
Alternative common names:   Blue Mountain prairie 
clover,  showy prairie clover, o rnate dalea 
 
Alterna tive scientific names:   Petalostemon ornatus 
Douglas ex. Hook, Petalostemon ornatum  Douglas, 
Kuhnistera ornata (Douglas) Kuntze, Petalostemon 
lagopus  Rydb.,  Petalostemon ornatum  forma  pallidus  H. 
St. John  
Uses  
Rangeland revegetation: Western prairie clover can be 
used in seeding mixes for div ersification and revegetation 
of rangelands .   
 
Forage :  Western prairie clover is a non -toxic legume and 
has the potential for increasing forage production and 
quality (Bhattarai et al. 2009).   Pollinator habitat: Dalea ornata 
attracts native bee fauna 
as well as managed agricultural pollinators.  
 
Beautification :  This plant is an excellent choice for 
beautification of roadsides, rest areas and parks.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natur al Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
General : Legume family (Fabaceae).  Western prairie 
clover is a perennial, herbaceous North American legume 
that grows to 12 –  24 inches in height.  It has a cluster of 
stems that arise from a taproot.  Dried stems are also 
usually present from previous years.  Leaves are alternate 
and o dd-pinnate, comprised of 5 –  7 oval shaped leaflets.  
Leaves and stems are dotted with tiny glands.  Flowers 
occur in dense, cylinder -shaped spikes, are light pink to 
purple in color and have 5 petals.  The flowers bloom 
upward along the spike May –  July.   Seedpods are closed 
and contain 1 or 2 seeds.   
 
Distribution : Western prairie clover is native to 
southeastern Washington, western Idaho, eastern Oregon, 
northern California and northwestern Nevada.  It is 
relatively uncommon.   
 
 Western prairie clover  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.