Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ILLINOIS 
BUNDLEFLOWER  
Desmanthus illinoensis 
(Michx.) MacM. ex B.L.  Robins. & Fern. 
Plant Symbol = DEIL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 R. Alan Shadow 
East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Alternate Names: False sensitive plant, Illinois 
mimosa, and Illinois desmanthus. 
 
Uses:  It is frequently used in range revegetation 
projects. It is recommended for use in range seedings 
and for wildlife food and cover. Illinois bundleflower 
was a minor plant for use by Native American tribes. 
It is being studied as a potential human grain crop by 
an independent, self-funded non-profit research and 
educational organization based in Kansas.  
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
This species is a member of the legume family 
(Fabaceae). It is a warm season, herbaceous, 
perennial leguminous forb.  Multiple stems grow from 
a woody caudex which is in turn attached to the deep 
tap root system of this species. The erect stems are 
smooth, angular, and grooved. The plant stands 1.5 to 
4.25 feet tall when mature. Its doubly compound 
leaves are attached to th e stems in an alternate 
arrangement. Leaves are sensitive to external 
stimulation such as sunlight or touch which causes 
the leaflets to fold inward, thus giving the plant the 
common name false sensitive plant. The white 
flowers contain five sepals, petals and stamens and 
are borne in “powder puff” globose heads. The self 
pollinated flowers produce clustered flat scythe-
shaped pods each about 1 to 1 1/2 inches long and 
containing two to six seeds. The pods generally split 
open at maturity and the brown seeds are expelled or 
at least in a position to be scattered by wind or 
wildlife.  
 
Illinois bundleflower plants are most often found in 
prairie remnants, sloughs, woodland edges or 
disturbed areas. The plant thrives on medium 
textured soils and is tolerant of most soil types except 
heavy clays and exceptionally  coarse sands. It grows 
more vigorously and is more abundant in a 20 inch or 
greater rainfall zone. Good  drought tolerance can be 
expected in open communities with reduced levels of 
competition. Bundleflower is normally found 
growing in association with tall warm-season grasses.  
 
Establishment 
It is easily established from commercially available 
seed. Bundleflower may be seeded alone at a depth of 
½ inch on heavier moister soils or up to 1 inch deep 
on dryer sandier soil types. Planting into a prepared 
seed bed with mulch would increase the chance of 
establishment. Planting in the early to mid spring 
time would provide optimum moisture conditions for 
the seedlings. Broadcast planting would require a 50 
to 100 percent increase in the amount of seed used. 
To maximize germination a se ed scarification process 
should be preformed on the seed prior to planting. 
The seed should also be in oculated with the correct

inoculant to cause nodulation of the plants root 
system.   
 
Management 
Planting a mixture of legumes and grass will 
generally increase the crude protein concentration of 
the harvested forage. However, forage samples 
containing Illinois bundleflower showed lower dry 
matter digestibility than grass samples alone. This 
lowering of digestibility may be due to the tannin 
content of the legume or its high lignin content. 
Forage yields produced in Minnesota indicated  
bundleflower may be a viable mid-summer forage 
candidate in that state, but  winter survival might be a 
concern.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Rabbits, rodents, grasshoppers, and leafhoppers 
selectively attack legumes,  especially at the seedling 
stage of growth. Reports indi cate that fungal leaf spot 
diseases and seed eating insects are a problem with 
this species. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There were no environmental concerns expressed 
about this leguminous, native perennial prairie plant. 
It is compatible and competitive with climax grasses 
of the tall grass prairie.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
 
‘Sabine’ Illinois bundleflower is a cooperative 
cultivar release by the USDA  NRCS Knox City Plant 
Materials Center, Texas Parks and Wildlife 
Department, and the Texas Agricultural Experiment 
Station. Sabine was collected from a native 
population near Crystal Beach, Texas. Foundation 
seed is available from the Foundation Seed Service, 
Vernon, Texas. 
 
Reno Germplasm Illinois bundleflower is a Tested 
class release by the Manhattan Plant Materials Center 
in Manhattan, Kansas. Re no originated for seed 
collected from native plan ts growing near Lake 
Cheney in Reno County, Kansas. Generation 2 seed, 
equivalent to foundation seed, is available from the 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited: 071218 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.