Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA 
OATGRASS  
Danthonia californica  
Bolander  
Plant Symbol = DACA3  
 
Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 
 
Alternate Names:   Another common name is 
California danthonia.  Synonyms include  Danthonia 
americana  and four botanical varieties:  americana, 
californica , palousensis , and piperi . 
 
Uses:  California oatgrass is recommended for 
revegetation, wildlife plantings, and restoration of 
oak savannas, transitional wetlands, and upland 
prairies, especially in the Pacific Coast states.  The 
species is valuable for enhancing biodiversity by 
exhibiting a spatial distribution compatible with forbs 
and improving habitat for feeding, nesting, and 
hiding by songbirds.  It  is a definitive component of 
certain prairies that form critical habitat for other  endemic organisms including sensitive butterflies and 
beetles.  The foliage is eaten by certain caterpillars 
and the grains are consumed by birds and mammals. 
 
As a rangeland plant, California oatgrass is well 
utilized by livestock.  Prior to maturity, it is rated as 
good to very good forage for cattle and horses in the 
Pacific Coast states, but less palatable for sheep and 
goats.  Ratings are lower for eastern, drier portions of 
its natural range.  Plants 
withstand heavy grazing but 
can be overgrazed leading to their depletion.  Protein 
analysis is high and stands have formed that are 
dense enough for haying.  Other potential uses 
include cover and erosion control in vineyards, young 
orchards, and parks, as well as along trails.  As a 
candidate for native lawn, this species can be mowed 
to maintain a turf-like stand.  It takes heavy foot 
traffic, trampling, and moderate summer moisture 
stress and can act as a stay-green firebreak.  
 
Description:   California oatgrass is a long lived 
perennial bunchgrass with stems (culms) that grow 
30-100 cm tall and separate at the lower nodes 
(joints) upon maturity.  The leaf sheaths are smooth 
to densely hairy.  Leaves are both basal and attached 
to the stem.  The upper blades  are flat to in-rolled and 
spreading to abruptly bent with distinct spreading 
hairs where they meet the stem.  The panicle (seed 
head) flowers between May and early July and is 3-8 
cm long, loose, and open with 1-6 broadly spreading 
spikelets.  Awns (linear ap pendages) on the seed are 
abruptly bent and 4-12 mm long.  Seed is produced 
both in the terminal panicle and at the lower nodes 
enclosed (hidden) within the leaf sheaths of the stem. 
California oatgrass can be confused with timber 
oatgrass ( Danthonia intermedia), poverty oatgrass 
( D. spicata ), and one-spiked oatgrass ( D. unispicata) 
but all three have more erect, compact panicles with 
the latter having a single spikelet in the seed head.  
 
Adaptation:   California oatgrass occurs naturally 
from British Columbia to southern California and 
eastward through the Rock y Mountain States and 
Provinces.  Broadly adapted, it is a minor to 
dominant constituent of numerous woodland, 
shrubland, grassland, and transitional wetland 
habitats.  The species is found on a wide array of 
soils types from excessively drained sandy loams to 
less permeable silts and clays and from relatively 
infertile sites to rich, moist bottomland.  While it 
inhabits summer dry sites such as steep, sunny south 
and west slopes, shallow rocky outcrops, and 
serpentine soils (soils high in magnesium, iron, and

certain heavy metals and 
deficient in other nutrients), 
as well as seasonally 
flooded wetlands, arid sites 
do not support it.  The 
species occurs within the 
following ranges: elevation 
0-7200 ft, annual 
precipitation 17 to 79 
inches, and soil pH 5.5 to 8.  
Ratings are relatively low 
for fertility requirement, 
salinity tolerance, deer 
resistance, and shade 
tolerance, variable for 
drought resistance, and high 
for fire resistance and 
wildlife value.  It has 
special adaptations for 
disturbance prone 
ecosystems.    
 
Reprinted with permission, 
 Univ. of Washington Press 
 
Environmental concerns:  California oatgrass is not 
considered to be weedy within its natural range.  
However, because of seed dormancy and latent seed 
in the soil, individuals may continue to sporadically 
emerge several years after stand removal.  No toxic 
properties for domestic livestock, wildlife, or humans 
have been reported.  The species has few significant 
pests but is one of many hosts for blind seed disease 
( Gloeotinia temulenta ), a potentially serious pest in 
ryegrass (Lolium  spp.) fields grown for seed. 
 
Establishment:  Growing California oatgrass from 
seed can be problematic as the result of delayed or 
sporadic germination and moderately slow seedling 
development combined with early competition from 
other species.  The variable germination rates are the 
result of either a seed  coat imposed dormancy, 
physiological (embryo) dormancy, no dormancy, or a 
combination of all three.  To determine the amount of 
dormancy in a seed lot, both a TZ (tetrazolium) test 
for viability and germination test should be run.  The 
difference between the two indicates the amount of 
dormancy.  To overcome high dormancy, good 
germination will require fall sowing to cold moist 
stratify the seed outdoors over winter (alternatively, 
moist stratify in a cooler for 30-120 days at 1-4°F), 
scarification of the seed coat  to weaken it, or both.  
Proven methods of scarification (sulfuric acid 
treatment, abrasion with sandpaper, use of a huller-
scarifier or brush machine) each have their 
limitations.  Hull removal (dehulling) and awn 
removal are coincidental to the process.  Mechanical  methods must be gentle enough to prevent damage to 
the seed embryo.  An oat huller may be an option.  
 
Keys to establishment for revegetation and other 
purposes are preplant weed control and proper 
seedbed preparation such as 1-3 years of fallow.   
Besides tillage and herbicides, site preparation 
methods and weed and stand management options 
include prescribed fire, grazing, mowing, or 
combinations thereof.  The most successful stands are 
often achieved by sowing the seed alone rather than 
in a mix, succeeded by the use of a nonselective 
herbicide such as glyphosate to kill new weeds before 
the California oatgrass seedlings emerge following 
delayed germination.  Very shallow soil coverage 
(1/4 inch or less) is critical because of the seed’s light 
requirement.  There are 
90,000-165,000 seeds/lb 
depending on the degree of processing and natural 
variation.  Each 1 lb of pure live seed (PLS) sown per 
acre results in 2-4 live seeds/ft
2.  Sown alone, the 
suggested seeding rate for drilling is 9-15 PLS lbs/ac.  
The rate is doubled for broadcast seeding.  A starter 
fertilizer is usually not re commended as it encourages 
excessive weed competition but a thin covering of 
mulch or jute netting is particularly useful on steeper 
banks.  California oatgrass propagates readily by 
division.  Plugs grown in standard potting media have 
worked better than direct seeding in many situations.   
 
Prepared By: 
Dale C. Darris and Peter Gonzalves, USDA, NRCS, 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator: 
Dale C. Darris, Conservation Agronomist, USDA, 
NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.