Plant Fact Sheet
VELVET 
BUNDLEFLOWER  
Desmanthus velutinus  Scheele  
Plant Symbol = DEVE2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “ bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
   
Uses   
Wildlife:   Velvet bundleflower is consumed by large and 
small wildlife.  Deer and other browsing animals can feed 
on the young, tender foliage.  The numerous seed 
produced by the plant are utilized by many species, 
especially quail.  
   
Livestock:   Velvet bundleflow er has a good forage value 
for sheep and goats while the foliage is young and tender.  
After seed begins to form, the forage value becomes fair 
for all livestock.   
   
Erosion Control:   Velvet bundleflower can be planted 
along field borders, railroads, and other sloping areas to 
reduce soil erosion from both water and wind.  
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Weediness    
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult y our local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
 
  .  Please con
sult this and 
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description   
Velvet bundleflower is a native, warm -season, perennial 
legume.  The plant is composed of several widely 
spreading, smooth stems that grow two feet long.  Velvet 
bundleflower produces a white “powder -puff” cluster 
shaped flower, one inch in diameter, between the months 
of April and June.  The leaves are three to four inches 
long with a bluish- green tint.  Numerous leaflets 
positioned twice pi nnate make up the leaves of the velvet 
bundleflower.  The seed from the velvet bundleflower 
grows in straight pods two to three inches long, and fully 
matures from mid July to late August.    
   
Adaptation   
Velvet bundleflower is widely adapted throughout c entral, 
south, and west Texas, as well as southern Oklahoma.  It 
prefers calcareous and limestone soils.  Velvet 
bundleflower does not adapt well to heavily wooded areas 
or areas that tend to remain wet for extended periods of 
time.   
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Velvet bundleflower should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast seeder, but grass drills are the most s uccessful 
method of planting velvet bundleflower.  Seed should be 
placed ¼ inch deep.  Soil samples should be taken before 
planting to determine the amount of fertilizer needed to 
bring the fertility level up to a medium range.  Limit 
nitrogen application to ten pounds per acre or less until 
the stand is established.  Velvet bundleflower should be 
planted at a rate of 4.5 lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre. 
When planting this as a component of a seed mixture, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired percent of 
the mix.    
 
 Management   
Velvet bundleflower is commonly found as a component
 
in seed mixtures for range seeding and conservation 
cover.  Stands of velvet bundleflower should be well 
established before livestock is permitted to graze.  Once 
the stand is established, velvet bundlef lower should never