Plant Fact Sheet
TUFTED HAIRGRASS  
Deschampsia cespitosa (L.) P. Beauv .  
Plant Symbol = DECE 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon   
 
 
Photo by Dale Darris  
 
Alternate names   
Other common names include blue -green hair -grass, 
fescue- leaved hairgrass, salt and pepper grass, 
tussock grass, and canche cespiteuse.    
  
Uses   
Tufted hairgrass is useful for restoring moist to 
seasonally wet prairies and stabilizing disturbed 
sites, streambanks, canals, shorelines, and upper 
tidal marshes. Other appli cations include acid and 
heavy metal mine spoil reclamation, alpine and 
boreal revegetation work, and bio- filtration swales.  
As a range or pasture grass, it is both a desirable, 
productive forage for cattle and sheep particularly at 
higher elevations, and a species of lesser or low 
value in regions where plants are coarse and less  palatable.  The species is sometimes cut for hay.  
Utilization by deer, elk, pronghorn, bison, bear, 
horses, and rabbits is variable.  Likewise, cover and 
food values are rated p
oor to good for small 
mammals, upland game birds, songbirds, and 
waterfowl depending on wildlife species and 
location. Tufted hairgrass is a larval food plant for 
several butterflies in North America and is host for 
at least 40 species of Lepidopteran inse cts world-
wide. Varieties have been bred as wear resistant turf 
for golf courses, sports fields and other uses.   
  
Description   
Tufted hairgrass is a highly variable, perennial cool 
season species that grows 20 to 60 in. tall.  Stems are 
erect and the leav es are .06 to .16 in. wide, flat or 
rolled, and mostly basal in a dense tuft.  The panicle 
(seed head or inflorescence) is upright to nodding, 
loosely branched, open, and 4 to 10 in. long. There 
are two florets (flowers) per spikelet. Flowering 
occurs from  May to September and seeds mature 
from late June to late September depending on 
location.   
    
Status   
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’ s 
current status, such as state noxious and wetland 
indicator values.   
  
Adaptation   
Populations occupy moderately moist to seasonally 
flooded, sunny to partially shaded environments 
with a wide variety of soil types (fine to coarse, 
mesic to hydric) and pH ranging from 3.5 to 7.5. 
Some populations have extreme tolerance to heavy 
metals and high soil acidity.  Salinity tolerance is 
generally considered low, but plants occurring in 
coastal estuaries may be slightly more salt tolerant.  
Crowns typically s urvive all but the most severe or 
hottest fires.   
Distribution -As one of the most widely distributed 
grasses on earth, tufted hairgrass is found in many 
arctic and temperate regions. It occurs from sea level 
to 14,000 ft in the mountains.  Habitats include 
coastal terraces, upper tidal marshes, seasonally wet 
prairies, moist subalpine mountain meadows, open 
forests, and alpine areas above timberline.