Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ANNUAL HAIRGRASS
Deschampsia danthonioides  
(Trin.) Munro  
Plant Symbol = DEDA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Alternate Names 
Other scientific names include  Aira danthonioides 
Trin.,  Deschampsia calycina  J. Presl, and 
Deschampsia danthonioides  (Trin.) Munro var. 
gracilis  (Vasey) Munz 
 
Uses 
Annual hairgrass is useful for wetland restoration, 
erosion control, and revegetation of other moist, 
disturbed areas where quick, low growing ground 
cover is desired.  Given its apparent lack of 
competitiveness, this species may prove valuable as a 
temporary nurse crop for establishing perennial 
native species in both wetland and upland seed 
mixes.  Waterfowl and birds eat the seeds.  However, 
the foliage may be of less merit for wildlife herbage 
and cover compared to other grasses because of its 
short stature, lifespan, and limited productivity.  The 
palatability and nutritional value of annual hairgrass 
for livestock and game is not documented.  The  vernal pools which it occupies are important 
reservoirs for aquatic invertebrates and amphibians. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
Annual hairgrass is a fine textured, native, cool 
season grass with smooth, slender stems (culms) that 
are 10 to 60 cm tall.  The form is upright to 
spreading, short, and somewhat tufted.  The narrow 
leaf blades are hairless, rough on the edges, slightly 
in-rolled, 0.5 to 1.5 (2) mm wide, and 1 to 10 cm 
long.  Flower heads (panicles) are open, 7 to 25 cm 
long, with ascending lower branches.  Annual 
hairgrass occurs from near sea level at the coast to 
8000 feet in the Rocky Mountains.  It is primarily 
found from Alaska south to Baja California and east 
to Montana and New Mexico; also the Northeast US 
and Chile.   
Key to identification : Annual hairgrass can be 
distinguished from slender hairgrass ( Deschampsia 
elongata ) and tufted hairgrass ( Deschampsia 
caespitosa ) by its weaker root development, fewer 
leaves, and smaller stature. Without close inspection 
it may be confused with other annual grasses, such as 
annual fescues ( Vulpia spp.).  Both may occur in 
waste areas.  Consult botanical keys for proper 
identification.  
 
Relative abundance in wild:   While most common in 
the Pacific Coast states, the species can still be hard 
to locate.  However, it can occur in large stands, 
especially in vernal pool s dominated by annuals.  
Seed retention is fair and fill is good.  The period for 
wild collection can extend several weeks as 
maturation progresses along a soil moisture gradient 
within depressions.   
 
Adaptation:  Annual hairgrass reaches its 
preeminence in vernal pools, mudflats and other 
shallow depressions that are ponded in winter and 
desiccated in summer.  In  California, habitat also 
includes alkali and coastal grasslands, the edges of 
alkali playas, and seasonally or periodically 
inundated wetlands dominated by annuals.  Other 
habitats can include streambanks, roadsides, drier 
banks, vernal seepage areas, waste areas, and 
mountain meadows.  Typical substrates appear to be 
acidic (pH 5) to moderately alkaline fine textured

clay soils and silt loams above a shallow, impervious 
layer.  However, it also grows on coarse textured 
substrates that stay moist through seed development.  
Annual hairgrass apparently tolerates some salinity 
and prefers full sun.  Fall germinants actively grow 
all winter, tolerating several days to several weeks of 
continual submergence.   
 
Establishment 
Annual hairgrass germinates  readily and is easy to 
establish on open, moist ground.  There is no seed 
dormancy and therefore no requirement for 
physiological conditioning or over wintering 
outdoors.  However, as a winter annual in milder 
growing climes of the West Coast, it is best suited to 
early fall sowing.  The seed should be run through a 
debearder or brush machine to remove pubescence 
(hairs).  This will accentu ate further seed cleaning 
and improve flow through a drill and other planting 
device.  There are approximately 900,000 seeds per 
pound (+/- 30%).  A seeding rate of 1 lb/acre pure 
live seed (PLS) would result in 20 live seeds per 
square foot.  Seeding rates will vary widely 
depending on planting purpose, site conditions, and 
method used. 
  Management
 
As an annual, this species requires regular 
disturbance or moist to wet open ground in fall and 
winter in order to proliferate.  It is not competitive 
and is easily replaced by other species.  Annual 
hairgrass should be well suited to moist soil 
management techniques (slow de-watering, disking, 
etc.) in shallow water impoundments and other 
controlled wetlands.  Such methods are used to 
improve habitat for waterfowl, shorebirds and other 
wildlife by maximizing seed production of annuals.   
 Line drawing reprinted with permission, University 
of Washington Press 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Shallow roots and low herbage production may limit 
this species usefulness for soil stabilization on highly 
erosive soils or unconsolidated substrates.  While 
annual hairgrass is a weak competitor with weeds, it 
may be less likely to become a weed itself.  Although 
this species can increase in  open waste areas, reports 
of this species becoming invasive are lacking.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Plants and seeds are sometimes available in 
California.  This species is generally not available 
elsewhere within its range, re quiring wild harvests or 
contract seed growing to provide material.   
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris  and Amy Bartow , USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 16mar2006 jsp, 16sept2008 dcd; 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.