Plant Fact Sheet
FLAT -TOP  GOLD EN TOP  
Euthamia graminifolia (L.) Nutt.  
P la n t  S ymbo l =  EUGR5 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Cape May Plant Materials  
Center  
 
Thomas G. Barnes @ USDA -NRCS PLANT S Dat abase / Barnes, T .G., 
a n d S. W.  Fra nc is.  2 004 .  Wildflowers and  ferns of Kentucky. Univ er sit y 
Pr e ss  of  Ke nt ucky .  
 
Alternati ve N a me s  
Common Alternate Names:  bushy, common,  fragrant, 
g rass -leaved, or flat -topped goldenrod  
 
Scientific Alternate Names : 
Solidago graminifolia  (L.)  Sa lis b .  
Solidago lanceolata  L.    
Chrysocoma g raminifolia L.  
 
Us e s  
Wildlife Use :F la t -top goldentop  provides  a nectar source 
for pollinators and is well -suited for use in  pollinator 
restoration.  Preliminary observation found that flat -top 
goldentop attracted 13 different s pecies  of Hy menoptera 
and Lepi doptera in  C ape May, New Jers ey. The European  
honey bee ( Apis mellifera ),co mmon buckeye ( Junonia 
coenia ), and eas tern carpenter bee ( Xylocopa virginica) 
were  most frequently observed visiting the flower.  
 
The wildlife value of this  s pecies  is  cons idered lo w;  
nevertheless, songbirds such as the American goldfinch 
( Carduelis tristis ) and the swamp sparrow  ( Melospiza 
g eorgiana ) feed on the seeds (Hilty,  2002). Dee r and 
rabbit enjoy browsing the plant.  
 
The flo wer attracts  the goldenrod s oldier beetle 
( Chauliog nathus pensylvanicus ) and black blis ter beetle 
( Epicauta pensylvanica ). The goldenrod soldier beetle 
larvae are  beneficia l  insects known to feed on aphids,  maggots, caterpillars, and grasshopper eggs; while  the 
adults help to pollinate plants
 (Trigg, 2005)
.   Bla c k b lis t e r 
beetles produce cantharidin, a  poisonous substance that 
may poison anima ls that graze the plant (Marlin, n.d.). 
Pleas e refe r to Hilty (2002b) fo r a co mplete  lis t of  ins ects  
that visit this plant.  
 
S tatus  
E. graminifolia  is  a native, facult ative  wetland plant that 
usually occurs in wet lands (67 –99% ) but is occasionally 
found in non -wetlands .  Pleas e consult the PLANTS Web 
s ite and your State Depart ment of  Natural  Res ources  for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
s pecies, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values )  
 
Wee dines s  
This plant may beco me  weedy or invasive in so me 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable veget ation 
if not properly  managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Fie ld Office, Cooperati ve Extens ion Service 
office, s tate natural res ource, or s tate agriculture 
department  regarding its status and use. Weed informat ion 
is  als o available  fro m the PLANT S Web s ite at 
http://plants.usda.g ov. Pleas e cons ult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile fo r this species for further 
informat ion.  
Des cripti on  an d A da pta tio n  
Description : Fla t -top goldentop is an upright, erect, native 
perennial with a many -branched inflores cence. It  is  an 
herb of the As teraceae family  whos e species  name  me ans  
“grass -leaf”.  It  g ro ws  t o  3 –6 ft  in height with a  1 –2 ft  
spread. The upper ½ of the plant appears bushy due to its 
branched stems and grass -like , narrow to  linear, a lternate 
leaves. It grows fro m a  long -slende r rh i zo me.  
The s talk -less 2 –4 in  long leaves taper to a long point, and 
n arro w t owards  the s tem. The  leaf has  3 –5 nerves  
underneath and is minutely rough -pubescent along nerves 
and marg ins. There are a  fe w resinous dots on the 
underside of the leaf. The  lo wer leaves  are deciduous  
early  in plant’s  life cyc le and the upper leaves  are reduced 
towards  the inflores cence. The leaves  omit  a s cent when 
crushed.   
The prima ry stalk supporting the flower c luster is winged 
and pubescent with hairs ly ing flat on the win g ma rgins. 
The flo wer heads  are 2 –2. 5  in high, are  arranged in dense, 
s t a lk -less, sma ll  f la t -topped clusters of 20 –35 flowers 
with s mall  rays. It has pale to bright yello w flowe rs that 
bloom  in the late su mmer or early  fall. The outer flowers 
of the cluste r open first. The flower heads are cone -
shaped and attached at the pointed end. The whorl of

small  leaves beneath the flower  is ovoid to bell-shaped. 
The obtuse or rounded, yellow bracts around the flower 
are s omewhat s ticky. Thes e overlapping bracts  are 3 .1  
mm  long an d occasionally have green tips. The .02  in  ( .5  
mm) long seed is a hard, pubescent, one -s eeded, 
indehiscent white nutlet. The seed is attached to hair -l ike  
bristles (pappus). Th e receptacle is  finely  fringed.  
 
E. graminifolia v ar.  graminifolia is distinguished by its 
relative ly narrow  leaves  that are 11 –20 t imes as long as 
wide  (Gleason and Cronquist, 1963).  E. graminifolia v ar. 
hirtipes  is the hybrid of E. gra minifolia  and  E. 
caroliniana  (Fernald, 1950) , and  is distinguished by its 
re la t iv e ly  b road, hairy  leaf blades  and few -flo wered head.  
 
 
Flat -top  go lde n top  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS  Database.  
 
Adaptation: Fla t -top goldentop can be found in  moist, 
open ground; meadows; prairies; roadsides; ditches; inter -
dunal flats; e xposed lakes; c onifer swa mps; lowland 
fores ts; calcareous  s eeps ; and s andy mois t s horelines . It is  
tolerant of poor, gravelly, sandy, or dry soils and once 
established, can tolerate droughty conditions. It is also 
found in shaded wood edges or sunny fields and clearings.  
Fo r  updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Pro file 
page  for this  s pecies  on the PLANT S Web s ite.  
 
Es tablishment  
Seed can be s own year -round in a greenhouse that is at 
le a s t  65° F.  The reco mmended planting is  three s eeds  per 2  
in  plug ,  watered regul a r ly . It can als o be  sown outdoors 
fro m seed in the fa ll or sow the seed in a coldfra me.  E. 
graminifolia  is a prolific  rhizo matous perennial that 
spreads aggressively through vegetative reproduction. 
When g rowing fro m vegetative  materia l  d ivide rootball 
(rhizo matous clumps)  while plant  is dormant.  Cuttings 
should be kept in the greenhouse at least 3  months to 
allo w fo r a mp le root and shoot development . When 
trans plan ted into field, plant on 1.5 –2 f t centers .    Unwanted s
eed dispersal fro m  wind can be prevent ed by 
the development of a vegetative curtain or buffer  with 
native shrubs, vines, or understory trees.  
Manage ment  
Adding nitrogen will  increase plant size, inc luding an 
increas e of s tem height, nu mber of leaves , and s tem 
dia meter.  E. graminifolia s eems  t o have a delayed 
response to nitrogen, and may store access N over winter 
in its rhizo mes. Adding N has been shown to increase the 
dens ity of s tems  in the s econd year after fe rtilizat ion, 
thereby eliminating other plant species an d reducing 
community dive r s it y . 
Pe s ts  an d P ote nti al  Pr o bl e ms  
Alle lopathic chemical properties have been found in  root 
and leaf e xt racts  of flat -top goldentop and may interfe re 
with the growth of other species. Lea f  leachates tend to 
interfere  with seed germination while  root leacha tes  
negatively affect the root growth of co mpeting plants. 
Crops such as radish and lettuce are susceptible to 
alle lopathic co mpetition and should not be grown in the 
s ame area. Maples  have als o been negatively affected by 
s imi la r  Solidago  s pecies .  
 
En vi r o nmental Concerns  
Due to rhizo matous growth, E. graminifolia  is  s omewhat 
aggressive. This plant may beco me a no xious weed so is  
perhaps not a good choice for  more  forma l gardens unless 
controlled with a co mplimentary buffer planting.  It is not 
as aggressive  as   S. Canadensis  o r  S. rugosa . E. 
graminifolia  is considered invasive in Europe.  
Co ntr ol  
Pleas e contact your local agricultura l e xtens ion s pecialis t 
or county weed specialist to learn  what works best in your 
area and how to us e it s afely. Always  read label and 
safety instruc tions for each control  method.  
 
Prepare d By : Christopher M. Sheahan . USDA-N RC S,  
Cape May Plant Materials   Center , Cape May, NJ. 
 
Ci ta ti o n : Sheahan, C.M.
 2012 .  Fact s heet  fo r  fla t-top 
goldentop  (Euthamia graminifolia ). US DA -NRCS, Cape 
May  Plant Materia ls  Center.  Cape May,  NJ .  08210. 
 
Published  July 2012 
 
Ed it e d : 
 
For  more  info rmation about this and other plants, please 
contact your local  NRCS  fie ld office or  Conservation 
Dis t ric t  <
http://ww w.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials  Progra m Web s ite <
http://plant-
mater ia ls.nrcs.usda.gov> 
US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER