Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON BONESET 
Eupatorium perfoliatum  L. 
Plant Symbol = EUPE3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD     
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ US DA-NRCS PLANTS Database / 
USDA SCS.  1989.   Midwest wetland flora: Field office illustrated 
guide to plant species .  Midwest National Technical Center, 
incoln. 
L
 
Alternate Names 
Common boneset, Thoroughwort 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: The leaves have been used to treat 
dengue fever.  Modern German research suggests that 
Common Boneset may act as a general immune 
system stimulant.  It has also been used as a 
diaphoretic and weak anti-inflammatory.   Caution
: 
Common Boneset is emetic and laxative in large 
doses, and it may contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids that 
are potentially harmful to the liver. 
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  The nectar from the 
flowers of Common Boneset is very attractive to a 
variety of pollinators, including bees, wasps, and 
butterflies.  The Swamp Sparrow supplements its diet 
with Common Boneset seeds.  Various caterpillars, 
such as  Phragmatobia lineate  (Lined Ruby Tiger 
Moth),  Papaipema cataphracta  (Burdock Borer  Moth),
 Schinia trifascia  (Three-lined Flower Moth),  
Chlorochlamys chloroleucaria  (blackberry looper), 
Semiothisa continuata  (Geometrid Moth sp.) and 
Haploa clymene  (Clymene Moth) eat various 
portions of the plant.   
 
Status 
 
Description and Adaptation  
Common Boneset is a native perennial wildflower 
that grows from 2 - 4 feet tall.  The central stem is 
covered in long white hairs and is unbranched with 
the exception of a few flow ering side stems near the 
apex of the plant.  The na rrow, lanceolate (tapering), 
opposite leaves grow up to 8 inches long and 2 inches 
across.  The bases of the leaves tend to grow 
together, making it appear as if the central stem 
perforates the leaves.  Two-  to eight-inch clusters of 
fragrant white flowers (with approximately 15 florets 
per flower head) appear in la te summer or early fall.  
The florets produce wind-dispersed small dry seed 
with hair-like bristles.  The fibrous root system 
frequently produces rhizomes ( horizontal stem  with 
shoots  above  and roots  below ), which create small 
colonies. 
 
Distribution:  Common Boneset prefers moist or wet 
conditions, soil with a sign ificant amount of organic 
matter, and full to partial sun.  It populates a variety 
of wetland habitats across eastern North America 
from Quebec south to Florida and west to Texas and 
Manitoba (USDA cold hardiness zones 2 - 10). 
 
Establishment 
Seed Propagation 
Seeds ripen about a month after flowering and should 
be collected when the heads dry, split and the fluffy 
seed begins to float away.  If collected earlier, dry the 
seed heads for 1 - 2 weeks in open paper bags.  If 
seeds are sown directly, sow in the fall and sow 
thickly as germination rates are typically low.  For 
container production, a cold-moist pretreatment at 40 
degrees Fahrenheit for 3 weeks to 3 months will 
increase germination percentages.  After 
pretreatment, sow seeds in a fine germination mix 
containing milled sphagnum moss.  Transplant to 
potting mix after seeds have germinated.  Seeds 
germinate at 70 - 85 degrees Fahrenheit and in the

presence of light.  Use a greenhouse with alternating 
temperatures (day temperatures 70 - 85 degrees 
Fahrenheit, night temperatures 65 - 68 degrees 
Fahrenheit).  Seeds will last up to 3 years if stored in 
a cold (40 degrees Fahrenheit) and dry (30% relative 
humidity) environment. 
 
Vegetative Propagation 
Common Boneset can be propagated by division or 
two-node softwood tip cuttings taken in late spring.  
Divide the plants in the fall as they go dormant or in 
the spring just as shoots first appear.   
 
Management  
Common Boneset prefers moist to wet soil and full or 
partial sun.  Livestock generally find the foliage of 
Common Boneset too bitter for grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The leaves of Common Boneset are favored by 
grasshoppers, flea beetles and saw flies, which can 
leave them looking bedraggled by midsummer.  It is 
not drought-tolerant.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.
 
 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk (Horticultural Volunteer) and Shawn 
Belt (Horticulturist), US DA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, USDA NRCS  National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
Edited: 03-Nov-2008 SMK; 090112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S.  Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and mar ital or family status.  (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD).  USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.  Read about 
Civil Rights at the Natural 
Resources Conservation Service.