Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN PURPLE 
CONEFLOWER   
Echinacea purpurea  (L.) 
Moench  
Plant Symbol = ECPU  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center 
 
                                                           R. Alan Shadow     
USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Echinacea, snakeroot, Kansas snakeroot, broad-
leaved purple coneflower, scurvy root, Indian head, 
comb flower, black susans, and hedge hog 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic :  Eastern purple coneflower was one of 
the most important medicinal plants used by Native 
Americans.  It was used by many tribes throughout 
North America to treat a variety of ailments.  It was 
used as a pain reliever, anti inflammatory, a treatment 
for toothaches, coughs, colds, and sore throats.  It 
was also used as an antidote for various forms of 
poisonings, including snake bite.   Portions of this 
plant were used to dress wounds and treat infections.   It has been used to soothe gastrointestinal troubles in 
man and horses.  Early pioneers were quick to pick 
up on healing properties of this species, probably 
from contact with Native Am
ericans as they traveled 
west, across the plains.   
 
Modern medicine has also seen potential benefits 
associate with this plant species.  Studies have shown 
eastern purple coneflower to be an immune system 
booster.  It has also shown activity against bacterial 
and viral infections.  Chemical compounds extracted 
from Echinacea have even shown inhibitory effects 
against certain forms of cancer. 
 
Echinacea is a very popular  herbal remedy today, and 
can be found easily in heath food stores.  It is most 
commonly used to treat the common cold and flu.  
However, some scientists debate its effectiveness for 
such use.  It should be noted that herbal remedies can 
interfere with some prescription medication.  Allergic 
reactions have occurred in some individuals.  It is 
recommended that a hea lthcare professional be 
consulted before use of such products.   
 
Landscaping :  Eastern purple coneflower is a popular 
plant in home gardens and is often grown for its 
showy flowers.  It can be used in pots, as accents in 
flower beds, or as borders.  It can also be used in 
wildflower mixes for roadside beautification and 
prairie restoration. 
 
Wildlife :  Eastern purple coneflower will attract 
insects and butterflies when in bloom, and song birds, 
particularly Goldfinches, ar e fond of its seed in the 
fall.                    
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Asteraceae Family.  Eastern pu rple coneflower is an 
erect, long lived, perennial herb that grows one to 
three feet in height, and pr oduces a woody rhizome.  
It has a very distinctive flower with reddish-purple 
petals.  The petals may be pink or white in some rare 
instances.  There is a characteristic “cone” at the 
center of the flower, from which its name is derived.  
Echinacea is rooted in the Greek word for hedge hog, 
echinos, in reference to the spiky appearance of the 
cone.  The stems are rough and have small hairs 
along their entire length.  The leaves are alternate,

simple, and ovate.  Seeds are produced in the cone 
much like that of a sunflower, and are small, dark, 4 
sided achenes.  Eastern purple coneflower typically 
blooms May through June. 
 
Eastern purple coneflower can be found throughout 
most of the eastern and central United States.  It can 
be found as far west as Colorado and north to 
Wisconsin, Michigan, and New York.  It is not 
present in the extreme north east, and becomes 
increasingly rare as its range extends westward, past 
Missouri. 
 
This plant prefers full sun, and has a low tolerance of 
drought conditions.  It will grow in a wide range of 
soil textures, and prefers a pH between 6.5 and 7.2.  
It will not tolerate water logging, and is most 
commonly associated with open, upl and sites.            
 
Establishment 
Seed should be sown in  a well prepared, firm, weed 
free, seedbed at a depth of  ⅛ to ¼  inch.  If broadcast 
seeding, a light drag or cultipacker should be used to 
cover to the seed.  Cold stratification of the seed is 
reportedly not necessary; however, most sources note 
that it does improve germination.  Cold stratification 
can be achieved by storing the seed in moist 
conditions in a cooler or refrigerator for 2 months, or 
by planting in the fall. 
 
If a solid stand of plants is desired, broadcast seeding 
at a rate of 12-15 pounds of seed per acre should be 
used.  For 36 inch rows, a seeding rate of 3 to 5 
pounds per acre will be adequate.  In wildflower 
mixes up to 1 pound of seed per acre may be used.   
 
For home applications seed may be germinated in 
flats, and transplanted into pots or flower gardens.  
Mature plants may also be divided when dormant and 
transplanted.  This process is done by splitting the 
dormant crowns into smaller units, and transplanting 
to desired locations.  The rhizomes and roots are very 
susceptible to drying during the process.  They 
should be transplanted immediately after splitting.   
 
Management 
Echinacea does not compete  well with other plants.  
Competition from weeds should be controlled by 
mechanical or chemical methods.  Chemical control 
can be achieved by application of pre and post-
emergent herbicides.  (Please read all warnings and 
labels before making applications and follow the 
manufacturer’s directions.)   Mechanical control can 
be achieved by mowing above the tops of young 
plants or cultivation between plants.     
  In general, fertilizer application is not necessary as  
eastern purple coneflower has low fertility needs.  In 
newly established fields, fertilization will increase 
weed competition and reduce stands.   Fertilization 
should be used sparingly in fields that have been 
established for 3-4 years.
 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with this species.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Due to its popularity as an herbal remedy, this 
species is becoming increasingly rare in its natural 
habitat.   Over harvest from the wild has drastically 
reduced plant numbers throughout much of its range. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no releases for  this species from the USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Program available at this time.  
However, commercial material is readily available  to 
the  public though nurseries and seed companies.  
Improved, ornamental varieties include:  
King, Bright Star, Razzmatazz, Orange Meadow 
Bright, Mango Meadow Bright, Doppleganger, Ruby 
Giant, Kim’s Knee High So mbrero, Alba, Bright Star 
Leuchste, Crimson Star, Magnus, Ovation, 
Springbrook’s Crimson Star, Talent, Thompson and 
Morgan Hybrids, White Flower Farm Strain, White 
Lustre, and White Swan. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   R. Alan 
Shadow, East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited: 071217 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.