Plant Fact Sheet
SULPHUR -FLOWER 
BUCKWHEAT  
Eriogonum umbellatum  Torr.  
Plant Symbol = ERUM  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Photo by A. Young -Mathews, California Plant Materials Center, 2009  
Alternative Names  
Alternate  Common Names: Sulphur flower, buckwheat 
b ush,  sulfur  buckwheat,  sulfur flower buckwheat,
 sulphur 
wild  buckwheat ,
 slender buckwheat  
Alternate  Scientific Names: There are 2 0 to 40 recognized 
botanical varieties of Eriogonum umbellatum , many of 
which intergrade across their ranges.  
Uses  
Wildlife  & Livestock:  The seeds are an important food 
source for many species of birds and small mammals.  
Quail,  sage-grouse,  deer and mountain sheep eat the 
leaves , and insects found on the plants are an important 
food source for sage -grouse chicks .  The plants are rated 
as having medium palatability for browse animals, but 
low palatability for grazing animals, with low protein 
content.    
Pollinators : Sulphur -flower buckwheat  attracts a wide 
variety of bees and other native pollinators.  It is a larva l 
host and nectar source for lupine b lue butterfly  ( Plebejus 
lupini) .  The cythera metalmark butterfly ( Apodemia 
mormo cythera ) and  the Rocky Mountain dotted- blue 
( Euphilotes ancilla ) are also  found in association  with a 
few varieties of sulphur -flower.  Bees produce a strong, 
dark honey from the  nectar. 
Restoration:  Sulphur -flower buckwheat  can be included 
in seed mixes for restor ation of native plant communities  on dry, rocky slopes and other sites where the species is 
adapted.
 
Landscaping:  Sulphur-flower buckwheat  can be used for 
environmental enhancement, erosion control and 
foundation plantings around homes.   P lants withstand s un, 
heat, drought, and wind, making them ideal for dry sunny 
slopes.   The showy flowers and seed heads, and compact 
growth habit make this plant a good choice for rock 
gardens.    
Ethnobotany : Tribes throughout western North America 
traditionally used different parts of the sulphur -flower 
buckwheat plant to treat a variety of ailments.  The 
Klamath used a poultice of the leaves to soothe burns.  
The Cheyenne made a tea from powdered stems and 
fl owers that was used as a gynecological aid for lengthy 
menses.  The Paiute and Shoshone made a poultice of 
mashed leaves, and sometimes roots, to treat lameness or 
rheumatism, and took a hot decoction of roots for colds or 
stomachaches .  The Kayenta Navajo  used the plant as a 
fumigant or to induce vomiting for gastrointestinal 
ailments.  The Kawaiisu used the mashed flowers as a 
salve for gonorrheal sores.    
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this pl ant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Sulphur -flower buckwheat is a native, low -growing, 
woody perennial  in the buckwheat family  (Polygonaceae).  
The pl ant typically forms low, broad mats with individual 
clumps ranging from 4 inches to 2 ft (but up to 4 ft) tall 
and wide.  Leaves are basal, 1 inch long, and softly wooly 
or hairless.  Flower stems are  3 to 16 inches tall and 
topped by  umbel-shaped  clusters  of tiny  flowers.  Flowers 
range from  sulfur yellow to orange or reddish, sometimes 
turning rusty orange -red with age.   Floral displays can 
color entire slopes starting in June at lower elevations and 
continue into September or October at higher elevations . 
Sulphur -flower buckwheat is usually found in dry, open, 
rocky sites with shallow, sandy soils, especially on sunny 
slopes and ridges.  This species  typically grows in regions 
that receive from 8  to  18 inches annual precipitation, 
which may come in the form of winter rain/snow or 
summer monsoons.   This plant grows best in full sun on 
well -drained, sandy or gravelly soils with low fertility, but  
will  sometimes  tolerate saturated soils and light shade .  It 
has high drought, salinity and carbonate tolerance , and 
grows in soils ranging from a pH of 6.5 to 9.0.

Sulphur-flower buckwheat is native to western 
mountainous regions of North America at elevations of 
700 to 12,000 feet.  It is found from western Canada  south 
to  California  and east  into Colorado and Ne w Mexico.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 Sulphur -flower buckwheat  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
Establishment  and Seed Production  
For most uses, s ulphur-flower buc kwheat can be 
established by direct  seed ing or transplanting plugs or 
container stock .  Select a sunny, well -drained planting site 
and  maintain good weed control, especially of annual 
grasses, during the first year of establishment .  The 
recommended single -species  broadcast  seeding rate is  8 to 
10  pounds per acre , but the rate should be adjusted 
depending on the species  mix and site conditions.  There 
are 100,000 to 200,000 seeds per pound, so a seeding rate 
of one pound per acre will result in about 2 to 5  seeds per 
square foot .  Seeds  should be raked in to a depth of about 
¼ inch.   S eeds  are dormant , and usually require 8 to 12 
weeks  (but as  many as 24  weeks ) of  cold, moist 
stratification in order to germinate, depending on the 
elevation and climate of the  original collection.  
Dormancy is broken naturally  by fall sowing if locally-
adapted germplasm is used.  Alternately, seeds can be 
cold stratified  by placing them in a fine mesh bag  buried 
in moist peat moss or sand in  a ventilated container at 34  
to  37°F  and planted  out in the early spring.   
F or seed production  prepare  a weed -free , smooth, firm, 
level seedbed for planting.   At the Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center , fields  are direct sown in the fall at a 
depth of ¼ inch and a rate of 10– 12 pounds per acre (50 
seeds per square foot) in rows 18– 24 inches apart, unless 
wider row spacing is needed for between row cultivation.  
Weeds  are controlle d by row tillage, hand removal , and 
spot treatment s with a nonselective herbicide .  P roduction 
fields can also  be established in the fall to early spring 
from  container stock  transplanted into weed  mat to reduce 
the need for weed management .  Plants do not produce  seed until their secon
d growing season and do not reach 
full production until year three , but can remain productive 
for ten  to twenty  years.   
S eed s are mature when the  petals and sepals become  dry 
and  papery (June to July in California  and Oregon).  Seed 
does not shatter easil y and will remain on the plant for a 
few weeks following maturation .  S mall plots are 
harvested by hand  with rice knives, while  l arger plots  can 
be harvested with a seed stripper.   Seeds are brittle and 
can be damaged  easily when using threshers or combine s.  
Use a hammermill or a gentle brush machine to break the 
seeds from the stalks and bracts, followed by a small air -
screen machine to remove chaff and weed seeds.   Seed 
y ield s vary from  150  to 700  pounds  per  acre.
   
Management  
W eeds  should be controlled and irrigation  may be 
necessary in the first year, but plants are drought tolerant 
once they are established .  Plants  can be pruned back after 
flowering to promote a denser, more compact plant.      
Pests and Potential Problems  
Plants are relatively free fr om disease and pest problems, 
but are susceptible to root and crown rot  when grown on 
poorly drained  soils. 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with sulphur -flower buckwheat.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materi als (and area 
of origin)  
Sulphur -flower buckwheat seeds and container plants are 
readily available from commercial sources.   ‘Sierra’ 
( California ) is a cultivar that  was d evel oped f or  erosion 
control and landscaping  o n dry,  roc ky  slopes  and 
droug hty si tes.  This cultivar is adapted to the dry Sierra 
Nevada foothills and mountains where soils and slopes 
limit competition.    
Prepared By  
Annie Young- Mathews, Conservation Agronomist  
USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon   
Citation  
Young- Mathews,  A. 2012. Plant  fact sheet for  sulphur -
flower buckwheat ( Eriogonum umbellatum ). USDA -
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials 
Center,  Corvallis , OR . 
Published  October 2012  
Edited:  26Apr2012 dcd ; 18May2012  jab ; 29Aug2012 gm  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND  EMPLOYER