Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PLAINS  LOVEGRASS
Eragrostis intermedia A.S. 
Hitchc. 
Plant Symbol = ERIN  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Name 
plains love grass  
 
Uses  
Plains lovegrass provides good forage for livestock.  
Its seeds are eaten by upland game birds.  Because it 
usually makes up a small percentage of the forage 
production on any site, it is seldom a key 
management species. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Plains lovegrass is a native, warm-season, perennial 
bunch grass.  The height is between 2 and 3-1/2 feet.  
The leaf blade is flat and rolls inward under dry 
conditions giving a threadlike appearance.  The leaf 
sheath is mostly basal, smooth, as long as internodes, 
and has a conspicuous line of hairs at the collar.  The 
seedhead is a large and sh owy open panicle that is 
brownish green in color before seed ripens.  The 
spikelets are 3- to 8-flower ed and extend horizontally 
from main stem.  Silver  hairs are found around the 
stem at the panicle base. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Proper management of other associated grasses keeps 
lovegrass vigorous. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the early spring.  Because this grass 
has a high seed stalk to leaf ratio, it is a low forage 
producer.  It is seldom found in pure stands, but is 
generally scattered throughout the plant community.  
It grows on dry upland soils ranging from clay to 
sand. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.