Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TEXAS 
KIDNEYWOOD  
Eysenhardtia texana  Scheele 
Plant Symbol = EYTE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
bee brush, vara dulce 
 
Uses 
The leaves of Texas kidneywood are highly palatable 
and nutritious.  They are browsed by livestock, 
white-tailed deer, and mule deer.  The plant is also of 
ornamental value because of its fragrant blooms, 
delicate foliage, and branching growth form.  This is 
a good plant for use in deer food plots, and for native 
plant restoration projects.   The nectar of the Texas 
kidneywood makes good honey, and dyes can be 
made from its wood.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Texas kidneywood ( Eysenhardtia texana) is a warm-
season, native, perennial shrub that grows 6½-10 feet 
in height.  It is a member of the legume family.  
Texas kidneywood has spiky white flowers that are  sweet smelling.  The vegetative parts of the 
kidneywood give off a citrusy odor when crushed. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Texas kidneywood grows in Texas and south into 
Mexico.  In Texas, it can be found in the Trans-
Pecos, Edwards Plateau, Southern Coastal Prairie and 
Rio Grande Plains regions.  It tends to prefer 
calcareous soils and is found as part of brushy, 
chaparral vegetation.  Texas kidneywood prefers full 
sun or light shade.  It is drought tolerant, but may 
temporarily defoliate under extended drought 
conditions.  It grows rapidly under moister 
conditions. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Texas kidneywood can be grown from seed or from 
cuttings.  Seeds can be started outdoors in March, or 
started earlier indoors.  Te
xas kidneywood appears to 
germinate best when temperatures fall between 68 
and 86 ºF and when there are about 12 hours of 
daylight.  Colder temperatures have been known to 
reduce germination, whereas  higher temperatures 
tend to reduce the survival of new seedlings.  
However, Texas kidneywood has been known to 
germinate with no light and temperatures from 59-
104 ºF. 
USDA NRCS Kika de la Gar za Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 
Kidneywood seeds can be planted hulled, or in the 
pod.  Fresh untreated seeds can be planted, and we 
have had success in germinating hulled seeds that 
have been stored in a seed cooler for as long as 25 
years (see our PMC's Technical Note # 6, 1999).  Dr. 
Richard Hoverson recommended to PMC staff in a 
1993 personal communication that if planting 
seedpods, they should be pre-soaked in distilled 
water for 72 hours prior to planting, with the water 
being changed every 8 hours.  
 
Seeds should be planted ¼-½ inch deep in a well-
drained planting medium.  A shallower planting 
depth of 1/8 inch is recommended for heavier, clay 
soil medium.  We suggest that seedlings be started in 
plug trays or germination trays as they are susceptible 
to damping-off when young.  At the PMC, we use a 
shallow tray with a thin layer of gravel, covered with 
a layer of sand, and topped with 1-1½  inches of 
planting medium.  Seedlings can be moved to larger

containers once they have three sets of true leaves.  
At this point, light fertilizer can be added to 
accelerate growth. Young plants may do better in 
light shade until they become established.   
 
Texas kidneywood can also be grown from soft or 
semi-hardwood cuttings, 4-6 inches long, taken in the 
summer and early fall.  We recommend a rooting 
hormone be used to facilitate root growth.  Cuttings 
tend to root in 3 to 4 weeks.   
 
We recommend that young plants be 6-9 inches in 
height when they are transplanted.  The use of plastic 
plant shelters is beneficial to protect young plants 
from heavy browsing, reduce plant competition, and 
create a friendly microclimate until the young plant 
can get established.  Fall transplanting gives young 
plants more time to establish before summer heat 
arrives. 
 
Management 
Texas kidneywood can be pruned from time to time 
to encourage a more compact growth form and 
encourage more blooms.  Seedpods should be 
harvested when they have turned brown and dry.  
Seeds are kidney-shaped, slightly- plump, and light to 
darker brown when matured.  Seeds or pods should 
be dried at room temperature for several days before 
storing.  Seeds or pods should be fumigated prior to 
storing.  We recommend storing seeds at cool 
temperatures and low humidity.  
 
The PMC has a broad composite collection of Texas 
kidneywood, with small quantities of seed available 
to commercial seed nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas 
 
Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.