Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BILLION-DOLLAR GRASS  
Echinochloa frumentacea  
Link.  
Plant Symbol = ECFR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
Echinochloa crus-galli  (L.) Beauv. ssp. edulis A.S. 
Hitch.;  Echinochloa crus -galli  (L.) Beauv. var. 
frumentaceum  Roxb., non Salisb. 
 
Uses 
Billion-dollar grass is an exceptional wildlife plant. It 
is a choice duck food and is eaten by 17 species of 
Northeastern waterfowl.  This food is also used by 
five upland game birds and many non-game birds 
such as sparrows, finches, and cardinals. Leaves and 
seedheads are eaten by rabbi ts and muskrats. As an 
erosion control plant it is used as a quick growing 
companion crop with perennial grasses and legumes 
and is especially suited to wet sites. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Billion-dollar grass is an introduced annual. It has 
coarse leaves and varies from one to five feet in 
height depending on available moisture and fertility. 
The seed-head is a compact panicle-type infloresence 
four to eight inches long, purplish in color, with 
awnless seed. Conversely, wild barnyard grass has 
seed with conspicuous awns and a more open-
branched panicle. Billion-dollar grass produces a 
much heavier seed yield th an the wild species. There 
are approximately 155,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This plant is widely adapted to the entire Northeast as 
it matures in 60-90 days. It grows well in wet soils 
but will also grow on well-drained upland soils. 
Billion-dollar grass is somewhat tolerant of low soil 
pH (4.5) and salinity of 2,000 parts per million. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seed may be drilled or broadcast and incorporated to 
a one inch depth on upland sites. In wetland areas, 
draw down water levels and broadcast seed on top of 
wet ground. Seeding rate for pure stands is 20 
lbs./acre when drilled and 25-30 lbs./acre if 
broadcast. In a mixture reduce  rate to 8-12 lbs./acre. 
Planting is recommended after the last killing frost in 
the spring. The seeding date may be timed to 
synchronize the maturity date of seed with the fall 
migration of specific migratory birds. 
USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center  
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Management  
As an upland food source, plant in pure stands as a 
field crop. For waterfowl, wetland areas planted in 
the spring should not be reflooded until the plants are 
at least six inches tall. Flood to 12-18 inches during 
the migratory season . Replant annually. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Chiwapa’ (India) is the only named variety, which 
was developed at the Coffeville, Mississippi Plant 
Materials Center and is appropriate only for the 
southeastern region of the country. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program

Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.