Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CANADA WILDRYE 
Elymus canadensis L. 
Plant Symbol = ELCA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Restoration: Canada wildrye is often an early 
successional component of prairie mixtures.  
 
Livestock: Canada wildrye provides good forage 
quality during the early part of the grazing season but 
is generally considered an inferior forage after it 
matures.  It is fairly palatable to most livestock, and 
is rated good in energy value but poor in protein 
value. 
 
Wildlife : Canada wildrye has fair to good palatability 
as food for wildlife.  It also provides nesting, brood, 
winter, and escape cover.  
 
Erosion Control : Exceptional seedling vigor and 
rapid establishment make Canada wildrye an 
excellent species for use in erosion control seedings.  
Stands of Canada wildrye typically establish during 
the 1
st year, reach peak production the 2nd or 3rd year, 
and then rapidly thin out.  This species is sometimes 
used in seeding mixtures where quick development 
and stabilization is needed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Canada wildrye is a native perennial bunchgrass that 
grows to 4 feet with erect  or arching culms and flat, 
wide (up to 0.8 inches), waxy green, pointed leaves 
that grow from the base of the stem to the spike.  
Auricles are claw-like and  clasping, arising from a 
broad, yellowish or light green collar.  The thick and 
bristly spikelets can reach 10 inches in length, and 
are often 2 or 3 to a node .  There are approximately 
115,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Canada wildrye is a short-lived, cool-season grass 
found on sandy shores and dunes; wooded areas, 
especially along trails, rivers and streams; and other 
disturbed sites throughout much of the North 
America.  Seedlings are vigorous and establish 
quickly, but are not highly competitive with other 
grasses.  Growth begins later in the spring and lasts 
longer into the summer than growth of smooth 
brome.  It is moderately drought tolerant and winter 
hardy.  It has good tolerance to salinity and tolerates 
shade very well. 
© W. L. Wagner 
Smithsonian Institute 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Canada wildrye is distributed throughout the 
northeast, north, and western United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Canada wildrye is typically seeded in a mix with 
warm season and/or other cool season grasses.  
Native forbs can also be included to enhance the 
restoration benefits. Planting may be completed in 
the spring or late fall, or early fall if moisture 
conditions are satisfactory.  The seedbed should be 
firm and weed problems elim inated prior to planting.  
Seeding rates will vary between 0.5 and 4.0 lbs./acre 
depending on the mix and site conditions.  If planted 
alone, solid seed at 10 lbs./acre (for conservation 
use), or 5 lbs. acre in rows (for seed production). 
 
Management  
For good quality, nutritious hay Canada wildrye 
should be cut just as the  heads are emerging from the 
boot.  When used for pasture, grazing should be 
delayed until there is at l east 5 inches of growth.

Canada wildrye generally decreases in response to 
grazing. 
 
Because its crown has coarse stems and leaves, 
Canada wildrye is somewhat resistant to fire 
mortality.  However, susceptibility increases when 
burns are conducted after the initiation of spring 
growth.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Canada wildrye is susceptible to leaf and stem rust, 
and to ergot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Mandan’ (North Dakota) was released by ARS 
Northern Great Plains Research Laboratory for use in 
the northern Great Plains states. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Tony Bush  
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center, East 
Lansing, Michigan 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.