Plant Fact Sheet
PENLAND'S EUTREMA  
Eutrema penlandii Rollins 
Plant Symbol = EUPE10  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure1:  Penland’s eutrema, Eutrema penlandii .  Photo USFWS,  Alicia Langton  July 2010. 
Alternat ive Names  
Scientific name:  Eutrema  edwardsii ssp. Penlandii, 
Weber 1985) . 
 
Common name:  Penland Alpine f en mustard, 
Mosquito r ange mustard . 
 
Uses  
Many mustard family plant species have known food 
value (cabbage, broccoli, kohlrabi, kale, etc.), in fact, 
Wasabi,  Eutrema japonica,  is a commonly recognized 
member of the Eutrema  genus in Asia.    
 
Penland’s eutrema  is browsed by alpine wildlife.   
 
  Stat
us 
Penland’s eutrema  was  designated as endangered by the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife  Service (USFWS)  in 1993.  
 
The Nature Serve conservation status rank, an 
international effort which rank s species on their “global” 
status,  ranks Penland’s  eutrema as G1/S1 - critically 
imperiled  globally  and in Colorado.   
 
Penland’s eutrema is only one of two species of Eutrema  
in North America and the only one in the lower 48 states . 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant ’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
General :  Mustard family (Brassicaceae).  Penland’s 
eutrema is a  diminutive herbaceous perennial plant that 
grows  from a taproot .  Plants grow up to 6 inches (15 cm) 
in height with one to  several spreading erect stems 
(Figure  1).  Basal leaves are heart -shaped with rounded 
tips.  Several white, four -petalled flowers top each stem.  
The leaves and fruit are without ha irs (glabrous) and 
stalked  which distinguishes this species  from many other 
small types of mustard that grow in the area such as 
Draba  (whitlow -grass). Flowering occurs June to August  
and even into September, depending on the site and snow 
melt .  Fruits of  Penland’s  eutrema are the characteristic 
mustard family siliques; they are diamond -shaped in 
cross- section  and  turn purple -black when mature which 
also distinguishes the plant from other look -alikes . 
 
Penland’s eutrema  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.

Distribution:  Eutrema penlandii  is a narrow endemic 
known only to occur in the Mosquito mountain range of 
Colorado in Lake, Park, an d Summit counties.  Range-
wide distribution reaches 18 miles from north to south 
and approximately 10 miles east  to west, encompassing 
roughly 200 acres of occupied habitat.  This species is 
thought to be an ice -age relic with its  closest relative, E. 
edwardsii,  found in the Canadian Arcti c Archipelago. 
A pproximately 40% of the existing known populations 
and habitat  for Penland’s Eutrema occurs on private land.  
Please consult the USFWS website at  www.fws.gov, for 
more information . For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.   
 
Habitat : Penland’s eutrema is  an alpine tundra species 
that grows above treeline in association with many 
species of moss, forbs, and graminoids in alpine meadow 
ha bitat.  It occurs in wetlands with perennial water flow 
from snowmelt, at 11,800 - 13,100 ft. in elevation.  
Penland’s eutr ema generally grows on the leeward, south 
and east -facing, flat to gently sloping benches with steep 
walls that provide some protection from snow -melting 
winds .  The annual precipitation is 30 -40 inches.  
Penland’s eutrema is known to frequently occur in 
a ssociation with a variety of alpine tundra species 
including: white marsh marigold ( Caltha leptosepala), 
water sedge ( Carex aquatilis ), mountain sedge ( Carex 
scopulorum),  Bering chickweed ( Cerastium 
beeringianum ), alpine spring beauty ( Claytonia 
megarhiza) , tufted hairgrass ( Deschampsia cespitosa), 
Ross avens ( Geum rossii), elephanthead ( Pedicularis 
groenlandica), arctic bluegrass ( Poa arctica), America 
bistort ( Polygonum bistortoides), alpine bistort 
( Polygonum viviparum ), King’s crown (Rhodiola 
integrifolia ), Rose crown ( Rhodiola rhodantha), 
diamondleaf saxifrage ( Saxifraga rhomboidea), and 
alpine meadow rue ( Thalictrum alpinum).  The Mosquito 
Range includes thirteen other rare plant species, of which, 
two are known only from the range . 
 
Adaptati on  
Penland’s eutrema is adapted to grow in  the Mosquito 
Range in central Colorado , where a unique set of habitat 
conditions exist.  An arctic circumpolar species, Penland’s 
eutrema is separated from its closest relative E. edwardsii , 
which occurs in the Ca nadian Arctic Archipelago by over 
1000 mile s to the north .   
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Depending on snow -melt, Penland’s eutrema produces 
mature fruits from late -July into A ugust and into 
September . Penland’s eutrema  produces from seed with 
no means of vegetative reproduction.  Little else is known  about the reproduction, pollinators, or seed dispersal at 
this time.
 
Management  
P rimary threats to Penland’s  eutrema  appear to be from 
h abitat  loss through recreation (off -highway vehicle use, 
camping, and hiking), alterations to hydrology, mining 
impacts, and climate.    
Pests and Potential Problems  
Currently there are no known pests affecting the growth 
and vigor of  Penland’s eutrema.  Associated threats  may 
include the introduction of non- native invasive plant 
species  from hikers and campers as recreational use 
numbers continue to increase annually of this popular 
recreation area  that constitutes the only habitat of  
Penland’s  eutrema.  Impacts of herbivory from pikas and 
rodents have been noted by researchers .  However, 
Penland’s mustard has evolved some tolerance to grazing 
and wildlife usage. For instance, a taproot growth form 
enables re- sprouting after grazing.  Interestingly, to date, 
the main non -native constituent in Penland’s mustard 
habitat is dandelion, T araxacon officinales, another tap-
rooted species.  
Environmental Concerns  
Hydrology is the most fragile aspect  of the habitat 
affecting Penland’s  eutrema .  Any activity that directly or 
indirectly alters the surface or ground water supply and 
alters the wetland habitat required by this species could 
pose a significant threat. On a larger scale, climate change 
could potentially threaten  this and other alpine s pecies 
since there are no upward elevation to which the species 
may migrate . 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
N/A 
 
Prepared By :   
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist,  USDA 
NRCS  Colorado  State Office,  Denver, Colorado.  
Gina Glenne ; Botanist USFWS, Mounta in-Prairie Region, 
Grand Junction, Colorado.  
Citation  
Taliga, Christine E. and Gina Glenne, 2012.  Plant Fact 
Sheet  for  Penland’s eutrema ( Eutrema penlandii). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State 
Office.  Denver, 80225- 0426. 
Published  September 2012  
Edited:  19Sep2012jab  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER