Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAND LOVEGRASS 
Eragrostis trichodes (Nutt.) 
Wood  
Plant Symbol = ERTR3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Name 
sand love grass, tall love grass. 
 
Uses  
Sand lovegrass is grazed by livestock and is 
sometimes cut for hay. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Sand lovegrass is a 
warm-season, short-lived, perennial bunch grass.  
The height ranges from 2-1/2 to 5 feet.  The leaf 
blade is flat.  It is narrow and rolls inward under dry 
conditions, giving a threadlike appearance.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded, nearly as long as the internodes, 
and hairy an inch or so below collar.  The seedhead 
has a large open and purplish panicle and spikelets 
mostly 4 to 6 flowered. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Occasionally, it is included in range-seeding mixtures 
for quick cover and forage production.  This grass is 
seldom a key management species.  It cures well on 
the stem and provides good grazing in the fall and 
winter, if grazing is deferred during summer months. 
 
Establishment 
This grass has a high stem to leaf ratio.  After stems 
are grazed off, they often become stiff and harsh to 
touch.  It can grow principally on deep sands and 
sandy loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 From Hitchcock, A.S. (1950) @ plants.usda.gov