Plant Fact Sheet
RUBBER RABBITBRUSH 
 Ericameria nauseosa (Pallas ex 
Pursh) G.L. Nesom & Baird   
Plant Symbol = ERNA10 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant  Materials Center, 
Pullman Washington  
 
Sally and Andy Wasowski, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 
www.wildflower.org  
 
Alternate Names 
Grey rabbitbrush, golden rabbitbrush, chamiso blanco, 
Chrysothamnus nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, 
Chrysocoma nauseosa  Pallas ex Pursh, Bigelovia 
nauseosa  Gray  
   
Uses   
Forage:  Rubber rabbitbrush has marginal value for 
livestock but is an important browse species for wildlife 
during the winter months.  
   
Wildlife habitat:  Small mammals and birds such as 
jackrabbits and sage grouse utilize rubber rabbitbrush for 
cover.   
   
Pollinator habitat : Rubber rabbitbrush attracts a wide 
array of native insects, including butterflies and small 
bees.  It is one the few native plant species in the 
Intermountain West that provides habitat for pollinators 
during the late summer and fall months.   
   
Range revegetation, erosion control and mine 
reclamation:  Rubber rabbitbrush produces deep roots,  heavy litter and abundant seed. It grows rapidl
y and is 
able to establish on severe sites.  
   
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans used rubber 
rabbitbrush for baskets, yellow dye, chewing gum, tea, 
cough syrup, and to treat chest pains.  During World War 
II the plant was studied as a substitute for commercial 
rubber, and currently it is a small commercial rubber 
source.   
   
Ornamental : Rubber rabbitbrush is a desirable plant for 
low maintenance and sustainable landscaping.    
   
Status   
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Description and Adaptation  
General : Composite family (Asteraceae).  Rubber 
rabbitbrush is a native, peren nial, warm-season shrub that 
grows to 1 to 8 feet tall.  It has a rounded crown with 
stems originating from its base.  Stems and leaves are 
covered with dense white hairs.  Leaves are 0.75 to 2.75 
inches long, 0.02 to 0.12 inches wide, alternate, linear to  
spatula shaped with entire margins.  Flowers are yellow, 
tubular, 0.25 to 0.4 inch long, arranged in terminal, 
rounded clusters.  Flowers begin bloom late July –  
October.  Inflorescences and seed bracts often persist 
through winter.  Seeds are achenes wit h pappus and are 
wind disseminated.  Reproduction is primarily by seeds 
and epicormic buds.    
   
The species is taxonomically complex, and is divided into 
two subspecies and 22 varieties (ecotypes).  The 22 
ecotypes exhibit a great deal of variability in 
m orphological characteristics and chemical composition.  
   
Distribution : Ericameria naseosa  is present in New York 
and all Great Plains and western states in the United 
States, and in the Canadian provinces of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and British Columbia. Fo r current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.