Plant Fact Sheet
CREEPING BURHEAD  
Echinodorus cordifolius  
(L.) Griseb.  
Plant Symbol = ECCO3  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS  
 
Figure 1 Creeping burhead  
Alternate Names 
None listed.  
Uses  
Creeping burhead is  a n  attractive  aquatic plant that is 
recommended  for use in shallow ponds and pools.   It may 
also  be suitable for use in  constructed wetlands.   Wildlife 
ben efits have not been documented but it can provide 
some cover for smaller species.  
Status  
Creeping burhead is listed as extirpated in Indiana and 
endangered in Maryland.  This plant is considered an 
obligate wetland indic ator species.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agr iculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed information is also available from the PLANTS 
Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the 
Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for 
further information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
Creeping burhead is a creeping annual or short -lived  
perennial.  The leaves are broadly heart shaped, 2 -7 
inches long and almost as wide.  The principal veins are 
conspicuous and impressed on the upper surface of the 
leaf blade.   The petioles  are  4-20  inches long, enlarged 
and  spongy towards the base.   T he flowering shoot  
(scape) can  reach  3 feet or more in length;  s capes  are 
upright  when young, often drooping and  rooting at the 
tips to produce new plantlets.   Numerous whorls of 
flowers with white petals  and greenish centers are located 
along the  scape. Flowering begins in June and continues  
until  frost. The fruiting heads are round, bur like clusters 
of small brown seeds.  The  native range of the species is 
from Maryland  south to Florida, west to Missouri and the  
panhandle of Texas.  It is usually  found growing in  
swamps,  wet woodlands,  marshes, and ditches. There are 
some  indications that it prefers a slightly shaded  location.  
Bes t growth is generally on wetland  soils with fairly high 
organic matter.   
   
 
Creeping  burhead distribution  from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Leflore Source creeping burhead, a selection of this 
species,  is established using transplants. The creeping 
nature of this plant produces numerous small plantlets that 
can be dug and divided from the parent plant.