Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SALTMARSH 
FINGERGRASS 
Eustachys glauca  Chapman 
Plant Symbol = EUGL5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Name 
Saltmarsh chloris, Chloris glauca 
 
Uses  
Saltmarsh fingergrass is grazed readily by cattle, 
horses, and sheep. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Saltmarsh fingergrass is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 3 to 4 feet.  The leaf blade is 
folded 12 to 14 inches long, rounded at tip and dark 
green.  The leaf sheath is crowded at the base, keeled, 
overlapping, and merges into the blade without a 
distinct collar.  The ligule is a minute fringe of hairs.   
The seedhead has 15 to 20 spikes, each 4 to 5 inches 
long and the spikelets are br own, all on one side of 
rachis. 
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Continuous close grazing easily kills this grass.  For 
maximum production and spre ad, graze it properly at 
all times and defer grazing every 2 to 3 years for at 
least 90 days throughout the growing season. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts early in the spring and continues 
through the summer.  It makes good regrowth.  
Growing points are 3 to 4 inches above ground early 
in the season.  It produces  seed two to three times 
during a long growing season.  In southern Florida, 
parts of the plant stay green all year.  It is adapted to 
coastal flatwoods, swamp margins, and sloughs on 
calcareous soils, thous it grows best in brackish 
marshes. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.