Plant Fact Sheet
CLAY -LOVING WILD 
BUCKWHEAT  
Eriogonum pelinophilum         
Reveal 
Plant Symbol = ERPE10  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program  
 
Figure1:  Clay-loving wild buckwheat,  Eriogonum pelinophilum ..   
  Photo  USFWS , Alicia Langton  July 2010.  
Alternative Names  
N/A  
Uses  
Pollinators: Clay -loving wild buckwheat  f lowers are 
visited by more than 50 spe cies of pollinators in a season.  
Roughly half of these 50 species are native bees, and 18 
species are native ants .   The USFWS  and others have 
noted,  that of all Eriogonum  species studied to date, none 
has as many pollinators as clay -loving wild buckwheat . 
Status  
Clay -loving wild buckwhea t was  designated as 
endangered, with critical habitat, by the USFWS in  1984. 
 
The Nature Serve conservation status rank  an  international 
effort which rank species on their “global” status, denotes 
clay -loving wild buckwheat  as G2/S2 - globally imperiled 
and statewide imperiled,  with a high risk of extinction due 
to very restricted range, very few populations (often 20 or 
fewer), steep declines, or other factors . 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of  Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Description
 and Adaptation 
General : Buckwheat family (Polygonaceae).  Clay -loving 
wild buckwheat  is a long -live d low -growing, spreading 
sub -shrub, reaching up to 4 inches (10 centimeters) in 
height and 12  in (30 cm) across .  “Stems are spread ing 
without persistent leaf base s up to 1/3
 the height of the 
plant; aerial flowering stems spreading to erec t, slender, 
l eav es, 1 per node” .  Leaves are dark green and appear 
needle- like with in -rolled margins .  Flowers are white  to 
cream  with reddish -brown  midribs and brownish- red 
bases , (Figure 2), petals all the same length .  Fruits are 
achenes, light brown, 0.1 in (0.3 to 0.35 cm) and 
triangular in cross -section.  Flowering  occurs late  May to 
early September .  
 
 
Clay -loving buckwheat  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
 
Distribution :  Clay-loving wild buckwheat is endemic to 
the rolling clay (adobe) hills and flats immediately 
adjacent to the communities of Delta and Montrose, of 
west -central Colorado.    
 
Habitat :   The habitat of clay -loving wild buckwheat 
consists of adobe clay badlan d hills and flats within the 
sparsely vegetated desert shrub community.  This plant 
community includes the following clay -loving buckwheat 
plant associates:  mat saltbush ( Atriplex corrugata), black 
sagebrush ( Artemesia nova), shadscale ( Atriplex 
confertifolia ), Gardner’s saltbush, ( Atriplex gardneri), 
bud sagebrush ( Picrothamnus desertorum ), charming 
woodyaster, ( Xylorhiza venusta),  and Adobe Hills 
beardtongue ( Penstemon retrorsus) .