Plant Fact Sheet                   
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KAWELU 
Eragrostis variabilis (Gaud.) 
Steud.  
Plant Symbol = ERVA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pacific Islands Area 
Plant  Materials Program 
 
 Forest and Kim Starr, USGS. Kawelu on Aviary Seep West Beach 
Sand Island, Midway Atoll.  
 
Alternate Names 
‘emoloa, kalamalo, variable lovegrass 
 
Uses 
Conservation : This species is used for erosion 
control, ecosystem restoration, and wildlife food and 
cover. Kawelu is one of the dominant species on 
Laysan and Lisianski islands and Pearl and Hermes 
Atoll where it is widely used by seabirds for nesting 
and foraging. On Laysan, the endemic and 
endangered Laysan Finch ne sts almost exclusively in 
kawelu and eats the seeds. Kawelu also provides 
important breeding habitat for the endangered Laysan 
Duck and several species of indigenous seabirds and 
terrestrial arthropods. On Pearl and Hermes Atoll
, 
kawelu provides cover for noio (brown noddy), 
wedge-tailed shearwaters, and koa’e’ula (red-tailed 
tropic bird).   
Cultural
: The native Hawaiians used kawelu for 
thatching their houses as an alternative to piligrass 
( Heteropogon contortus). It is used to enhance 
cultural sites. Kawelu is re ferred to in poems, songs, 
and hula chants. Kawelu is a hula step that signifies 
the waving of grass. 
 
Ornamental : Kawelu is an attractive bunchgrass that 
can be used as an accent plant and for other 
landscape uses. Individual plants look like small, 
light green fountains. This is especially true for the 
type from the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Kawelu is a variable, tufted, short-lived perennial 
grass. The stems or culms are erect, smooth, and 1 to 
3 or more feet tall. There is  considerable variation in 
length of leaves and flowering panicles. The leaf 
blades are flat at the base and rolled inward at the 
upper part. Leaves are 0.50 to 0.60 inch wide and up 
to 32 inches long.  The fl owering heads or panicles 
are narrow and range from 8 to 16 inches long. They 
are either somewhat open or dense and spike-like, 
with branches strongly upright to spreading. The oval 
seeds (caryopsis) are .03 to .06 inch long with minute 
grooves. They are dark reddish brown. There are 
approximately 3,136,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Kawelu is an endemic that occurs in the Hawaiian 
Islands on sand dunes, grasslands, open sites in dry 
forests, and exposed slopes and ridges or cliffs from 
sea level to approximately 3,700 feet. It is found in 
the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands on the atolls of 
Kure, Midway, and Pearl and Hermes and the islands 
of Lisianski, Laysan, and Nihoa. It occurs naturally 
on the main islands of Hawaii, Kauai, Lanai, Maui, 
Molokai, and Oahu. It is grows naturally in areas that 
receive approximately 40 to 100 inches of rainfall 
annually. It can be established in lower rainfall areas, 
but may not perpetuate itself. 
 
There is a distinct difference in growth habit between 
plants from the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands and 
those found on the main islands.  Kawelu plants from 
the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are more upright 
and fountain-like as shown by the image taken on

Aviary Seep West Beach Sand Island, Midway Atoll. 
The plant type in the imag e taken on Kanaha Beach, 
Maui, is typical of kawelu plants from the main 
islands. Kawelu seeds collected on Laysan and 
Midway were planted at the NRCS Hoolehua Plant 
Materials Center on Molokai. The resulting plants 
had the characteristic growth habit described for 
kawelu plants from the Northwestern Hawaiian 
Islands. 
   
 Forest and Kim Starr, USGS. Ka welu on Kanaha Beach, Maui.  
 
Distribution 
Please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
This grass is easily established by seed. Broadcast 
seed at the rate of 3 to 5 pounds pure live seed (PLS) 
per acre. Seeds will germinate quickly and the plants 
will develop fairly rapidly. The seedbed should be 
weed-free. 
 
Plants may be propagated in the nursery and 
transplanted to the field. Use a sterile well-drained 
medium. Kawelu seedlings are susceptible to 
damping-off. Good sanitation practices are important. 
Fungicide seed treatments may be necessary. 
Applications of a time release fertilizer will enhance 
growth, enabling the seedlings to grow beyond the 
stage
 where they are susceptible to damping-off. The 
seedlings should be ready for planting on site within 
3 to 4 months. 
  Management 
No management is required for kawelu when planted 
in its natural range of adaptation for rainfall, 
elevation, and soil type. Plantings made on degraded 
sites may need additional fertilizer, irrigation, and 
other inputs as appropriate. 
 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests that are detrimental to the 
life cycle of kawelu. Adult plants are susceptible to a 
leaf disease. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Kahoolawe Germplasm Kawelu is a source identified 
release of a naturally occurring kawelu germplasm 
and has been unaltered. 
 
Prepared By:  Robert J. Joy, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Hoolehua, Hawaii  
 
Species Coordinator:  Robert J. Joy, USDA NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Hoolehua, Hawaii    
 
Edited: 090622 jsp  
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer."  
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.