Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CREEPING 
SPIKERUSH  
Eleocharis palustris  (L.) 
Roemer & J.A. Schultes  
Plant symbol = ELPA3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Robert Mohlenbrock USDA SCS. 1989. Midwest Wetland Flora 
 
Alternate Names 
Common spikerush 
 
Uses 
Creeping spikerush is suitable for erosion control, 
constructed wetland system applications, wildlife 
food and cover, wetland restoration and creation and 
improvement of plant diversity in wetland and 
riparian communities. Plants spread rapidly by 
rhizomes and will develop a thick root mass that is 
resistant to compaction and erosion. The rhizomes 
also form a matrix for many beneficial bacteria 
making this plant an excellent choice for wastewater 
management applications. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Creeping spikerush is a perennial, strongly 
rhizomatous wetland plant naturally occurring in wet 
meadows, seeps, springs, lake margins and other  wetland environments. Stems are upright and round 
and are typically 10 to 70 cm (4 to 27 in) tall. Stems 
are topped with a terminal
 spikelet bearing numerous 
flowers. The fruit is a yellow to brown lenticular 
achene from 1.5 to 2.5 mm long. Achenes are tipped 
with a tubercle and subtended by up to 8 bristles. 
 
Creeping spikerush is a native obligate wetland 
species found throughout the Northern Hemisphere. 
It occurs in all U.S. states except Georgia, Florida 
and Hawaii. 
 
Creeping spikerush grows on  sites that are either 
permanently or seasonally  flooded. The plants can 
grow and thrive in permanent water up to 1 m (3 ft) 
deep. They can also surviv e in areas where the water 
table drops to 30 cm (12 in ) below the surface late in 
the growing season. Plants are commonly found 
growing in areas totally inundated for up to 4 months.  
Plants grow in saturated, fine textured soils in neutral 
to alkaline or saline conditions (pH 7 to 8 and EC 
<14). 
 
Establishment 
Germination rates can be enhanced by lightly 
scarifying the seed followed by wet pre-chilling in a 
mixture of water and sphagnum moss at 2ºC (35º F) 
for 30 to 45 days. Seed requires light, moisture and 
heat for germination. For greenhouse propagation, 
place seed on soil surface and press in lightly to 
assure good soil contact. Do not cover seed. Soil 
should be kept moist, and the greenhouse should be 
kept hot, 32 to 38ºC (90 to 100º F). Germination 
should begin within one to two weeks. Maintain soil 
moisture until transplanting. Plugs should be 
transplanted at 30 to 45 cm (12 to 18 in) spacing. 
This allows plants to fill in interspaces within one 
growing season. Soils should be kept saturated with 
no more than 8 cm (3 in) of standing water at any 
time during the first growing season. Fluctuating 
water levels during the establishment year will 
facilitate spreading. Seed can be collected by hand 
stripping or clipping with hand shears. 
 
Management  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known probl ems with insects or 
diseases. Aphids will feed on the stems, but little or 
no damage has been noted, and the vigor of the plants 
has not been affected.

Environmental Concerns 
These selected class releases are from a species 
native to the Intermountain West and have no known 
negative impacts on wild or domestic animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Aberdeen PMC has released four performance 
tested ecotypes of creeping  spikerush from the PMC 
service area. The CJ Strike  Selection was collected 
from the CJ Strike Wildlife Management Area 
(WMA) near Bruneau, Idaho. It was selected for use 
in Land Resource Region (LRR) B West. The 
Malheur Selection was selected for use in LRR D 
North. It was collected from the Malheur National 
Wildlife Refuge (NWR) n ear Burns, OR. The Mud 
Lake Selection comes from the Mud Lake WMA, 
north of Terreton, Idaho and was selected for use in 
LRR B East. The Ruby Lake Selection was selected 
for use in LRR D South. The collection site was the 
Ruby Lake NWR in Elko County, NV.   
 
Sixteen creeping spikerush collections from the 
Aberdeen PMC Service Area were evaluated from 
1991 to 1995. All collections were evaluated for 
survival, vigor, overall growth and spread, potential 
seed production, and above ground biomass 
production. The PMC released one selection from 
each LRR in the PMC service area. The released 
selections are the accessions with the best overall 
rating against others from within its respective LRR.  
Accession numbers: CJ Strike (9057585), Malheur 
Selection (9057607), Mud Lake Selection (9067389), 
and Ruby Lake Selection (9067387). 
 
Generation 0 (G0) seed is maintained at Aberdeen 
PMC. Later generation seed (ie G1) is not produced, 
maintained or available through the USDA-NRCS 
Plant Materials Center. To make collections of these 
creeping spikerush releases , contact the appropriate 
managing agency for the original collection site. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC, Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
J. Chris Hoag, USDA NRCS Aberdeen PMC, 
Aberdeen, ID. 
 Edited: 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.