Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HOLLOW-STEMMED JOE-PYE WEED  
Eupatoriadelphus fistulosus 
(Barrett)  King and H. Rob.  
Plant Symbol = EUFI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 Robert H.  Mohlenbrock @ US DA-NRCS PLANTS Database / 
USDA SCS.  1989.  Midwest wetla nd flora: Field office illustrated 
guide to plant species.  Midwest National Technical Center, 
Lincoln. 
 
Alternate Names 
Trumpetweed, Joe-Pye Weed,  Eupatorium fistulosum 
L. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: Native Americans use the tea of 
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed  as a diuretic.  A tea 
of the roots is used to treat fevers, colds, chills, sore 
womb after childbirth, diarrhea, and liver and kidney 
ailments.  A wash of the root tea is also used for 
rheumatism and as a diaphoretic. 
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye 
Weed is an outstanding plant in flower and is popular 
for wet or moist meadow plantings, and native 
landscape gardens.  Make sure to give this plant 
ample room due to its impr essive size.  The nectar 
from the flowers is very attractive to a variety of 
pollinators, including butterflies, skippers, and long-
tongued bees.  Various caterpillars, such as  Schinia 
trifascia  (Three-lined Flower Moth),  Papaipema 
eupatorii  (Eupatorium Borer Moth), and  Haploa clymene
 (Clymene Moth) eat various portions of 
iadelphus spp .   
l 
 
urrent status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
d indicator values). 
l 
 
k and 
he 
imes 
roduces rhizomes ( horizontal stem  with  shoots  
ws s 
rdiness 
ones 3 – 9).  It is rarely found on disturbed sites and   wet meadows and fields. 
y 
y the 
r 
tment at 40 
e  
Fahrenheit, and night temperatures 65 - 68 degrees 
Eupator
 
Status 
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed
 is listed as a specia
concern in Maine, as a threatened species in 
Michigan, and as endangered in New Hampshire. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
c
state noxious status, and wetlan
 
Description and Adaptation  
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed is a native perennia
wildflower that grows from 2 - 6 feet tall.  The 
central stem is hollow, giving the plant its common
name.  The flowers are fragrant, purple or pin
occur in round clusters of 5 to 7 florets per head.  
Flowers appear in mid- to late summer (July-
September).  The florets produce wind-dispersed 
achenes (small dry seed with  hair-like bristles).  T
ovate (egg-shaped) leaves have conspicuous veins, 
grow up to 10 inches long, and usually appear in 
whorls of 4 to 7.  The fibrous root system somet
p
above  and roots  below ), which create colonies. 
 
Distribution:  Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed gro
in moist to wet soils in full sun to partial shade.  It i
widely distributed from Quebec to Missouri and 
south to Florida and Texas (USDA cold ha
z
grows in woods,
 
Establishment 
Seed propagation 
Seeds ripen about a month after flowering and should 
be collected when the heads dry, split and the fluff
seed begins to float away.  If collected earlier, dr
seed heads for 1 - 2 weeks in open paper bags.  If 
seeds are sown directly, sow in the fall and sow 
thickly as germination rates are typically low.  Fo
container production, a cold-moist pretrea
degrees Fahrenheit for 3 weeks to 3 months will 
increase germination percentages.  After 
pretreatment, sow seeds in a fine germination mix 
containing milled sphagnum moss.  Transplant to 
potting mix after seeds have germinated.  Seeds 
germinate at 70 - 85 degrees Fahrenheit and in th
presence of light.  Use a gr eenhouse with alternating
temperatures (day temperatures 70 - 85 degrees

Fahrenheit). Seeds will last up to 3 years if stored in
cold (40 degrees Fahrenh a 
eit) and dry (30% relative 
umidity) environment. 
ormant or in the spring just as shoots first appear.    nt 
ic 
ye Weed, but it is not a preferred 
razing plant. 
, 
ve them 
oking bedraggled by midsummer.     
 
o concerns at this time. 
oved, and Selected Materials (and nded cultivars or selected 
aterials at this time. 
n 
 National Plant 
aterials Center, Beltsville, MD. 
CS National Plant Materials 
enter, Beltsville, MD 
dited: 090112 jsp 
 
h
 
Vegetative propagation 
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed can be propagated 
by division or two-node softwood tip cuttings taken 
in late spring.  Divide the plants in the fall as they go 
d
 
Management 
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed prefers damp, moist 
to wet, rich soils, but it will also grow in gravelly or 
sandy soils if there is sufficient moisture.  This pla
prefers partial shade and ne utral to slightly acid
soils.  Livestock will eat the leaves of Hollow-
stemmed Joe-P
g
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Hollow-stemmed Joe-Pye Weed is not drought-
tolerant.  The leaves are favored by grasshoppers
flea beetles and saw flies, which can lea
lo
 
Environmental Concerns
N
 
Cultivars, Impr
area of origin) 
There are no recomme
m
 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk (Horticultural Volunteer) and Shaw
Belt (Horticulturist), US DA NRCS
M
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, USDA NR
C
 
E
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
ct 
 
The U.S.  Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and mar ital or family status.  (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should conta
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Offic
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD).  USD e 
A is an equal opportunity 
rovider and employer.  Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural 
p
R esources Conservation Service.