Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SPOTTED JOE-PYE WEED 
Eupatoriadelphus maculatus 
(L.)  King and H.E. Robins 
var.  maculatus 
Plant Symbol = EUMAM3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD     
W
 
illiam S. Justice @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
Alternate Names 
Spotted trumpetweed, Eupatorium maculatum  L. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: Native Americans used a tea of the 
whole herb as a diuretic.  A tea of the roots has been 
used to treat fevers, colds, chills, sore womb after 
childbirth, diarrhea, and liver and kidney ailments.  A 
wash of the root tea was used for rheumatism and as 
a diaphoretic. 
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  The nectar from the 
flowers is very attractive to  butterflies, skippers, and 
long-tongued bees.  The Swamp Sparrow 
supplements its diet with the seeds of  E. maculatus.  
Various caterpillars, such as  Schinia trifascia (Three-
lined Flower Moth),  Papaipema eupatorii  and Haploa clymene
 (Clymene Moth) eat various 
portions of  Eupatoriadelphus spp .   
 
Status 
Spotted Joe-Pye Weed is listed as a historical plant in 
Kentucky and as endangered/extirpated in Maryland.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation  
Spotted Joe-Pye Weed is a native perennial 
wildflower that grows from 2 - 6 feet tall.  The 
central stem is hairy and purple or purple-spotted, as 
are the flowering stalks.  Fragrant purple flowers, in 
flat-topped clusters of 9 or more florets per head, 
appear in mid- to late summer (July-September).  The 
florets produce wind-dispersed small dry seed with 
hair-like bristles.  Plants  are mostly unbranched, 
except for flower-bearing stal ks near the apex of the 
plant.  The ovate (egg-shaped) leaves have 
conspicuous veins, grow up to 8 inches long and 2.5 
inches across, and usually appear in whorls of 4 or 5.  
The fibrous root system sometimes produces 
rhizomes ( horizontal stem  with  shoots  above  and 
roots  below ), which create colonies. 
 
Distribution:  Spotted Joe-Pye We ed prefers moist 
conditions and populates a variety of wetland habitats 
from Nova Scotia south to the mountains of North 
Carolina and from Nebraska to British Columbia 
(USDA cold hardiness zones 2-9).  It is rarely found 
on disturbed sites. 
 
Establishment 
Seed propagation 
Seeds ripen about a month after flowering and should 
be collected when the heads dry, split and the fluffy 
seed begins to float away.  If collected earlier, dry the 
seed heads for 1 - 2 weeks in open paper bags.  If 
seeds are sown directly, sow in the fall and sow 
thickly as germination rates are typically low.  For 
container production, a cold-moist pretreatment at 40 
degrees Fahrenheit for 3 weeks to 3 months will 
increase germination percentages.  After 
pretreatment, sow seeds in a fine germination mix 
containing milled sphagnum moss.  Transplant to 
potting mix after seeds have germinated.  Seeds 
germinate at 70 - 85 degrees Fahrenheit and in the 
presence of light.  Use a gr eenhouse with alternating 
temperatures (day temperatures 70 - 85 degrees

Fahrenheit, night temperatures 65 - 68 degrees 
Fahrenheit).  Seeds will last up to 3 years if stored in 
a cold (40 degrees Fahrenheit) and dry (30% relative 
humidity) environment. 
 
Vegetative propagation 
Spotted Joe-Pye Weed can be propagated by division 
or two-node softwood tip cuttings taken in late 
spring.  Divide the plants in the fall as they go 
dormant or in the spring just as shoots first appear.   
 
Management 
Spotted Joe-Pye Weed typically only reaches full 
height in moist, rich soils, but it will also grow in 
gravelly or sandy soils if there is sufficient moisture.  
This plant prefers partial shade and neutral to slightly 
acidic soils, although it flowers best and seeds ripen 
best in full sun.  Livestock will eat the leaves of 
Spotted Joe-Pye Weed, but it is not a preferred 
grazing plant. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
It is not drought-tolerant.   The leaves are favored by 
grasshoppers, flea beetles and saw flies, which can 
leave them looking bedraggled by midsummer.     
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time, although ‘Gateway’ is popular 
in some nurseries.  Spotted Joe-Pye Weed seeds are 
available from commercial nurseries specializing in 
native and unusual plants.
 
 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk (Horticultural Volunteer) and Shawn 
Belt (Horticulturist), US DA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, USDA NRCS  National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
Edited: 090112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and mar ital or family status.  (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD).  USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.  Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural 
Resources Conservation Service.