Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PALE PURPLE 
CONEFLOWER  
Echinacea pallida   (Nutt.) 
Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = ECPA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
 Britton and Brown 1913 Illustrated flora of the northern states and Canada 
 
Uses 
Pale purple coneflower can be used for roadside 
plantings, prairie restoration,  wildlife food and cover, 
prairie landscaping and native gardens. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
This plant is considered threatened in a couple of 
states. 
 
Description 
Pale purple coneflower is a native perennial forb 
growing to a height of 3 feet with coarse bristly hairs 
on the stout stems and leav es.  The leaves are rough- surfaced, up to 10 inches long and 1 ½ inches wide, 
and tapering at either end, with several parallel veins 
running along their lengths.  The basal leaves are on 
long stalks, while the stem leaves are few, and 
usually lack long stalks.  There is a single showy 
flower head at the top of each stem, with many 
drooping, pale purple peta
l-like ray flowers, each up 
to 3 ½ inches long, surrounding a broad, purplish 
brown, cone-shaped central disk.  Pale purple 
coneflower flowers in late spring to midsummer. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Pale purple coneflower is widely distributed in dry 
and mesic prairies and open savannas from 
southeastern Nebraska and north central Iowa south 
and east to southwestern Ar kansas and northwestern 
Indiana. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.   
 
Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing or using chemical  weed control.  Firm the 
seedbed by cultipacking.  Seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow seed to be planted 1/8 inch deep.  
The seed of pale purple coneflower should be 
dormant seeded for best results, because the seed 
needs cold moist stratification for two months (60 
days) in cold, moist environment (35 - 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit).  This is the usual time required to break 
dormancy; however, a few require only one month or 
up to three months. 
 
Pale purple coneflower has 80,000 – 85,000 seeds per 
pound.  Seeding rates for seed production should be 
about 3 - 5 pounds of pure live seed (PLS) per acre in 
36-inch rows  
(20 - 30 seeds per row foot).  For a solid stand, the 
seeding rate would be 15 - 20 pounds PLS per acre 
(30 – 40 seeds per square foot). 
 
For a prairie planting, pale purple coneflower would 
be a small component of a mixture ranging from 0.1 
– 1.0 PLS pound per acre (0.2 – 2 PLS per square 
foot). 
  
Use no fertilizer the establishment year unless soil 
test indicates a low deficien cy of less than 15 PPM of 
phosphorus and or less than 90 PPM of potassium.

Use no nitrogen during the establishment year as this 
can encourage weed competition.  
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing over the height 
of the pale purple coneflower plants or cultivating 
between the rows.  For grassy weed control usage of 
a post emergence grass herbicide can provide control 
and will encourage a good stand.  Remove dead plant 
material in the spring for faster green-up by 
shredding.  Burning of dead plant refuge can weaken 
the plants unless done before it has broken dormancy. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This species was grown at the Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center for several years, and during this 
time there were no apparent pests or potential 
problems in growing. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Pale purple coneflower is not known to invade where 
this species does not naturally occur. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
According to the publication entitled ‘Improved 
Conservation Plants Materials Released by NRCS 
and Cooperators through September 2001’, there are 
no cultivars, source identified, selected or tested 
releases of pale purple coneflower from the Plant 
Materials Program.  The origin for these releases was 
northern, central and southern counties in the state of 
Iowa. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Jimmy Henry, Manager 
Steven Bruckerhoff , Conservation Agronomist 
Jerry Kaiser, Plant Materials Specialist 
Elsberry Plant Materials  Center, Elsberry, Missouri 
 Edited: 21nov2003 jlk; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.