Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLE LOVEGRASS
Eragrostis spectabilis (Pursh) Steud. 
Plant Symbol = ERSP  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Alternate Names 
petticoat-climber, tumble grass 
 
Uses  
Livestock readily graze purple  lovegrass in the spring 
and early summer.  On heavily grazed areas, deer dig 
up and eat the basal part of the stem during the 
winter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Purp
le lovegrass is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height is 
between 1 and 3 feet.  The leaf blade is 8 to 18 inches 
long; densely hairy; stiffly ascending when young; 
tapers to fine point.  The leaf sheath is longer than 
internodes; covered with long, gray hair.  The ligule 
is hairy.  The seedhead is open panicle 1 to 2 feet 
long and about as wide, bright purple until maturity; 
tuft of hair in axial of seed stalks, spikelets 6- to 
12-flowered. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass adds variety to livestock diet but is seldom 
abundant enough to be a key management species.  It 
makes maximum production when no more than 50 
percent of current year's growth by weight is grazed 
off.  A summer grazing defe rment of at least 90 days 
improves plant vigor.  This grass increases under 
controlled annual burning. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the early spring and continues into 
the fall.  Purple lovegrass grows in colonies.  It never 
makes up a large percentage of plant composition.  
The seedheads are weak, break off easily, and tumble 
in the wind.  Some plants produce short, slender 
rhizomes.  It is primarily adapted to medium- and 
coarse-textured soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.