Plant Fact Sheet
COMMON WOOLLY 
SUNFLOWER  
Eriophyllum lanatum  Forbes  
Plant Symbol = ERLA6  
Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA  
 
Eriophyllum  lanatum.  Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Herbarium 
Alternat ive Names  
Common Alternate Names: Oregon sunshine, golden 
yarrow, yarrow leaved eriophyllum,  dwarf woolly 
sunflower, Pursh’s woolyleaf  
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  None  
Uses  
Pollinator  habitat: Eriophyllum lanatam  attracts beetles, 
syrphid flies, bees, moths and butterflies.  Butterflies that 
are known to visit this plant include:  orange sulfur, red 
admiral, comma, and skipper .  It also serves as a host 
plant for the painted lady butter fly.  An endangered  butterfly in Oregon, Fender’s Blue (
Icaricia icarioides 
fenderi ) relies on E. lanatum for a  source of nectar . 
 
Ornamental:  This plant is hardy to Zone 3 and can be 
used in perennial borders, along pathways, and in rock 
gardens and emban kments. The Lady Bird Wildflower 
Center  recommends selecting a local ecotype, planting 
several plants in a group, and pruning the dead branches.  
 
Rangeland vegetation:  This plant is quick to establish and 
can be used for revegetation and diversification of  
rangeland in a variety of habitats.    
 
Ethnobotanical:  People of the Miwok tribe made a 
poultice of the leaves of this plant and bound them to 
aching parts of the body; the Skagit rubbed the leaves on 
skin to prevent chapping; and the Chehalis used the d ried 
flowers  as a love charm.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Eriophyllum lanatum is a 
native forb or subshrub, and may be an annual, biennial, 
or short - or long- lived perennial depending on site 
conditions.  It has a multi -branched, erect to spreading 
form and grows to  10 to 60 cm (4 to 24 in) tall.  Stems 
and leaves are covered with white hairs.  Leaves are 2.5 to 
7.5 cm ( 1 to 3 in) long and irregularly divided into narrow 
lobes.  Flowers are solitary, on long stems  and bloom 
May through July.  The flower head is 4 to 6.5 cm (1.5 to 
2.5 in) wide with golden yellow disk flowers and 8 to 12 
yellow ray flowers, each 1.5 to 2 cm (0.6 to 0.8 in) long.  
Flower bracts are broad and erect .  Seed is narrow, 
smooth, has four angles and a crown of scales or  s hort 
pappus.   
 
Common  woolly sunflower  is  adapted to areas with dry, 
rocky or sandy soil which receive a minimum of 25 cm 
(10 in) annual precipitation at elevations from se a level to 
3,050 m (10,000ft).   The plant has a high drought 
tolerance due to its white hairs that conser ve water by 
reflecting heat and reducing air movement across the leaf 
surfaces .
  It often grows  in rocky areas along roadsides , 
on coulees, bluffs, and canyons, and in dry grassland, 
thickets and forests . 
 
This plant  is  common on both sides of the Cascade 
Mountains from British Columbia south to Washington,