Plant Fact Sheet

VIRGINIA WILDRYE 
Elymus virginicus L. 
Plant Symbol = ELVI3 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
Larry Allain USDI GS NWRC @ PLANTS 
Uses 
Livestock: Virginia wildrye (Elymus virginicus) is 
very palatable and nutritious, and is readily eaten by 
all classes of livestock in the spring and fall while it 
is green.  It can be used in range restoration as a cool-
season grass, and in native range seed mixes.  It can 
also be used as a cool season pasture grass in shaded, 
wooded, or riparian areas.  Virginia wildrye is a good 
forage producer.  It can produce as much as 3,300 lbs 
of dry weight forage per dryland acre.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Virginia wildrye is a native, cool season, perennial 
bunchgrass which grows two to three feet in height.  
It reproduces by tillering and seed. Virginia wildrye 
self-fertilizes, but has been known to hybridize and 
introgress (outcrossing depression). 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Virginia wildrye prefers moist soils, high soil 
fertility, heavier soil textures, and it is shade tolerant.  
It can be found scattered on shaded banks, along 
fencerows and in open woodlands.  Virginia wildrye 
can be found throughout the United States except for 
Nevada, California, and Oregon.  In Texas, it can be 
found occasionally throughout most regions with the 
exception of the most western fifth of the state.   
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated flora of the northern states and Canada 
Establishment 
Virginia wildrye is best established from seed.  The 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 
Kingsville, Texas has been looking at two collections 
of Virignia wildrye that are adapted to South and 
South Central Texas. We have had consistent 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

germination percentages above 85 percent. East 
Texas Plant Material Center in Nacogdoches, Texas 
is also evaluating this species for collections adapted 
to the northern and eastern portions of Texas and the 
Southern part of Oklahoma.   
For South and South Central Texas, plantings should 
be done in the early fall on a clean, firm, weed-free 
seedbed, with adequate soil moisture. Planting depth 
will vary according to the soil type of the planting 
location. An emergence study conducted by the Kika 
de la Garza PMC (1998) found that seeds should be 
planted from ¼ - ½” deep on clay soil type, and up to 
1” deep for sandier soils. 
Virignia wildrye can be drilled at a minimum of ten 
pounds of pure live seed per acre, or broadcast at 
twenty pounds of pure live seed per acre.  If it is a 
critical area planting or if dense coverage is desired, 
double the seeding rate.   When including Virginia 
wildrye in a seed mixture, adjust the seeding rate 
accordingly.  The planting should be considered 
successful if 1-2 plants are present per square foot 
planted.  Stands are best established and maintained 
if they are not planted next to areas with a large 
concentration of aggressive warm-season grasses, 
such as K-R Bluestem or Buffelgrass. 
Virginia wildrye is also a good seed producer.  It can 
produce as much as 400 pounds of seed per dryland 
acre per year.  Virginia wildrye contains 
approximately 80,000 seeds per pound.   
Management 
Virginia wildrye should not be grazed the first year, 
in order to allow the formation of a strong root 
system.  Once established, graze on a rotational basis 
throughout the cool-season.   Optimum forage height 
for use is between 4 and 10 inches.   
Viriginia wildrye can be grown dryland or with 
irrigation. It should not be fertilized after planting 
until the new plants have become established. After 
the stand is established, fertilize as indicated by the 
results of recent soil tests.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
Virginia wildrye is susceptible to damage from white 
grubworms.  Stands may be treated with diazinon, 
other grub-killing pesticides, or biological controls to 
limit damage.  Treatment should be applied when the 
grubs are in the active phase, usually in the late 
spring or early summer.  Consult with your local 
agricultural extension office for the treatment and 
timing most effective for your area.  
For additional assistance regarding the production 
and establishment of Virginia wildrye, please contact 
the Kika de la Garza Plant Material Center at (361) 
595-1313. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Northern Missouri Germplasm Virginia Wildrye was 
released in 1999 by the Missouri Plant Material 
Center for use in northern Missouri.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
Edited: 01Oct2002 SDM; Edited 05Nov2003 jlk; 06jun06 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.