Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SNAKE RIVER 
WHEATGRASS 
Elymus wawawaiensis  J. 
Carlson & Barkworth  
Plant Symbol = ELWA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Alternative Names 
bluebunch wheatgrass 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife : Snake River wheatgrass 
is palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It 
is a preferred feed for cattle , horses, sheep, elk, deer 
and antelope at various tim es during the year.  In 
spring the protein levels can be as high as 20 percent 
and decrease to about 4 percent protein as the grass 
matures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 
percent throughout the active growth period.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Snake River wheatgrass 
is very drought resistant, stands are persistent, and it 
is adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils.  It is 
very compatible with slower  developing natives such 
as thickspike wheatgrass, western wheatgrass, and 
needlegrass species.  It do es not compete well with 
aggressive introduced grasses.  Its drought tolerance, 
combined with extensive root systems and good 
seedling vigor make this species ideal for reclamation 
in areas receiving 10 to 20 inches annual 
precipitation.  The cultivar  'Secar' competes well in 
areas as low as 8 inches annual rainfall.  This grass 
can be used in urban areas where irrigation water is 
limited and to stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and 
roadsides as a component of a mix. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bluebunch wheatgrass  Pseudoroegneria spicata  
(Pursh) A. Love (formerly  Agropyron spicatum) and 
Elymus wawaiensis  J. Carlson (formerly  Elymus 
lanceolatus ssp. wawawai ) are perennial  bunchgrasses common to the northern Great Plains 
and the Intermountain regions of the western United 
States.  They are long-lived cool season native grass 
with an extensive root system with strong tillers.  
Bluebunch and Snake River wheatgrasses spread by 
seed, except in high rain
fall zones where some short 
rhizomes may occur. 
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass is highly variable and grows 
to 1.5 to 4 feet tall and seed  spikes are 3 to 8 inches 
long.  The auricles (ear-shaped appendages where 
leaf blade and sheath meet) are pointed and semi-
clasping to nearly lacking.  Leaves are lax, flat to 
inrolled, 4-6 mm wide and green to blue in color.  
Leaf sheaths are generally smooth and hairless.  
Reproductive stems are erect, slender, sometimes 
wiry with a wavy floral stal k.  Seeds have a bristle or 
awn. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Snake River does best on medium to coarse textured 
soils and can be found on heavy to medium to coarse 
textured soils over 10 inch es deep including fairly 
sandy sites.  It can be seeded on clayey sites.  It can 
be found on thin, rocky sites and on very steep 
slopes.  It will tolerate weakly saline conditions.  It 
can not grow on very acidic sites.  It is cold tolerant, 
is moderately shade tolerant,  and very tolerant of fire.  
It is intolerant of high water tables, poor drainage, 
and periods of extended inundation. 
 
On native sites Snake River wheatgrass is most 
abundant in the 8 to 20 inch annual precipitation 
zones.  Seeded varieties do best with 12 to 20 inches 
of precipitation ('Secar' will do well with 8 to 18 
inches) and will tolerate up to 35 inches on very well 
drained soils.  The elevation range is from 500 feet 
above sea level to 10,000  feet.  It is a major 
component of many native plant communities and 
generally occupies 20 to 60 percent of the overall 
composition by weight. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
This species should be seeded with a drill at a depth 
of 1/2 inch or less on medium textured soils, 1/4 inch 
on fine textured soils and 3/4 inch or less on coarse 
textured soils.  Single species seeding rates 
recommended for this grass are 6 to 8 pounds Pure

Live Seed (PLS) or 19 to 25 PLS per square foot.  If 
used as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of 
mix desired.  For mined lands and other harsh critical 
areas, the seeding rate should be increased to 40 to 50 
PLS per square foot.  Seedlings are weaker than 
crested wheatgrass and a clean firm weed free 
seedbed is required for establishment (cheatgrass 
competition can cause stand failure). 
 
Seed in very early spring on heavy to medium 
textured soils and in late fall on medium to light 
textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid 
September) seeding is not recommended unless 
irrigation is available.  Dormant fall seedings will 
prechill seed and reduce seed dormancy.  
 
Snake River wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly for 
a native grass and stands should be given 3 years to 
ensure establishment.  It is compatible with other 
species and should be used in seeding mixtures.  It 
should not be seeded with strongly competitive 
introduced species. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment. Application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage. Mow weeds at or prior to their bloom stage. 
New stands may also be damaged by grasshoppers 
and other insects and pesticides may be needed. 
 
Management 
Stands of Snake River wheatgrass should not be 
grazed until they have firmly established (usually two 
growing seasons) and started to flower.  Six inches of 
new growth should be attained in spring before 
grazing is allowed in established stands.  The 
growing tip of Snake River wheatgrass is fairly high 
and stands can easily be ov ergrazed.  Spring grazing 
should occur no more than one out of three years and 
no more than 40 percent utilization should occur 
during rapid growth.  Heavy early spring grazing is 
especially damaging and grazing should be delayed 
until flowers are halfway emerging from the 
protecting leaf.  No more than 60 percent utilization 
should occur after seed ripens.  
 
Snake River wheatgrass can be used for hay 
production and will make nutritious feed, but is more 
suited to pasture/rangeland use.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Snake River wheatgrass is long lived and spreads 
primarily via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions.  Most  seedings do not spread from original plantings.  It is a 
cross pollinating species and is known to cross with 
bluebunch wheatgrass, thickspike wheatgrass, 
quackgrass and bottlebrush squirreltail.  These 
crosses broaden the gene pool and do not generally 
dominate a site or crowd 
out the native ecotype and 
in many cases are sterile. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Secar' was originally identified as a variety of 
bluebunch wheatgrass.  The original collection site is 
along the Snake River gorge  near Lewiston, Idaho.  
'Secar' was released by  the Idaho-Oregon-Montana-
Wyoming AES, Washington Agriculture Research 
Center, and Pullman, WA Plant Materials Center in 
1980.  It is one of the most drought tolerant native 
perennial grasses presently available and can survive 
down to 8 inches rainfall.  It is a bunchgrass with 
good seedling vigor and establishes well under 
droughty conditions.  'Secar'  is intended for use on 
rangeland for re-establishment of native plant 
communities.  Certified seed  is available and breeder 
seed is maintained by Pullman PMC.  Foundation and 
registered seed is availa ble through the appropriate 
state Crop Improvement Association or commercial 
sources to grow certified seed. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle , Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.