Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RATTLESNAKE MASTER  
Eryngium yuccifolium  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = ERYU 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Button eryngo 
 
Uses 
Rattlesnake master can be used for roadside 
plantings, prairie restoratio n, prairie landscaping, 
wildlife cover, and also in wildflower gardens 
because of its attractive appearance. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Rattlesnake master is a warm-season perennial native 
forb which grows well on wet or dry mesic prairie 
soil.  Plants grow 2 to 6 feet tall from a short, thick 
rootstock.  The bluish green basal leaves are up to 3  feet long and up to 1½ inch
es wide.  The leaves along 
the stem are much shorter, but they may be as wide 
as the basal leaves.  All the leaves are thick and 
parallel veined and have soft or weak prickles spaced 
far apart along the edges.  The leaf bases clasp the 
single, erect stem.  Flower heads are on stout 
peduncles at the tip of the stem.  Each nearly 
spherical flower head is from 1/2 to 1 inch in 
diameter and is made up of many small flowers.  
Whitish bracts stick out sharply from the flowers, 
which gives the flower head a rough, prickly feel and 
appearance.  The heads have a honey-like odor and 
are in bloom June to September.  Individual fruits, 
which mature in the flower head, are less than 1/10 
inch long.  The root of rattlesnake master has been 
used medicinally by American Indians and pioneers.   
Eryngium  is Greek for “prickly plant” and 
yuccifolium  is Greek for “yucca leaves.” 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Rattlesnake master is found generally in wet or dry 
prairies and open woods in  the southeast US, north to 
Virginia, and throughout the Midwest to Minnesota, 
Kansas and Texas.  
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 @USDA NRCS PLANTS Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing or using chemical  weed control.  Firm the 
seedbed by cultipacking.  Seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow seed to be  planted ¼ inch deep.  For 
prairie restoration or dive rse plantings for wildlife, 
rattlesnake master can be incorporated into seed 
mixes at a rate of 2 oz pure live seed/ac (there are 
177,700 clean seeds in one pound of seed).  Use 
stratified seed for spring planting (May to June), and 
unstratified seed for a fall dormant seeding 
(November to March).  Apply no fertilizer the 
establishment year unless soil test indicates a severe 
deficiency of potassium and/or phosphorus.  Use no 
nitrogen during the establishment year as this can 
encourage weed competition. 
 
Transplants planted in spring or fall can also be used 
for establishing rattlesnake master on permanent 
sites.

Management 
Reduce weed competition by mowing or using 
approved herbicides.  Burning may be appropriate 
where plant vigor declines  or where invader species 
threaten native mix stands. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Lodging has been noted when growing rattlesnake 
master in a monoculture planting. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Rattlesnake master is not considered weedy or an 
invasive species and has not been noted spreading to 
adjoining areas.  Seedlings have not been noted 
spreading from original plantings, or if they do 
spread, the rate of spread is not alarming.  
Rattlesnake master is self-pollinated. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Three source-identified co mposites of rattlesnake 
master from northern, central, and southern Iowa 
have been released by the Elsberry, Missouri Plant 
Materials Center.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Jimmy Henry , Manager 
Steven Bruckerhoff , Conservation Agronomist 
Elsberry Plant Materials  Center, Elsberry, Missouri 
 
Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.