Plant Fact Sheet
ENGELMANN’S DAISY 
Engelmannia peristenia (Raf.) 
Goodman & C.A. Lawson   
Plant Symbol = ENPE4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “ Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
Texas AgriLife Research and Extension at Uvalde  2000 Copyright 
Texas A&M University System  
Alternate Names 
Cutleaf daisy  
Uses   
Livestock:  Engelmann’ s daisy is rarely found on 
overgrazed pastures due to its palatability by livestock.  
Cattle, sheep, and goats can all benefit from the high 
protein and digestibility obtained from this species.  
Crude protein can reach as high as twenty -five percent in 
early spring.  Livestock, like wildlife, can benefit from 
grazing on Engelmann’s daisy before warm -season 
varieties become available.   
   
Wildlife:  This species benefits wildlife in several ways.  
Deer and rabbits enjoy feeding on Engelmann’s daisy.  It 
has  high protein content and is available earlier in the year 
than warm season vegetation.  Engelmann’s daisy also 
provides cover for small mammals and many species of 
birds.     
   
Erosion Control:  Engelmann’s daisy is commonly 
planted on slopes like roadsides  and embankments to help 
reduce the potential of soil erosion.    Status 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g . 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Weediness    
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with  your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site; 
please consult the related web sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information.   
   
Description    
Engelmann’s daisy is a native, cool -season perennial 
which can grow up to three feet tall.  The plant produces a 
basal rosette of leaves that can grow eight inches long.  
Leaves are very deeply cleft or almost divided.  Coarse 
hair can been found on both the leaves and stems of the 
plant.  The vegetation remains green throughout the 
winter, and begins to flower in May.  The flower head 
elongates during the spring months.  Engelmann’s daisy 
flower heads are made up of yellow ray and disk flowers.  
They measure about one to two inches in diameter.  
During extreme heat, the petals of the plant fold 
downward.   
   
Adaptation   
Engelmann’s daisy is adapted to a wide range of soil 
types and climate conditions, but is found most frequently 
throughout central Texas.  Ideal soil types range from 
sandy loams to clay loams.  Engelmann’s daisy does not 
seem to tolerate heavy clay soils, salinity, or deep sands.  
The plant has a deep tap root which  makes it a hardy, 
drought tolerate species.   
   
Distribution   
Engelmann’s daisy is most commonly found throughout 
north central Texas and the Edward’s Plateau.  It is also 
found as far north as South Dakota, as far west as 
Arizona, and as far east as Louisi ana.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Website.  
 
Establishment   
Planting should be done in late summer or in the fall.   
Sow seed ¼ to ¾  inch deep in a well prepared, firm 
seedbed.  The full seeding rate for Engelmann’s daisy is