Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLENDER 
WHEATGRASS 
Elymus trachycaulus  (Link) 
Gould ex Shinners  
Plant Symbol = ELTR7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/pasture : Slender wheatgrass is 
palatable and nutritious for livestock.  It also makes 
good quality hay. 
 
Wildlife : It is among the preferred wheatgrasses for 
elk and bighorn sheep at higher elevations. 
 
Erosion control : Slender wheatgrass is recommended 
for inclusion in reclamation mixes because of its 
good seedling vigor and establishment qualities. It is 
also somewhat tolerant of saline soils. 
 
Reclamation : Slender wheatgrass seedlings are 
vigorous and provide good initial plant cover in seed 
mixtures. Plants tend to be short-lived, thus giving 
other plants a chance to become established. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Elymus trachycaulus  (Link) Gould ex Shinners, 
slender wheatgrass, is an erect, tufted bunchgrass 
ranging in height from 2 to 2-1/2 feet.  It is a 
relatively short-lived (3 to  4 years) cool season 
perennial species native to the mountain and 
intermountain areas of the western United States and 
the northern Great Plains.  It has very short rhizomes 
and the seedstalks and stems have a characteristic 
reddish to purplish tinge at the base. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Slender wheatgrass is a wi dely distributed species 
and can be found growing at elevations from 4,500 to 
12,000 feet. It prefers loam s and sandy loams in areas 
receiving at least 14 inches  of annual precipitation.  
Slender wheatgrass grows on moist to dry sites and 
has moderate to good tolerance of alkaline conditions 
(pH = 8.8).  Salinity tolerance ranges from 1 to 16 
mmhos/cm depending on environmental conditions 
and ecotype.  It is surpassed in this trait only by tall 
wheatgrass. 
 
It is less drought tolerant than either crested or 
western wheatgrass and may succumb to drought 
since it sometimes matures late in the season.  It does 
not tolerate excessive soil moisture.  It is shade 
tolerant. USDA NRCS 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center 
Meeker, Colorado 
 
Considerable genetic variability is present in slender 
wheatgrass populations and some ecotypes may be 
rather specific to their original sites due to self-
pollination. 
 
Slender wheatgrass is distributed throughout the 
northeast, north, and west portions of the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seeding with a conventional drill is not difficult. 
Drilling depths should be 1/4 to 3/4 inches.  Medium 
textured, well drained soils are preferred.  The 
recommended drill seeding rate of 6 pounds PLS per 
acre will apply approximately 20 seeds per square 
foot.  Seeding rates should be doubled for critical 
areas and broadcast seedings. 
 
Seedling vigor is excellent during the first year of 
growth.  New stands increase in size by vigorous

tillering.  This is a fast growing grass which can 
establish quickly on critical sites. 
 
Management 
Slender wheatgrass is best suited as a filler in seed 
mixtures containing slower establishing, longer-lived 
species for use on mountain and foothill sites.  It is 
only moderately tolerant of grazing and requires good 
management to maintain stands.  It performs best for 
hay and pasture when grown in combination with 
legumes. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Pryor’ is a release from  the Bridger, Montana Plant 
Materials Center and is useful for conservation and 
reclamation planting mixtures. 
 
‘Revenue’ is a 1970 release from Canada. 
 
‘San Luis’ slender wheatgrass has good adaptation 
and is long-lived at elevations of 4,500 to 12,000 
feet. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 05jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.