Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WINTERBERRY EUONYMUS  
Euonymus bungeanus  Maxim.
Plant Symbol = EUBU6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: This plant can be used alone, in 
clumps, in single rows or in multiple rows for 
windbreaks.  It is used on erodible sites for soil 
stabilization. 
 
Wildlife : Winterberry euonymus provides desirable 
habitat for game and songbirds throughout the year. 
 
Landscape : This plant can be used as a living screen, 
noise barrier, enhancement of transportation 
corridors, around campgrounds, and in urban and 
industrial developments. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or  agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Euonymus bungeanum Maxim., winterberry 
euonymus, is a long-lived, deciduous shrub that 
grows to a height and spread of 15 to 25 feet.  The 
shrub is usually multiple-stemmed at or near the large 
base. 
 
© William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institute 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
The light-green leaves are bright and shiny when they 
are small.  They grow rapidly to a length of 2 to 4 
inches.  Slender petioles cause the older leaves to 
droop.  The foliage is rather open, so that the light 
brown bark of the older branches adds contrast to the 
light-green leaves.  Fall leaf color ranges from yellow 
to reddish or brown. 
 
The flowers are inconspicuous, but the fruits are 
brilliant red.  They are 4-lobed capsules, some of 
which often remain on the plants after the leaves have 
fallen.  As the capsules open, the brilliant red coats of 
the seeds are exposed. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is a winter-har dy shrub that is adapted to a wide 
range of soil and climatic conditions.  It is adapted 
from the low elevation of the mountains to the open 
plains.  It has been widely tested and evaluated in 
Kansas, Oklahoma, northern Texas, New Mexico, 
Colorado, and portions of Nebraska. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Plants may be grown from recently harvested open-
pollinated seed.  Seed should be either fall-planted or 
stratified for spring planting.  For field establishment, 
2 year old bare root plants can be used under 
favorable conditions.  Potted material has been more 
successful on difficult sites  such as roadsides.  All 
planted area must be weed  free to allow for plant 
establishment and growth. 
 
Management  
Care should be taken to control unwanted vegetation 
in areas planted with winterberry euonymus.

Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant has no serious pests. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Pink Lady’ (China).  Seed and plants are available 
from most commercial growers in the western half of 
the United States. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.