Plant Fact Sheet
BOTTLEBRUSH 
SQUIRRELTAIL  
Elymus elymoides  (Raf. ) Swezey 
ssp.  brevifolius
 (J.G. Sm.)  
Barkworth
 
Plant Symbol = ELELB2  
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado  
 
Bottlebrush squirreltail field at UCEPC Meeker, Colorado.  
 
Alternate Names  
Squirreltail, tall squirreltail, desert squirreltail  
 
Uses  
The potential uses of bottlebrush squirreltail include 
erosion control  and domestic livestock and wildlife forage 
production. The plant establishes easily, remains green for 
a long  period and is palatable throughout the winter. 
Squirreltail  has become an important tool for oil shale and 
coal mine  reclamation.  It  has  also  become  an important 
source  for reseeding after fire. It is quick to establish, has 
a proficient seed dispersal mechanism, and is resistant to 
fire damage.  Bottlebrush squirreltail has also shown that it 
can become a good competitor with undesirable annual 
weed  species. Bottlebrush s quirreltail is recognized as 
being one native perennial bunchgrass that has potential 
for  broad- scale application in range seedings where 
introduced products such as crested and Siberian 
wheatgrasses  and Russian wildryes have been used 
traditionally. Excellent seed dispersal, ability to tolerate 
fire, and  strong  seedling vigor  make bottlebrush 
squirreltail  an attractive species for use  in  many 
conservation applications.   
  Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural  Resources for this plant’s current 
status.  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension  Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Pleas e consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
 
Bottlebrush squirreltail distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
 
For updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Bottlebrush squirreltail, Elymus elymoides , is a cool-
season native perennial bunchgrass. The  plant grows 8 -25 
inches tall, and occurs primarily on dry, gravelly  or saline 
soils and is common on hillsides  and alkaline flats. The 
stiff, involute leaf blades expand up to 3/16 of an inch in 
width and often become smooth  or softly pubescent. The 
spikelets are two flowered at each node of a 
disarticulating rachis . The  spikelets drop from the seed 
head and are disseminated by the wind into  surrounding 
areas.   
 
Bottlebrush squirreltail is widely distributed ,  spanning 
from Mexico to British Columbia and from the west coast  
to the Dakotas and south to Oklahoma and Texas. It  also 
occupies a wide range of elevations from 4,000 to  10,500 
feet. As a species, Elymus elymoides has good drought