Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WEEPING 
LOVEGRASS  
Eragrostis curvula  (Schrad.) 
Nees  
Plant Symbol = ERCU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Weeping lovegrass is used as a 
temporary cover for erosion control purposes.  On 
surface mine 
spoil, it provides almost immediate 
cover on steep outer slopes where spoil is rather 
acidic and of low fertility. 
 
Crops : Weeping lovegrass is used as a nurse crop 
when seeding sericea lespedeza, coastal panic grass, 
or switchgrass.  When seeding black locust or bristly 
locust, it serves as a companion species. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Eragrostis curvula  (Schrad.) Nees, weeping 
lovegrass, is a rapidly growing warm-season 
bunchgrass that was introduced into the U. S. from 
East Africa.  The many long, narrow leaves emerging 
from a tight tuft are pendulous, with the tips almost 
touching the ground.   The drooping leaf characteristic 
gives rise  to the name “weeping” lovegrass.  Leaf 
height is rarely above 12  inches.  The seed heads are 
open panicles, reaching a height of 30 to 40 inches 
and containing numerous small, fine seeds. 
 
Adaptation 
Weeping lovegrass prefers a light-textured, well-
drained soil, and will thrive on soils of low fertility.  
Climatic conditions determine its range of adaptation.  
Low winter temperatures will prevent regrowth and 
cause the grass to act as an annual or a short-lived 
perennial. 
 
Weeping lovegrass is distributed throughout the 
southern United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
This grass is easy to establish by seed.  Seed alone at 
a rate of 3 to 5 pounds per acre, or 1 to 2 pounds per 
acre in mixtures with other species.  Seeds will 
germinate quickly and plant growth is rapid.  The 
seed is extremely fine, requiring mechanical seeding 
equipment to have small seed attachments.  If seeded 
with a ‘hand’ cyclone seeder, the lovegrass seed 
should be mixed with a diluent or a carrier (cornmeal, 
sand, or fine sawdust) for uniform distribution of 
seed.  Do not cover seed more than 1/2 to 1 inch on 
sandy soils; 1/4 inch is sufficient on silt loams.  
Cultipacking soil before seeding is helpful. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
          Beltsville, MD 
 
Sites too steep or stony for use of mechanical 
equipment can be seeded without soil scarification.  
Broadcast seeding by air or use of hydroseeders is 
successful if seeding rates are increased to 
compensate for poor seed bed. Where possible, the 
soil should be scarified and firmed. 
 
Normally, weeping lovegrass can be planted after 
danger of severe frost is over, and anytime 
throughout the summer with success.  Lime and 
fertilizer needs are similar to that for tall fescue and 
ryegrass when used for temporary cover.

Management 
Because of its short duratio n, there is no management 
required for weeping lovegrass.  It is palatable to 
livestock and should be  protected where this 
possibility exists. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pest s of weeping lovegrass. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘A-67’, ‘Ermelo’, and ‘Morpa’.  Seed is 
commercially available from most of the large seed 
companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 01Feb2002 JLK; 06jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.