Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK ASH 
Fraxinus nigra  Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = FRNI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
brown ash, swamp ash, basket ash 
 
Uses 
Cultural: The primary use of black ash is as a source 
of  basket-making materials, particularly for Native 
Americans.  
 
Timber : It has some use as flooring, as which it 
performs admirably. 
 
Wildlife : Young trees are preferred as deer browse.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Black ash, is a native,  deciduous tree which has 
important cultural significance to Native Americans.  
Alternative common names are descriptive of the  preferred habitat and the primary use of the species.  
Black ash is a small to medium sized tree with 
opposite branching and compound leaves.  Leaflets 
number 7-11 (typically more than green ash) and are 
green and smooth on both sides.  The terminal leaflet 
has a short stalk, but the ot
her leaflets are attached 
directly to the leaf stalk (petiole).  The fruit is a 
samara with a broader wing than that of green ash.  
The bark is pale gray and flaky, and the crushed 
foliage smells like elderberry.  The first key to 
identifying black ash is its location on poorly drained 
sites.  It is slower growing (1.5-2.5 ft/yr) than 
associated trees such as red maple. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Black ash grows on sites and soils with generally 
poor drainage, including peat, fine sands, and loams 
in bogs, streambanks and other low spots.  It can 
tolerate a wide range of soil pH.  The range of the 
species extends from the Mason-Dixon Line north to 
western Ontario and east to the Maritimes.  Black ash 
is shade intolerant and requires some soil disturbance 
to invade a site naturally. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1997. Northeastern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
The seed of black ash seems to have both seed coat 
dormancy and chemical dor mancy, with immature 
embryos thrown in for goods measure.  Thus getting 
the seed to germinate in the nursery can be a 
challenge.  Apparently plan ting the seed very soon 
after harvest is key to germination.  Otherwise a 
series of natural or artificial cold and warm 
stratifications will likely be necessary to achieve 
germination. 
 
Direct planting of seeds is likely to be sparsely 
successful. 
 
Seedlings must be planted in appropriate soil and site 
conditions.  The species often grows as an understory 
tree or partly suppressed by other species.  
 
Management  
Little is known about managing young stands of 
black ash.  Keeping competing vegetation from 
totally shading the ash, and protection from heavy 
deer concentrations are lik ely strategies.  Livestock 
of all classes must be excluded from the site.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
While none currently exist, the interest in the species 
will result in the culture of known source materials. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson, Retired 
USDA NRCS New York State Office, Syracuse, New 
York 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 07jun06 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.