Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HARD FESCUE 
Festuca brevipila  Tracey 
Plant Symbol = FEBR7 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
 Clarence Kelley, USDA NRCS 
 
Alternate Names 
Festuca trachyphylla, F. duriuscula, F. ovina var. 
duriuscula, F. longifolia, F. cineria, F. duriuscula 
var. cineria, F. ovina 
 
Uses  
‘Durar’ hard fescue is used for stabilizing roadsides 
and ditch banks, farm tree plantings,  cover in 
orchards, weed suppression, campsites and 
recreational areas, fairways for golf courses, farm 
landing strips, runway shoulders, logging roads, skid 
trails, ski slopes, dryland lawns and as cover for 
retired cropland.  It has been used for grazing, but 
usually more palatable gra sses are preferred. Mature 
stands are short-statured and have few seed heads, 
which makes this plant desirable for low-
maintenance long-term cover. 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
‘Durar’ hard fescue is an introduced cool-season 
perennial bunchgrass developed by re-selection from 
seed collected by Virgil Hawk in 1934 at the Eastern 
Oregon Livestock Experiment Station at Union, 
Oregon. It was released for commercial production in 
1949, named ‘Durar’ in 1961 and registered with  Crop Science in 1964. This was the first commercial 
release of hard fescue. 
 
‘Durar’ is an introduced fine-leaved fescue that is 
long lived, persistent and competitive with other 
grasses and weeds. The semi-erect fine stems of this 
densely tufted bunchgrass attain a height of 30 inches 
when grown in good conditions. Compared to sheep 
fescue, it has more lax leaves that are longer, broader 
and coarser. 
 
Hard fescue is native to forest edge habitats and open 
forests of Europe.  
 
‘Durar’ is more drought resistant than chewings 
fescue (
Festuca rubra  ssp. fallax ), but not as drought 
resistant as sheep ( Festuca ovina) or Idaho fescue 
( Festuca idahoensis ).  It is adapted to the 16 to 30 
inch rainfall areas of Wash ington State, Oregon and 
Idaho. ‘Durar’ makes a tremendous root system, 
producing many more pounds of roots per acre than it 
does in top growth. Root samples taken from the top 
8 inches of soil after 6 growing seasons showed 
‘Durar’ with 6,000 pounds of roots per acre and 
crested wheatgrass with 3500 pounds of roots per 
acre. It produces up to 70 0 pounds of clean seed per 
acre. 
 
‘Durar’ is adapted to medium and fine textured soils 
that are well drained.  Wet or saturated soils are not 
tolerated. It is somewhat shade tolerant.  
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment  
There are 565,000 seeds per pound of clean seed of 
‘Durar’. A firm, weed-free seedbed is highly 
recommended. The germinating seedlings are 
susceptible to soil crusting, so early spring seeding is 
essential. Seeding should be done with double disk 
drills with depth control so that seeding depth is no 
more than 1/4 inch. Early spring seedings work well 
when made in spring barley stubble.  
 
‘Durar’ seedlings may not be more than 1 – 2 inches 
in diameter in the establishment year; however, 
tremendous gains in competitiveness are made in the 
second year. 
 
Consult your local Natural Resources Conservation 
office for seeding and seeding rate recommendations.

Management  
New seedings need protection the first year, so the 
seeded area should not be used or be subjected to 
traffic. Weed control is needed especially in the 
establishment year. Do not fertilize in the year of 
seeding because this generally results in heavy weed 
growth. Maintenance applications of fertilizer may be 
necessary in low fertility critical areas where the 
stand is stressed.  Rotational use is recommended in 
heavy use areas, along  with a maintenance 
application of fertilizer. 
 
Consult your local university Extension office for 
fertilizer and weed control recommendations. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
No serious pests or other problems have been noted. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Over 90 cultivars of hard fescue have been released 
as of 2007, some of which are Plant Variety 
Protected. Many of these varieties are for turf and 
lawn use.  
 
Prepared By   
Wayne Crowder, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Species Coordinator  
Mark Stannard, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 
 
Edited: 120307 MS, 120407 GK, 120507 JB; 071217 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.