Plant Fact Sheet
SAND FESCUE 
Festuca ammobia Pavlick 
Plant Symbol = FEAM5 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Figure 1.  Sand fescue in flower. Photo by Dale Darris.  
Alternate Names 
Depending on the taxonomic authority, other names 
include  Festuca rubra  ssp.  arenicola,  Festuca rubra  ssp. 
densiuscula,  and  Festuca rubra ssp.  pruinosa  or rock 
fescue . Classification remains under review.   
Uses  
Sand fescue  spreads by short rhizomes (underground 
stems) and develops extensive roots giving it excellent 
soil and sand binding capability for erosion control along 
beaches  and  streambanks, and on other disturb ed slopes .  
Additional  uses include  forage for cattle and horses, 
endemic  wildlife food and cover, and  restoration of 
coastal meadow s and other native plant communities.  
The species is also  planted for  low maintenance turf and 
ornamental  landscaping .  It has potential as perennial 
cover  in vineyards ,  young orchards , and no-mow lawns .  
 
    Status
 
Sand fescue occurs equally in wetlands and drier uplands. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Sand fescue is a dense, fine textured , medium to long 
lived , perennial cool season grass . It spreads slowly  from 
rhizomes  and seed .  Foliage is primarily basal and 
typically green ,  with some  individuals  or populations 
turning  blue-grey in summer.  Stems (culms)  grow to a 
height of 8 -24 inches (2 0-60 cm)  and the flower head 
(panicle or inflorescence) is branched but o ften 
compressed rather than open.  Most populations flower in 
May or June ,  maturing seed a month later.   Sand fescue is 
part of a diverse complex of red fescue species that have 
transitional  forms and introduced germplasm .  They 
intergrade from one to anot her making separation and 
identification difficult  and somewhat disputed.  
 
The prototypical  native  sand fescue  is found on beaches , 
rock crevices,  meadows, gravelly sites, and streambanks  
in full sun to partial shade  primarily  along the Pacific 
Coast .  It occurs only at lower elevations on mo ist to 
moderately dry soils from California to Washington. The 
natural range may extend further north into coastal  British 
Columbia but not inland .  The species tolerates many soil 
types besides sands, including s ilty clay loams with low 
fertility.  Coastal types  have presumed tolerance to salt 
spray and preference for moderately acidic to neutral , 
well - t o moderately well -drained  soils.  Drought tolerance 
may exceed that of other closely related red fescues . 
 
 
Fig ure 2. Sand fescue  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.