Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HARD FESCUE 
Festuca trachyphylla  (Hack.) 
Krajina  
Plant Symbol = FETR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 ©Robert Soreng.  Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution, Department of Botany
 
Alternate Names 
Festuca brevipila Tracey 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Hard fescue’s primary use has been 
for soil protection on road sides, ditchbanks, airports, 
skid trails in the higher rainfall zones, and as a cover 
crop in irrigated orchards and windbreaks. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Festuca trachyphylla  (Hack.) Krajina, hard fescue, is 
a medium tall, semi-erect, long-lived, densely tufted 
bunchgrass.  It is a large form of sheep fescue and 
closely related to Chewings fescue.  It has broader, 
longer, coarser, more lax leaves than sheep fescue.  It 
is more drought tolerant than Chewings fescue but 
not as hardy as native sheep fescues.  It is a heavy 
root producer.  This plus its abundant dense leaves 
and low crowns makes it an excellent erosion control 
plant.  It is a good seed producer,  but seedling vigor 
is low. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The cultivar ‘Durar’ is adapted to a wide range of soil 
conditions in areas of 12 inches or more annual 
precipitation.  Performance is best on well-drained 
soils.  It will not tolerate  “wet feet” or saline-alkaline 
soils, but does well on low fertility sites and in 
shaded areas.  It has not been accepted as a 
companion grass to alfalf a or clover for hay even 
though it does not reduce hay yields and its  massive 
root system contributes large quantities of organic 
matter.  The dense mass of relatively tough leaves 
makes mowing difficult. 
 
Hard fescue is distributed throughout the Northeast.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
A firm, moist, weed-free seedbed is essential.  Good 
emergence and full stands are dependent upon 
adequate moisture near th e soil surface until the root 
system is established.  The seeds are small and 
should not be planted more than 1/2 inch deep.  Drill 
5 to 7 pounds of seed per acre.  Drilled seedings have 
been most successful although broadcast seedings at 
10 pounds per acre, harrowed or raked in, have 
worked well on sites too rough to drill.  Spring 
seedings have been consistently more successful than 
fall seedings.  Seeding should be done as early in the 
spring as possible on drylands. 
 
Management  
If irrigated, seedings should be watered every 4 to 7 
days until plants are well established. Weeds can be 
controlled by clipping prior to seed set.  Once 
established, hard fescue acts as an effective barrier to 
weed invasion.  Maintain 2 to 4 inches stubble for 
soil protection.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Grubs, leaf spot, dollar spot, summer patch and red 
thread are potential problems for hard fescue. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Durar’ (Oregon) was released by the Pullman, 
Washington Plant Materials Center.  Many other 
cultivars have been released by government agencies 
and private turf breeding companies.  Seeds can be 
obtained from commercial seed suppliers. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.