Plant Fact Sheet
STRETCHBERRY 
Forestiera pubescens  Nutt.   
Plant Symbol =  FOPU2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Stretchberry  
 
Alternate Names     
Forestiera neomexicana , New Mexico forestiera, New 
Mexico olive, New Mexico privet.   
   
Uses   
Stretchberry has several conservation applications 
including windbreaks, shelterbelts, and living snowfences.  
It can be used in wildlife plantings for nesting, cover, and 
food.  Although the species performs best when provided 
with adequate soil moisture,  it is considered fairly drought 
tolerant and can be used in Xeriscapes
®  and for mine land 
reclamation.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
   
Description and Adaptation  
Stretchberry is a multi -stemmed, perennial shrub reaching 
a mature height of 12 to 15 feet under ideal conditions 
(high soil moisture, good nutrition).  I t has numerous, 
sometimes interlocking branches, and is capable of  sprouting from the base.  The light
-green to grayish -green 
oblong simple leaves have an opposite arrangement on the 
stem.  New bark is smooth and light gray to brown; old 
bark tends to be s mooth and light gray.  The yellow 
flowers are inconspicuous and borne in dense clusters in 
the axils of the previous year’s leaves.  Stretchberry 
blooms in late March or early to mid -April before new 
leaves appear.     
   
Stretchberry fruit is a round to obl ong drupe (berry) that 
matures to a dark bluish -black to black color from June to 
September.  Fruit retention tends to be moderate, the fruit 
often lost to birds before falling to the ground.  
Stretchberry is comparable to skunkbush sumac Rhus 
trilobata  in  function and use.  It tends to form dense, 
almost impenetrable hedges, although the branches of 
stretchberry are more linear, erect, and supple than 
skunkbush sumac.   
   
Stretchberry is native to southwestern United States.  It 
grows along stream courses,  moist valleys, hillsides, and 
mesas at elevations of 3,000 to 7,000 feet.  It is well 
adapted to annual precipitation zones ranging from 
approximately 9 to 24 inches.  It grows best in soils with a 
pH range of 7.0 to 8.5.  It is described as needing a 
mini mum of 160 frost -free days, although it grows well in 
Montana in areas characterized by a 135 -day growing 
season.   
   
Distribution :  Stretchberry is found in Arizona, 
California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
Texas and Utah.  Please consult the Pl ant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Stretchberry establishes from seed, containerized, or 
bareroot stock.  Plant seeds in moist soil in the fall or 
prior to February for  natural stratification.  Seedlings 
emerge by May.  For spring planting in May, seeds must 
be stratified for 30 days in moist sand at 38 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Thin seedling to two -foot spacing within 
rows.    
   
Management   
Although stretchberry is c onsidered drought tolerant, its 
performance is improved with supplemental watering and 
fertility.  As with other woody plants, it is important to 
control weeds during establishment with tillage, weed 
cloth, or careful application of herbicides.  
   
Pests a nd Potential Problems  
No serious insect or disease problems have been 
observed.