Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CREEPING RED FESCUE  
Festuca rubra  L. ssp. arenaria  
(Osbeck) F. Aresch.  
Plant Symbol = FERUA3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
red fescue 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Creeping red fescue has a wide 
range when used for erosion control along roads and 
highways; cuts, fills, and other disturbed areas; and 
for stream and channel bank stabilization. 
 
Recreation and beautification : Creeping red fescue 
makes excellent lawns, golf greens and turf for 
ground cover in landscaping.  It is particularly 
important in shaded locations and on sandy soils. 
 
Wildlife : This fescue is very valuable as ground cover 
in wildlife habitat conservation, especially when 
grown in combination with taller species used for 
bird nesting sites. 
 
Livestock : In general, creeping red fescue has not 
been very important as forage, due to low palatability 
and productivity.  While it withstands close grazing, 
it tends to become unpalatable if allowed to grow. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Festuca rubra  ssp. arenaria, creeping red fescue, is a 
perennial with short rootstalks and few to many 
stems that are usually reddish at the base and 6 to 36 
inches high, with smooth leaves and sheaths.  The 
leaves are enfolding and narr ow, more or less hairy, 
and shorter than the stems.  Its seedhead is a dark 
green, reddish, or waxy cluster, 2 to 5 inches long, 
that has erect or ascending  branches and is initially  open but becomes contracted.  Flower spikelets are 3, 
8, or 10-flowered; the seed covering is indistinctly 
nerved, with a bristle half or less as long. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Creeping red fescue is adapted to gravely, calcareous 
soils in cool, temperate climates.  It requires more 
moisture than hard or sheep fescue, and prefers a pH 
of 5.5 to 6.5 but can survive considerable acidity.  It 
can be grown as a dryland cover crop in coastal 
regions or other areas with average annual 
precipitation greater than 18
 inches.  Elsewhere, it 
will produce better yields if grown under irrigation.  
Creeping red fescue is climatically adapted to all of 
the major land resource regions that receive adequate 
moisture and have well-drained soils.  It thrives in 
sun or shade. 
 
Creeping red fescue is distributed from the western to 
the eastern U.S.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Creeping red fescue is best seeded on a firm, weed-
free, well-prepared seedbed following fertilization of 
the soil.  Broadcasting on a freshly disturbed site is 
effective in cases where a proper seedbed cannot be 
prepared.  The grass is usually seeded in a mixture 
with other species selected according to the purpose.  
Lawn seedings include 2 pounds per 1,000 square 
feet in a mixture with bentgrass or Kentucky 
bluegrass depending on whether the application is 
intended, respectively, for a moist coastal site or the 
drier interior.  Shallow seeding with a drill is 
preferred for many seedings.  Stabilization projects 
are seeded at rates of 12 to 18 pounds per acre.  On 
sand dunes, drill at 6 pounds per acre into a stand of 
beachgrass after the sand surface is stilled.  Lawn or 
turf areas and critical areas, which are broadcast 
seeded, are mulched for erosion control and to retain 
soil moisture during establishment. 
 
A complete fertilizer should be applied at the time of 
establishment, or else fe rtilize according to soil test 
needs.  Fertilizer should provide nitrogen, phosphate 
and potassium. 
 
Management  
Newly seeded areas requ ire protection from heavy 
trampling or grazing for one year or until the stand is 
well established.  Lawn areas will develop more

rapidly if fertilized and irrigated.  Weed control by 
clipping or the use of selective herbicides is desirable 
and may be necessary until full cover is established.  
For optimal appearance and effective weed control, 
stubble height for lawns and other turf areas should 
not exceed 2 inches after clipping or mowing. 
 
Erosion control seedings and sand dune areas need 
fertilizer application and protection from overuse, but 
do not normally require weed control.  Fescue is 
shade tolerant and will usually establish even under a 
canopy of vegetation. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests of creeping red fescue. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no particular cultivars recommended for 
conservation use.  Creeping red fescue can be 
purchased at most commercial seed sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.