Plant Fact Sheet     
 
 
ARIZONA FESCUE 
Festuca arizonica Vasey 
Plant symbol = FEAR2  
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center. 
 
 Steve Parr, Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Arizona fescue has also been referred to as mountain 
bunch grass and pine grass
. 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Rangeland:
 Arizona fescue is moderately 
palatable to cattle and horses, and to a lesser extent, 
domestic sheep.  In late summer the herbage 
decreases slightly in palatability.  It has moderate 
grazing tolerance. It produces a large amount of 
forage and remains fairly green from spring to fall.  
The over-all forage value has been rated good to 
excellent. 
 
Erosion Control :
  Arizona fescue has an extensive 
root system making it a valuable plant for soil 
stabilization.  It has moderate drought and shade 
tolerance qualities. 
 
Reclamation/Restoration
:  Arizona fescue has 
performed well on slightly acid mine waste sites in 
areas receiving adequate precipitation. 
 
Wildlife Habitat:
   Arizona fescue has been reported 
to provide forage for deer, elk, antelope, mountain 
goat and bighorn sheep. In addition, Arizona fescue 
has been reported to provide food and cover for a 
number of small mammals and birds. 
 
  Recreational/Residential
:
  Arizona fescue does not 
tolerate trampling, and will not  withstand foot traffic.  
Arizona fescue can be used as an ornamental in 
landscape gardens. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Arizona fescue is a native, cool season, long lived 
perennial bunch grass. The plant has no rhizomes.  
The culms or stems can range from about 1 to 3 feet 
tall, clustered, pale blue-green, and are rough to the 
touch.  Leaf blades are mostly basal, pale blue-green, 
6 to 10 inches long, shaped like a string, and rough to 
the touch.  The inflorescence is a panicle about 3-8 
inches long.  It has a deep , dense fibrous root system. 
 
Adaptation 
Arizona fescue is commonly found on dry, shallow, 
clay loam soils; however, it can also grow on loams 
and sandy to gravelly soils.  It most often grows in 
association with ponderosa pi ne at elevations of 6000 
to 10000 feet and on sites receiving at least 10 inches 
of annual precipitation. It  grows better on areas that 
receive 14 inches of precipitation in a year.  It occurs 
from Colorado south to Texas and west to Nevada.  
Arizona fescue is moderately shade and drought 
tolerant. It has been reported to survive most fires 
and recovers quickly with monsoon rains in 
ponderosa pine forests of Arizona and New Mexico. 
 
Establishment 
It is recommended to fall plant Arizona fescue, unless 
irrigation water is available for establishment during 
early spring or at other tim es during the year.  The 
seed can be drilled or broadcast.  Drill seed ¼ to ½ 
inch deep in a clean, weed-free seedbed.  Two to 9 
pounds of Pure Live Seed per acre have been 
recommended for establishment under irrigation, and 
half this recommended rates for dry land plantings.  
For critical area planting 4-9 pounds of Pure Live 
Seeds have been recommended  
 
Management  
Control weeds and withhold grazing during the 
seedling year.  Arizona fescue will tolerate moderate 
grazing, but stands will decline under close grazing 
or heavy use. Use proper grazing management to 
keep a healthy stand.

Seed production fields should be planted in rows 36 
inches or more to aid with cultivation for weed 
control and for roguing off-type plants. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No pests for Arizona fescue were found in the 
literature reviewed. Allelopathic effects of Arizona 
fescue were observed in the laboratory in seedlings of 
bottlebrush squirreltail, blue grama and ponderosa 
pine.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
None were reported in the literature reviewed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Redondo’ Arizona fescue is the only cultivar release 
of this species.  ‘Redondo” was released in 1973 by 
New Mexico State University; Colorado State 
University; New Mexico State Highway Department, 
and the Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) of the United 
States Department of Agriculture. 
 
The release ‘Redondo’ or iginated from a 1956 
collection west of Los Alamos, New Mexico.  Initial 
testing and selection was conducted at Los Lunas 
Plant Materials Center, Los Lunas, New Mexico; 
Bridger Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana; 
and field locations in Colorado and New Mexico. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Manuel Rosales , USDA NRCS Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Edited: 080702 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.