Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA FESCUE  
Festuca californica  Vasey 
Plant Symbol = FECA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
  
Alternate names:   A close relative is Parish’s 
California fescue,  Festuca parishii or Festuca 
californica  var. parishii . 
 
Uses:  California fescue is a native grass useful for 
the restoration of upland plant communities, 
especially oak savanna, open woodlands, and  
prairies in Oregon and California.  Its deep roots 
make it a good candidate for erosion control on 
slopes.  The species often persists throughout the year 
with evergreen foliage in milder environments.  
Tightly clumped bases and non-aggressive growth 
habit suggest compatibility with forbs.  Other 
possible uses are revegetation of disturbed areas and 
wildlife food and cover.  Palatability is medium for 
all classes of ungulates. The species attracts certain 
butterflies and many native birds eat the seeds.  As a 
tall grass with thick chalky blue to green foliage,  California fescue is increasingly appreciated for its 
ornamental and environmental landscape value.   
 
Description:  
California fescue is a native, cool 
season perennial bunchgrass that is intermediate to 
long lived.  The base is tightly clumped and the 
culms (stems) are tall and erect, growing to a height 
of 60-140 cm. Inflorescen ces (flowers or panicles) 
are 10-30 cm long, open and sparsely branched.  
Branches usually occur in pairs.  Leaves are medium 
textured (2-4 mm wide), primarily basal, stiff, 
sometimes purple tinged, flat or rolled, firm, and 
rough to the touch.  Plants are typically grayish blue 
to green and lack horizontal rooting systems.  This 
species flowers anytime between March and July, 
depending on elevation, population, or locale. 
 
Key to identification :  California fescue is coarser 
textured and usually taller than other native fescues, 
but might be confused with tall fescue ( Schedonorus 
phoenix,  synonym Festuca arundinacea ), which is 
widely introduced in the re gion.  However, compared 
to California fescue, the leaves of tall fescue are 
wider (4-10 mm vs. 2-4 mm) and have prominent or 
clasping auricles (lobes at the base of the leaf blades).  
Parish’s fescue is smaller, but otherwise very similar 
to California fescue.  
 
Adaptation:
  California fescue is found in large parts 
of Oregon and California; its range includes the 
Coast Ranges, foothills, and valleys from Clackamas 
County, Oregon, to San Luis Obispo County, 
California. The species also occurs in the Cascade 
Range from Clackamas County south into California 
and in the north and central Sierra Nevada.  Elevation 
range is from sea level to 6500 ft. in the mountains.  
Its relative, Parish’s Califor nia fescue, is confined to 
the San Bernardino Mountains of California. 
 
California fescue plants become hardy at a young age 
and, once established, are tough survivors.  Adapted 
to a variety of conditions, the species tolerates sun to 
intermediate shade and semi-drought, as well as 
moist soil along stream banks. However, it is most 
frequent in the dappled shade, along the borders of 
woods, and on north facing slopes.  Other habitats 
include oak savanna, the understory of mixed 
conifer-hardwood forests,  chaparral, and serpentine 
soils (soils toxic to many plants due to high levels 
magnesium and iron silicates and other minerals).  
Preferred soils are medium to fine textured with a pH 
of 5.7 to 7.5.  In one study, the species was rated 
tolerant to salt spray and moderately tolerant to soil

salinity, similar to many other grasses including 
introduced tall fescue. 
 
Commercial availability:   A few seed sources are 
sometimes for sale in Oregon and California.  Several 
cultivars with exceptional foliage are found in the 
horticultural trade, but they are vegetatively 
propagated or have a narrow gene base and are not 
recommended for restoration. 
 Line drawing reprinted with permission, 
             University of Washington Press  
 
Relative abundance in the wild:   California fescue 
has become rare in the Willamette Valley. Often hard 
to find, it is an excellent candidate for species 
reintroduction.  This grass is relatively common in 
Southwest Oregon and parts of California.  
 
  Limitations or environmental concerns:  This 
species is initially slow to germinate and sometimes 
difficult to establish, especially with competition.  
Seed set is low in some years which may be the result 
interference in pollination from rains during early 
spring flowering.  There are no known environmental 
concerns.   
  
Establishment:   California fescue appears to have 
minor seed dormancy, at least in some populations.  
Others report no dormancy, but two weeks of cold 
moist chilling (stratification treatment) can result in 
more uniform and quicker germination.  Spring  sowing of untreated seed can have staggered 
germination; seedlings may emerge over a period of 
two to eight weeks. Therefore, fall planting when soil 
temperatures are cooler is highly recommended.  No 
special physical conditioning of the seed is required 
for using a drill or broadcast seeder.  While slow to 
establish, seedlings become hardy plants.  .  There are 
approximately 224,000 (+/- 20%) seeds per pound 
with hulls intact.  Each 1 pound of seed sown per 
acre is equivalent to approximately 5 seeds per 
square foot.  Sown alone, a suggested minimum 
seeding rate is 10 lbs of pure live seed (PLS) per acre 
for general revegetation.  In seed mixes, fast 
germinating and quick establishing grasses should be 
kept to a low percentage.  
 
Some practitioners prefer container plants of 
California fescue because of spotty or variable 
establishment from seed.  It is easily propagated 
vegetatively by division of the crown.  California 
fescue is presumed to have some tolerance to fire as a 
natural component of grassland ecosystems.   
Suggested frequency for pres
cribed fire is once every 
three to five years.  However, summer burning can be 
fatal if plants are green and active.  Specific 
guidelines for stand management and grazing are not 
well reported. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris and Sonja Johnson. USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon.  Edited 7/31/07 D. Darris; 070802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.