Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED FESCUE 
Festuca rubra L. 
Plant Symbol = FERU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Please consult PLANTS fo r infraspecific taxa. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Red fescue is an excellent soil 
binder and used extensively for stabilizing 
waterways, slopes, banks, cuts, and fills. 
 
Recreation and beautification : This grass is used as a 
turf for lawns, athletic fields, golf courses, and 
playgrounds. 
 
Crop : It is used as a cover crop in orchards. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Festuca rubra  L., red fescue, is a cool season, sod-
forming grass.  Leaves of red fescue are bright green, 
wiry, and narrow.  They are pressed together in a “V” 
shape and appear nearly round.  Stems are usually 
bent at the reddish or purplish base and grow about 2  feet tall.  The panicle seedhead is contracted or 
narrow. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This grass is hardy, wear-resistant, and shade 
tolerant.  It is drought resistant after establishment, 
and adapted to sandy and acid soils.  It prefers well-
drained soils, but requires ample moisture for 
establishment.  Its prime area of use in the Northeast 
consists of New York, Ohio, West Virginia, 
Pennsylvania, and the New England states.  In the 
other states of the Northeast region, the grass is 
adapted to the cooler zones.  In areas of high 
temperatures and humidity, 
the grass may turn brown 
or deteriorate during the summer.  It will generally 
recover in the fall when temperature and moisture 
conditions are more favorable. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Red fescue is rarely seeded in pure stands.  Instead, it 
is used with grasses and legumes for specific 
purposes, such as lawns, erosion control, or 
recreational areas.  Seedbed preparation, fertilizing, 
liming, rate and dates of seeding, and weed control 
requirements are generally governed by the 
companion grasses in the mixture.  When red fescues 
are added to a mixture they usually constitute 25 to 
60 % of the mixture by weig ht.  In shaded areas, red 
fescue is often the key grass in the mixture. 
 
Management  
To maintain stand vigor and density on lawns and 
recreational areas, apply fertilizers at the 
recommended rate annually .  For critical erosion 
areas, less frequent use of fertilizers may be 
satisfactory.  When red fescue dominates a stand, 
mowing consistently below 1-1/2 inches can cause 
severe damage to the stand. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests of red fescue. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Illahee’ (England), ‘Pennlawn’ (Europe), ‘Rainier’, 
and ‘Trinity’.  The common varieties are readily 
available from commercial sources.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.