Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
  
ROEMER’S FESCUE 
Festuca roemeri (Pavlick) 
Alexeev  
Plant Symbol = FERO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC                                                                 Key to identification
: Proper identification takes 
experience.  Refer to "Fescues and Allies of Western 
Oregon" by B. Wilson (Institute for Applied Ecology, 
Corvallis, OR, 2002) for details with an excerpt as 
follows:  "The less blue individuals are easily 
confused with chewings red fescue (Festuca rubra 
var . commutata ), which is widely naturalized.  When 
the two grow together, Roemer’s fescue lives in drier 
or less disturbed microhabitats.  It is very easily 
confused with sheep and hard fescues. Sterile 
individuals are indistinguishable or identifiable only 
by leaf anatomy. However, fertile  F. roemeri has a 
much more open inflorescence and longer lemmas 
than any sheep or hard fescue. Occasionally confused 
with sterile  Stipa lemmonii  (Lemmon’s needlegrass), 
but Roemer’s fescue does not live on the xeric soils 
preferred by  S. lemmonii." 
 
Alternate names:   Also known as Festuca 
idahoensis  Elmer ssp. roemeri (Pavlic) S. Aiken.  
Other names include  Festuca idahoensis var. 
roemeri , Festuca roemeri  var. roemeri or northern 
Roemer’s fescue, and  Festuca roemeri var. 
klamathensis  or southern Roemer’s fescue.   
 
Uses:   Roemer’s fescue is an important native grass 
for restoration of upland prairie and oak savanna 
within its natural range of western Oregon, western 
Washington, and northwest California.  While 
uncommon or even rare due to habitat loss, it is still 
dominant in some remnant prairies.  Typically found 
on steep, shallow, or highly mineral soils, it may also 
be useful for revegetation and erosion control where 
a slower establishing, fine textured native grass is 
desired.  Although Roemer’s fescue does not  compete well with introduced grasses, it is drought 
tolerant and its non-aggressive growth habit suggests 
compatibility with forbs.  Other possible uses are low 
maintenance lawns or as a cover crop in vineyards 
and young orchards, although further evaluation is 
needed.  Some populations and specimens have 
ornamental value, including those with fine textured, 
purple and red tinged stems or bluish foliage.  Forage 
value and palatability for wildlife and livestock are 
unknown, but may be similar to Idaho fescue (
F. 
idahoensis ).  As a range grass, Idaho fescue is rated 
as fair to good forage. 
 
Description: Roemer’s fescue is a native cool season 
perennial bunchgrass with variable longevity and 
mostly basal foliage.  It is short, fine textured, and 
densely tufted, and has stiff culms that grow 35-100 
cm tall.  The panicle (seed head) is open and 5-20 cm 
long. Leaves are often glaucous (covered with a 
whitish waxy coating) and color varies throughout a 
wide spectrum of greens and blues.  Stem color 
ranges from light green to dark purple or red.   
 
 
Adaptation: Roemer’s fescue is a mid to late 
succession species in its natural habitat.  It prefers 
moderately acid to slightly alkaline, fine to medium 
textured mineral soils.  The species generally grows 
in full sun but will tolerate partial shade near forest 
edges and oaks.  While drought tolerant with 
extensive roots, it is found on somewhat more mesic 
(moist) sites such as the edges of grassy balds.  As an 
upland grass it requires good soil drainage and does 
not tolerate winter soil saturation or flooding.

Roemer’s fescue is only found west of the Cascade 
and northern Sierra Nevada Mountain Ranges.  
Variety roemeri occurs from Douglas County and 
northeast Jackson County, Oregon, north to British 
Columbia and south along the Pacific coast to San 
Francisco.  The species occurs on moderately dry to 
moist prairies, savannas, meadows, and grassy 
openings within woods. Variety  klamathensis occurs 
in similar habitats, but also on serpentine substrates 
(soils toxic to many plants due to high levels of 
magnesium and iron silicates and other minerals).  It 
is not found along the coast.  The species intergrades 
with Idaho fescue ( Festuca idahoensis) in southwest 
Oregon. 
 
 Reprinted with permission, Un iversity of Washington Press 
 
Commercial availability:  One or more populations 
are available for western Oregon. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Roemer’s fescue is 
scarce from the Willamette Valley of Oregon north to 
British Columbia.  It is scattered to uncommon from 
Eugene, Oregon south to San Francisco.  
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:   There is 
potential for poor seed fill in some populations, 
possibly from inbreeding depression or other factors.  
It is susceptible to stem and leaf rust which can 
severely weaken plants in some years.  
Misidentification between Roemer’s fescue and 
introduced red fescue (Festuca  rubra) may lead to 
contamination of seed fields and restoration sites. 
 
Establishment:  Seeds germinate without treatment. 
However, germination is quicker and more uniform 
after 14 days of cold, moist stratification (chilling). 
There are approximately 500,000 seeds/lb with hulls 
intact.  A seeding rate of 1 lb/ac results in about 12 
seeds/sq. ft.  Sown alone, recommended rates vary 
from 4 to 20 pure live seed (PLS) lbs/ac depending 
on goals. Fall seeding is generally preferred but not 
required. Rate of establishment from seed is 
moderately slow.  Spring sown plants do not flower 
until the second full growing season.  This species is 
presumed to be well adapted to fire as a natural 
feature of prairie ecosystems.  It may possess 
management requirements similar to Idaho fescue 
such as deferred grazing every few years, but 
verification is needed. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris, Sonja Johnson, and Amy Bartow. USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited 7/31/07 D. Darris; 070801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.