Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREEN ASH 
Fraxinus pennsylvanicus 
Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = FRPE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Uses 
Windbreak: Plant green ash in the central rows of 
multi-row windbreaks.  It can also be used for single-
row windbreaks, although loss of lower branches 
with age reduces effectiveness. 
 
Wildlife : Green ash is of moderate importance to 
wildlife.  The winged seeds (samaras) are eaten by a 
number of birds and mammals including wild turkey 
and rodents.  Whitetail and mule deer browse the 
twigs and foliage. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Green ash is 
extensively planted as a shade and ornamental tree.  
New clones have increased its importance in the 
landscaping industry. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Marsh., green ash, is a 
deciduous, medium-sized tree  with an open, irregular 
crown reaching about 50 feet in height.  Native to 
eastern North America and is fairly common west to 
Wyoming and Colorado along plains watercourses at 
elevations below 6,000 feet.  The tree is fast growing 
on moist bottomlands, and is extremely hardy to 
climatic extremes once established. 
 
Fruits are straw-colored, one-seeded, winged 
(samaras), 1 to 2 1/2 inches long, borne in dense 
branching clusters; flowers are inconspicuous, 
without petals, borne in dense clusters (panicles) near 
the ends of the twigs, male and female flowers on 
separate trees; leaves are opposite, pinnately 
compound, 4 to 6 inches long, 7 to 9 leaflets, 
narrowly elliptical, long-pointed, entire, bright green 
above, paler below; stem straight, bark thin with 
network of interlacing ridges, brown to dark gray, 
twigs smooth; roots are shallow, wide-spreading. 
 
Adaptation and Distributoin Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS Green ash is widely adapted to soils, moisture 
conditions and pH found east of the Rocky 
Mountains.  The species will tolerate seasonal 
flooding, but is intolerant of shading from 
surrounding trees.  Green ash is a fairly early 
successional tree on most sites. 
 
Green ash is distributed throughout the east and 
midwest of the  United  States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Green ash is comparatively easy to establish, and has 
been widely used for windbreaks in the plains and 
prairie states and provinces.  The seedling will 
withstand weedy conditions, but at reduced growth 
rates. 
 
Management  
Green ash is not as rapid growing as red maple or 
elm, so it tends to be crowded out over time by its

faster growing cohorts.  Management to retain green 
ash includes control of competition.   
 
Deer will browse green ash seedlings so protective 
netting may be required where pressure is heavy. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Green ash borer and carpenter worm can be a serious 
problem in this tree species.  Rust and ashflower gall 
might cause concern in some years. Ash yellow is a 
disease that has been asso ciated with sever growth 
reductions and/or dieback  in areas of the eastern 
Great Plains. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Green ash is a variable species and commonly 
accepted botanical varieties intergrade to some 
extent, especially  Fraxinus pennsylvanica  var. 
subintegerrima  and Fraxinus pennsylvanica  var. 
lanceolata.  ‘Cardan’ (MT) is recommended for 
planting in the Northern Gr eat Plains states.  Green 
ash seedlings are available at most commercial 
hardwood nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson  (Retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.