Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
MANNAGRASS  
Glyceria occidentalis  (Piper) 
J.C. Nels.  
Plant Symbol = GLOC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names 
Other names are Northwestern mannagrass, tall 
mannagrass, and waxy mannagrass. 
 
Uses 
Western mannagrass is a native species important for 
restoration of freshwater marshes, vernal pools, and 
depressions within wetland prairies.  The species 
rapid growth, underground stems, and floating leaves 
aid in reducing erosion along the edges of streams 
and lakes where it naturally occurs. In the Pacific 
Northwest, this grass is recommended for use in 
stormwater management, including detention ponds 
and biofiltration swales that  are wet year round.  The 
foliage and seeds provide food and cover for  waterfowl, small seed-eating birds, muskrats, and 
other small mammals.  Western mannagrass may be 
useful in seed mixtures aimed at increasing plant 
diversity while helping deter the invasion of reed 
canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea
).  The seed can be 
dried and ground into flour and was apparently eaten 
by Native Americans. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Western mannagrass is a  short-lived, cool season 
perennial grass with flaccid stems (culms) that reach 
a height of 70 to 150 cm.  The form is moderately 
coarse textured, clumpy, and upright to nearly flat: 
spreading from rhizomes or decumbent (low lying) 
stems that root at the  nodes (joints).  When 
submerged in spring, this species produces floating 
stems and leaves, but flowering is reduced.   Leaf 
blades are ribbon-like, 4 to 13 mm wide, and 15 to 30 
cm long.  Flowerheads (panicles) are narrow and 15 
to 40 cm long, with appressed branches and long 
cylindrical spikelets (the groupings of individual 
florets or flowers).  The flowering period is long, 
from May to September. Western mannagrass occurs 
from British Columbia south to California and east to 
Idaho and Nevada at elevations below 4000 feet.  
 
Key to identification:  Western mannagrass is easily 
confused with northern mannagrass ( Glyceria 
borealis ) and slender spiked mannagrass ( Glyceria 
leptostachya ) which are found in similar aquatic 
habitats.  Western mannagrass has larger florets 
(individual flowers) and the  seed is three times larger 
compared to the other two.  A botanical key, scale, 
and hand lens are needed for proper identification. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  This species is 
widely occurring and common in the Pacific 
Northwest at low elevations, especially along streams 
and in wet meadow depressions.  Despite the long 
flowering period, seed collection is laborious because 
retention is poor: the seed drops (shatters) very easily 
when green and not fully mature. However, 
additional seed may be held within the lower leaf 
sheath and can be removed by threshing.  
 
Adaptation:  This species is easy to establish and 
grow on adapted sites.  It can volunteer readily.

Western mannagrass grows naturally in vernal pools, 
wet depressions, marshes, and ditch bottoms, as well 
as along the shores of lakes, streams, and ponds.  
While found in full sun, it occasionally occurs in 
partial shade as well.  Soils include poorly drained 
sands, loams, and clays with acid, neutral or slightly 
alkaline pH.   This species can grow in permanent 
standing or slow moving water at least 30 cm deep.  
It is intolerant of drought and is not found on saline 
sites.  Soil fertility requirements are moderate.  
 
Establishment 
The seed has no 
physiological 
dormancy and 
germinates 
readily without 
treatment in less 
than three 
weeks.  The 
species can be 
broadcast on the 
surface of mud 
or muck in the 
fall or spring.  
Moist soil is 
adequate for 
germination, but 
if the site is inundated prior to germination, the seed 
must be secured in place with a thin mulch or mat to 
prevent it from floating or washing away.  The hull 
detaches readily but can be left intact.  There are 
approximately 215,000 to 360,000 seeds/lb (+/- 20%) 
with and without hulls, respectively.  A seeding rate 
of 1 lb pure live seed per acre will result in about 5 to  
8 live seeds per square foot.  Actual seeding rates will 
depend on methods, objectives, and site conditions.   
Western mannagrass is easily propagated by division 
or as container stock sown from seed and maintained 
in shallow standing water.   
 Management
 
There is a lack of information about the management 
of western mannagrass.  It can be grown and 
maintained under continuously moist, saturated, or 
seasonally to permanently flooded conditions.  
Regeneration and spread is favored by wet open areas 
and disturbance.  Water impoundments or other 
controlled wetlands should not be allowed to dry out, 
especially if viable seed has not yet formed.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Line drawing reprinted with 
permission, University of 
Washington Press 
Seed is difficult to collect in the wild.  Western 
mannagrass is a serious weed  in low lying, poorly 
drained fields of introduced grasses grown for seed in 
Oregon.  Some strains may be herbicide resistant.  
Riparian wetland and stream restoration projects 
should consider substituting other native grasses if 
ryegrass (Lolium  spp.) seed fields are downstream.  
Consult with your local Extension Service agent, 
weed control handbook, or other experts for advice. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds, plugs, or containers are usually available, but 
seed is often expensive.    
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 21mar2006 jsp, 17sept2008 dcd; 080919 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC  To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.