Plant Fact Sheet
DOWNY 
RATTLESNAKE  PLANTAIN  
Goodyera pubescens (Willd.) R. Br 
Plant Symbol = GOPU 
 
Contributed by:  USDS NRCS  Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Cente r 
 
 USDA -NRCS National Plant Materials Center  
Alternate Names 
Peramium  pubescens  (Willd.)  
Uses  
Downy rattlesnake plantain is useful for woodland 
wildflower plantings and as an indoor terrarium plant.  
Medicinal Use: Native Americans used it to treat 
snakebites, burns and many other ailments.  
Status  
Downy rattlesnake plantain is listed as e ndangered in 
Florida and e xploitably vulnerable in New York.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values ).   
Description
 and Adaptation 
Downy rattlesnake plantains are one of the m any species 
of orchids native to eastern North America. They can be 
found growing in dry to moist upland woods with acidic 
soils.   The plants are low growing with stems that creep 
along the soil surface, often divi ding and forming small 
colonies.  Leaves lay close to the soil in circular 
arrangement (basal rosette) around a central growing 
point.   Leaves are oval and about 1.5 to 2.5  inches long. 
Downy rattlesnake plantain has striking leaves marked 
with a network  of silvery veins and a broad strip e down 
the center, resembling the skin of a snake.  A ll parts of the 
plant are covered with a very fine downy hair especially 
noticeable on  the bloom spike.  Despite the name , downy 
rattlesnake plantain  is  not related to the common lawn 
weed  plantains, but ha s similar appearing rosettes of 
leaves.  The evergreen foliage is attractive year round, 
with individual leaves lasting 3  to  4 years.  I t flowers in 
late summer with small white flowers densely packed on 
a slender cylindrical spike , 6 to 18 inches tall.  Downy 
rattlesnake plantain occurs in the entire eastern half of the 
U.S. and Canada from Ontario and Quebec south to 
Oklahoma, Arkansas,  Mississippi and Florida.   
   
 D owny rattlesnake plantain  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Obtain only nursery/greenhouse propagated plants from 
reputable growers, and not wild collected plants.  Orchids 
are slow to regenerate in the wild and may be easily 
eliminated through irresponsible wild collection, and may 
© Randy Pheobus