Plant Fact Sheet
PUGET SOUND 
GUMWEED  
Grindelia integrifolia  DC.  
Plant Symbol = GRIN  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center , 2009 
Alternat ive Names  
Alternate  Common Names:  Willamette Valley gumweed, 
Puget Sound gumplant , entire-leaved gumweed,  gum 
plant,  gum weed,  resinweed  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Grindelia  integrifolia DC . 
var . integrifolia   
Uses  
Puget Sound gumweed can be  used in prairie and wetland 
restoration  projects , pollinator enhancement plantings, 
hedgerows, and is a  good plant for reclaiming seaside 
land.   It is also a n attractive  ornamental for use in 
wildflower meadows, butterfly gardens, and gardens close 
to the coast.   Several tribes  in the Pacific  N orthwest 
extracted a resin from gumweed that was used to treat 
asthma, bronchitis, whooping cough, and dermatitis 
caused by poison ivy.  
This species  is the dominant  late-summer blooming plant 
in much of its native  wetland pra irie or salt marsh habitat, 
so  it is serves as an important late -season source of pollen 
and nectar for butterflies, native bees , syrphid flies, wasps 
and other  beneficial  insects.   Willamette hybrid gumweed  
populations provide a critical pollen resour ce for an 
endemic native wetland -pr airie solitary bee  ( Melissodes 
pullatela ), and are the preferred nectar and extra- floral 
resin food source for the  rare wetland great copper  butterfly (
Lycaena xanthoides ) in the Willamette Valley 
of Oregon .    
Status  
Puget Sound gumweed  is classified as a facultative 
wetland plant, meaning it u sually occurs in wetlands, but  
is  occasionally found in non- wetlands.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threa tened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Puget Sound gumweed, a member of the sunflower  family 
(Asteraceae),  is a native,  perennial,  tap-rooted, 
herbaceous  to  semi -woody  subshrub  that grow s 8 to 40 
inches tall.   The stout, branched s tems are leafy, upright 
or reclining on the ground but with tip s ascending, and are 
generally covered in  long, soft, shaggy but unmatted 
hairs.  Basal leaves are lance -shaped, slightly wider near 
the tip, with s mooth or toothed edges, up to 16 inches 
long a nd 1½  inches wide.  Stem leaves are alternate, 
stalkless,  often  with clasping bases , up to 3 inches long, 
usually with smooth margins ,  and  dotted with  stalked 
glands  that produce a sticky resin .  Immature flowe r heads 
ooze a sticky ,  white latex that gives them a  milky 
appearance.  When open, t he daisy -like  flower heads are  1 
to 2 inches across and are  composed of 10 to 35 yellow, 
petal -like ray flowers 
1/3 to 4/5  inch  long  surrounding the  
yellow disk flowers in the center.   Below the flower head 
is a whorl ed cup of green  b racts that are sticky -glandular  
with  long,  thin tips that are spreading  or sometimes 
curved back from the flower head .  Fruits are small, wind -
borne achenes that are some what-flattened with a pappus 
of two to several firm but deciduous awns.   Plants flower 
from June to November .   
Grindelia  integrifolia  r eadily hybridizes with  G. nana var. 
nana  where  the two  species co -occur  in  the Willamette 
Valley of  western Oregon.   Grindelia integrifolia  x  nana 
var.  nana, commonly called  Willamette hybrid gumweed, 
is  locally  common  in  spring -wet areas , dry pastures  and 
roadsides .  Grindelia integrifolia  also hybridizes with the 
coastal species G. stricta  in the Puget Sound region of 
Washington.   
Puget Sound gumweed is a locally common wildflower 
found along beaches, rocky shores, wet meadows, 
wetland prairies, ditches, pastures and salt marshes.  It 
tolerates poor, sandy to clayey and saline soils, and 
prefers full sun to light shade and moist soil.   This species  
is distributed along the coast of Oregon, Washington, 
British Columbia, and the panhandle of Alaska, and 
inland in the Puget Trough of Washington through the