Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HONEY LOCUST 
Gleditisia triacanthos  L.  
Plant Symbol = GLTR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Herman, D.E., et al. 1996.   North Dakota tree handbook 
 
Alternate Names 
Honey–shucks, Sweet Locu st, Three-thorned-acacia, 
Thorn tree, Thorny  Locust, Sweet-bean  
 
Uses 
Landscaping 
Thornless and fruitless varieties have been developed 
by the horticultural industry and are used extensively 
in landscaping.  The trees are very hardy and are 
often used in parking lot islands and along side 
walks.  The open canopy and small leaves will not 
shade out turf grasses or other landscape plants.   
 
Wildlife  
Honey locust is used extensively by wildlife.  The 
bean pods are a favorite food of the white-tailed deer, 
squirrels, rabbits, hogs, opossums, and raccoons.  
Domestic animals such as sheep, goats, and cattle 
will also forage on the honey locust bean pods.  
Browsing and grazing animals, such as deer, cattle, 
and sheep utilize the tender shoots in spring and the 
bark of young trees in winter.   Honey locust is  capable of forming dense thickets of thorny 
vegetation which provides excellent cover for a wide 
variety of game animals and birds.  Flowers of this 
species are incredibly attractive to pollinating insects.   
 
Timber 
Wood from the honey locust is very dense, shock 
resistant and commonly used in the timber industry.  
Honey locust wood is easily split, capable of 
obtaining a high luster finish, and is durable when in 
contact with soil.  For these reasons, timber from 
honey locust has been used as fence posts, railroad 
ties, furniture, warehouse or shipping pallets, tool 
handles and fuel.   
 
Ethnobotanical 
Native Americans used the dried pulp from the seed 
pods as a sweetening agent and a minor food source.  
The wood was used to make bows, and a variety of 
medicines were made from various parts of the plant.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, st ate natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants .usda.gov.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Honey locust is a woody, long lived, native, 
deciduous, legume (Fabaceae family), and is capable 
of obtaining 100 feet in height. The doubly 
compound leaves are alte rnate and dark green in 
color.  Large, red thorns are often found on the 
branches and trunk of wild trees.  The thorns 
typically have 3 points, but may have more, 
especially those on the trunk.  The bark is dark gray 
and black with deep fissures  that form large “plates” 
of bark on mature trees.  Long, twisted seed pods 
form in late summer, and turn from green to dark 
reddish brown as they mature.  The size of these pods

is highly variable, and they give off a very strong, 
sweet aroma when they ripen and fall to the ground. 
 
Honey locust is a pioneering woody species 
commonly found in overgrown pastures, fields, fence 
lines, and wood lot edges. It has a very broad range 
of adaptation, and is distributed nationwide, 
excluding Oregon and Washington.  The greatest 
concentration of plants can be found in the central 
portions of the U.S. It pref ers moist, fertile, alluvial 
soils.  It will withstand periods of drought and 
prolonged wetness, and is commonly found in the 
upland areas along river drainages.   
 
Establishment 
This plant is often distributed by animals which have 
consumed the seed and passed them through their 
gut.  This can be imitated by scarifying the seed 
mechanically or by using an acid bath.  Seeds soaked 
in hot water (85 -90
oC) and allowed to cool to room 
temperature have also germinated well.  Seed that has 
been treated with these methods can be planted into a 
well prepared seed bed or  container, approximately ½ 
inch deep.  Seedling should be strong enough for 
transplanting at one year of age.  Root cuttings have 
also been successfully used  for propagation.  Honey 
Locust requires full sun, and will not tolerate 
shading.   
 
Management 
Once established, trees are generally maintenance 
free.  Pruning of lower limbs will encourage tall, 
upright growth.     
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Honey Locust has few significant pests.  Canker can 
sometimes be a problem, but rarely kills the tree.   
 
This plant can become a nuisance, and will dominate 
a site if left unchecked or  mismanaged.  Honey locust 
can produce numerous thorns that are capable of 
puncturing implement tires.  Though not listed as a 
toxic plant, contact with thorns often results in sore 
wounds that are slow to heal.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Due to rapid growth, aggressive re-sprouting, and 
density of the wood, this plant has excellent potential 
for use as a biofuel either  by direct burning of the 
wood or cellulosic ethanol production. 
 
Control  
Honey locust is intolerant of fire.  Timely, periodic 
burning will eliminate it from open areas.  Herbicides 
may also be used for control and suppression.  
Cutting young trees results in excessive re-spouting  from the stump and roots, compounding the original 
problem exponentially.  Stumps from cut trees must 
be treated with herbicide to prevent aggressive re-
sprouts from forming dense thickets of thorny trees.   
 
Please contact your local
 agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.    
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Thornless and fruitless varieties are readily available 
through the nursery industry. 
 
Prepared By:   R. Alan Shadow , Soil Conservationist, 
USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacogdoches, TX  
 
Species Coordinator:  R. Alan Shadow, Soil 
Conservationist, USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center, Nacogdoches, TX  
 
Edited: 090108 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.