Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLENDER-SPIKED 
MANNAGRASS  
Glyceria leptostachya  Buckl. 
Plant Symbol = GLLE2  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Alternate Names 
Other common names include davy mannagrass, 
slimheaded mannagrass, and soft mannagrass.  
 
Uses 
Slender-spiked mannagrass is a lesser known, mid-
sized native grass suitable for wetland restoration and 
enhancement.   It may also be used for seeding the 
edges of streams and lakes, as well as the bottom of 
low gradient drainage ditches and other watercourses.  
This species exhibits a low-lying growth form and 
vegetative spread that helps reduce erosion.  The 
prostrate floating leaves an d stems may further aid in 
control erosion by lining the banks of streams, 
waterways, and channels during high flows.  The 
seed and leaves are a likely source of food for 
waterfowl, shore birds, songbirds, and small 
mammals, similar to other mannagrasses. 
   Forage value and palatability for livestock are 
unknown.  However, the tender, green foliage is 
probably utilized by deer and other ungulates.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Slender-spiked mannagrass is a short-lived, 
perennial, cool season grass with succulent foliage 
and erect to low lying stem s that are 60 to 110 cm 
tall.  Reportedly, this grass also produces rhizomes 
(underground stems), but individuals often retain a 
more bunchgrass appearance.  Plants may spread 
vegetatively from lower stems that root at nodes 
(joints) in contact with the  soil.  The leaf blades are 
flat to rolled slightly inward, 3 to 7 (10) mm wide, 
and rough on both sides.  On land, they develop 
mostly at the base of the plant but floating leaves can 
form when plants are submerged.  The flowerhead 
(panicle) is open, 20 to 40 cm long, with a few 
branches pressed close to the main axis.  Slender-
spiked mannagrass occurs from Alaska south to 
California but not further inland. 
 
Key to identification:  In the Pacific Northwest USA, 
this species resembles a smaller version of western 
mannagrass ( Glyceria occidentalis ), which is coarser, 
more open, and has much larger seeds.  It can also be 
confused with northern mannagrass ( Glyceria 
borealis ) but the latter has a smooth leaf blade while 
the upper blades of slender-spiked mannagrass are 
rough in texture. Consult a botanical key to 
distinguish these species. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Generally 
uncommon throughout its natural range compared to 
other mannagrasses.  Scattered plants are 
occasionally found along small streams and in 
riparian wetlands or marshy areas, especially in the 
Willamette Valley of Oregon and along the Pacific 
Coast.  Seed ripens in July or August.  Retention 
within the panicle is poor to fair at best.  Wild 
collections rarely yield much seed because 
populations are usually small and plants are widely 
scattered.  
 
Adaptation:  This species is well adapted to wet 
meadows, the margins of streams, lakeshores, 
freshwater marshy areas, and other depressions that 
stay moist in summer.  It easily withstands year

round inundation by developing a floating leaf 
growth form.  However, longevity may be reduced.  
This species is found on acidic soils that are coarse to 
fine textured.  Tolerance  to salinity, alkalinity, or 
high soil acidity is unknown.  Slender-spiked 
mannagrass typically grows in full sun.  
 
Establishment 
Slender-spiked mannagrass seed has no strong 
dormancy and germinates at a moderate rate in fall or 
spring.  Establishment rate is intermediate.  Hulls are 
loosely attached and may be readily removed during 
seed processing.   There are approximately 1,300,000 
seeds/lb (+/- 30%).  A sowing rate of 1 lb per/ac of 
pure live seed will result in about 30 live seeds per 
square foot.  The potential high cost of seed may 
limit its use to mixtures with other native grasses.  
Based on seed size and seedling vigor alone, a 
seedling rate of 2 to 5 lbs/ac may be adequate for a 
single species stand.   
 
Management  
There is a 
lack of 
information 
about the 
management 
of slender 
spiked 
mannagrass 
for livestock 
or other 
purposes.  
Succulent 
growth should 
favor 
palatability, 
but grazing 
would be 
inappropriate 
or restricted under the we t environments where this 
species grows.  Seed prod uction requires extensive 
irrigation, poorly drained soils, seasonal wetlands, or 
shallow water impoundments.  Regeneration is 
favored by disturbance and the presence of open mud 
or prolonged moist soil that is sparsely vegetated.   
This species may be suited to moist soil management 
(slow de-watering, disking, etc.) of impounded 
wetlands for improving waterfowl, shorebird, and 
other wildlife habitat. 
 
Limitations and Environmental Concerns 
It is difficult to obtain seed of any volume from the 
wild.  In western Oregon, other mannagrasses, 
especially western mannagrass, are considered weeds 
in low lying fields of Italian ryegrass ( Lolium spp.)  grown for seed.  Apparently, slender-spiked 
mannagrass is of infrequent or lesser concern.  It is 
not reported to be a competitive, weedy or invasive 
plant species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is rarely sold as seed or plants.  
Availability depends on wild collections or contract 
growing with producers who specialize in native 
herbaceous plant seed.   
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris
, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 21mar2006 jsp, 17sept2008 dcd; 080919 jsp 
 
 Line drawings reprinted with permission, 
University of Washington Press  For more information about this 
and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.