Plant Fact Sheet
BLANKETFLOWER 
Gaillardia aristata Pursh  
Plant Symbol = GAAR 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Bridger Plant  Materials 
C enter, Bridger, Montana  
 
Gaillardia aristata,  Susan R. Winslow, Bridger P MC 
Alternate Names  
Indian blanketflower, common gaillardia, gaillardia  
Uses  
Blanketflower is a native perennial wildflower  useful for 
add ing  species diversity in native plant seed mixes for 
rehabilitation of disturbed sites.  It  can be used  in 
produc ing native wildflower sod for restoration of native  
plant colonies . Blanketflower  is suitable for use as an 
ornamental wildflower in low maintenanc e or naturalistic 
landscapes. It has utility as a cover and food source for 
pollinators, wildlife, and livestock.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
B lanketflower is a native, perennial, tap -rooted 
wildflower with showy, yellow ray flowers and reddish -
brown central disk flowers. The pubescent plants vary  
from 10 to 24 inches in height. Leaves are arranged 
alternately along the stem and are 3 to 6 inches long with 
margins that are coarsely -toothed and deeply divided. 
Blanketflower grows on sunny, well -drained sites in  prairie meadows up to grassy openings in the mountains.
 
It has an extensive bloom pe riod beginning in early 
summer.  
It does well on a variety of soil types, including loams to 
rocky to gravelly -sandy textures; and tolerates a soil pH 
range from slightly acidic to mildly alkaline . 
Blanketflower  attains optimum growth in full sun, 
beginning in early spring until seed set in late summer . It 
occurs at elevations  from 1,300  to 9,000 ft.  
 
 
Blanketflower  distribution  from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant  Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Blanketflower may be grown from seed or division of 
vegetative parts. The seed does not require cold 
stratification treatment to break dormancy. For range 
plantings, se ed should be plante d into a firm, weed-free 
seedbed, preferably with a  mechanical drill that will 
ensure uniform seed placement depth of ¼ - to ½ -inch.  
The re are approximately 22 0,700 seeds  in one pound of 
blanketflower . The full seeding rate is 5  pounds pure live 
seed /acre,  but it would seldom be seeded in a pure stand. 
It is recommended that blanketflower  be included as a 
component of a native seed mixture at a rate not to exceed 
½  to 1 pound pure live seed /acre. When used in a mix , 
adjust the seeding rate to the desired per centage of mix. 
Spring seeding is preferred over late summer or dormant, 
fall planting date s. 
Seed production fields should be established in rows at 25 
pure live seeds  per lineal foot of row. Between -row 
spacing is dependent on the type of planting and