Plant Fact Sheet     
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KENTUCKY 
COFFEETREE
 
Gymnocladus dioicus  (L.) K. 
Koch  
Plant Symbol = GYDI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State 
University, Research Forestry 
 
 USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Area  
Archives, USDA Forest Service 
 
Alternate Names: American coffee bean, American 
coffee berry, American mahogany, chico du Canada, 
chicot, chiot, chiot tree, co ffeebean, coffeebean-tree, 
coffeenut, coffeetree, d ead tree, geweihbaum, 
Kentucky coffeetree, Kentucky mahogany, 
mahogany, mahogany-bean, ne ttle-tree, nicker tree, 
nicker treet, stump tree 
Also: Gymnocladus dioica  (L.) Koch 
 
PARTS OF THIS PLANT ARE 
POISONOUS-See Environmental Concerns 
section of this document 
 
Uses 
Industry: Timber, the strong, heavy wood is used in 
general construction and fence posts although the rot 
resistant wood is soft and the staples pull out easily. 
Pioneer settlers used the coarse-grained, light brown 
to reddish-brown wood in cabinetry.  Also used for 
ornamental purposes in large area landscape 
plantings and parks. 
 
Wildlife:  Kentucky coffeetree is used by nesting 
birds. Due to the tree’s t oxic plant parts such as the 
leaves and raw seeds, there  is little wildlife usage as a 
source of food. 
 
Ethnobotanic: While native to North America, Native 
Americans introduced the tree to some parts of the 
continent as they used the pulp from the wood to treat 
insanity. A tea was also ma de from the leaves and 
pulp and used as a laxative. Early settlers used the 
seeds of the tree as a substitute for coffee. 
CAUTION! The seeds and pods contain the alkaloid 
cystisine  (Seed Environmental Concerns).  Cystisine 
is thought to be neutralized in the roasting process. 
 
Conservation : Kentucky coffeetree was formerly 
planted around farmsteads. It is tolerant to a wide 
range of conditions such as drought, chalk 
(limestone), and urban conditions.  The tree has been 
planted on mine spoils  for soil reclamation and 
stabilization.  This pest free tree is an alternative to 
ash and elm which have been ravaged by insects and 
disease.   
 
Status 
Kentucky coffeetree’s numbers are declining rapidly 
due to over harvesting.   The species is not invasive; it 
is only found in small clusters due to root sprouting 
and makes up a rare component of any woodland. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
General:  Legume Family (Fabaceae): A medium to 
large, round-barked native deciduous tree reaching 
heights of 60-100 feet with a spread of 40 to 50 feet.  
Its short trunk, 1 to 2 feet in diameter, divides into 
several large branches that end in contorted, stout 
twigs.  Its unique, thick, dark bark is gray to grayish-
brown, often marked with deep, irregular furrows and 
plates that curl at their sides.  The alternate,

bipinnately compound leaves are the largest of any 
native species, measuring from 1 to 3 feet in length 
by 18 to 24 inches in width, arranged in feather-
fashion in 5 to 9 pairs of pinnae, the lowest are 
reduced to simple leaflets.  Typically the leaves 
consist of six to 14 entire; more or less ovate (almond 
shaped) leaflets, 2 to 3 inches long.    
 
Relatively hardy in zones 3 to 8, the tree adapts well 
to urban conditions.  It prefers full sun, humus-rich, 
moist soil, and tolerates drought and occasional 
flooding.  Considering its cultural tolerances, it 
should be on the list of “tough” trees.  Kentucky 
coffeetree is a fast-growing tree when young with 
moderate to slow growth as the tree ages attaining 12 
to 14 feet in 10 years. 
 
Establishment 
Seedlings may be planted in the field after one year.  
Transplant balled and burlapped trees into deep, rich, 
moist soil for best growth. 
 
Management  
Fertilize with formulations that promote woody 
growth rather than excessive foliar growth.  Prune in 
winter or early spring; wood may be somewhat 
brittle.  Longer, weaker branches should be pruned 
when young to promote a stronger structure.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems: No serious insect or 
disease problems. Fallen leaf stalks and pods require 
some clean up. 
 
Environmental Concerns:  The leaves, seeds and 
pulp are poisonous and are toxic to livestock, 
humans, and pets. Sprouts eaten in the spring have 
produced toxicosis. Leaves, young sprouts, and seeds 
with gelatinous matter around them contain the toxin. 
Cattle have reportedly died  after drinking from pools 
of water contaminated by fallen leaves and seeds 
from the tree.   
 
Control 
Animals should not be al lowed to graze woodland 
areas where Kentucky coffeetree grows or where it 
has been cut and allowed to sprout, until spring 
grasses and herbage are abundant.  Sprouts can be 
grubbed periodically as a preventative measure as 
only a few of these trees will be found in any 
woodland.  Fence in large fruiting trees to prevent 
livestock from eating the fallen pods.  This measure 
is desirable over removing a species that is so rare in 
the landscape. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin): Several cultivars are available in the  nursery trade including selections that are 
predominately male such as ‘Espresso’
, ‘J.C. 
McDaniel’ (Prairie Titan
™), and ‘Stately Manor’, that 
produce no fruit. Espresso exhibits an upward, 
arching branch form resulting in an elm-like vase 
shape. Prairie Titan is a very symmetrical, upright 
spreading tree 60 to 70 feet tall with blue-green 
summer foliage,  from the University of Illinois 
campus near Davenport Hall. Stately Manor is a 
narrow, upright form 50 feet tall and 20 feet wide, is 
possibly best for street tree use. ‘Variegata’ is a little 
known, slower growing cu ltivar with streaks of 
creamy white variegation and pink-purple new 
growth. 
 
Prepared By:  
John M. Row 
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center,  
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Wayne Geyer, Ph.D. 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Species Coordinator: 
John M. Row  
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center,  
Manhattan, Kansas 
 Edited: 0702 jd; 070227 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.