Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TALL MANNAGRASS
Glyceria elata  (Nash ex Rydb.) 
M.E. Jones  
Plant Symbol = GLEL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Alternate Names 
Another common name is fowl mannagrass.  It is 
now classified as the same species as the more widely 
distributed Glyceria striata  which has similar 
common names. 
 
Uses 
Tall mannagrass is a rapidly establishing native 
species suitable for restoration of swamps, the edges 
of marshes, ponds, and streams, and other wetland 
plant communities where an herbaceous understory is 
desired.   It has versatility for use along creeks and 
ditch bottoms where exposure may vary from full sun 
to dense shade, thereby improving soil stability 
beyond the use of woody plants alone.   Where this species dominates, herbage production is high.  
Palatability of 
G. striata is rated good to very good 
for cattle and horses which consume both flower 
stems and leaves.  It is rated fair to good for sheep 
which tend to use only the leaves.  The seed is food 
for waterfowl and birds while the foliage and tall 
stems provide good wildlife cover.  Foliage is 
seasonally grazed at a light to heavy rate by deer, 
muskrat, and bears.  Elk can make minor use of it as 
well.  Tall mannagrass may be applicable to seeding 
mixtures targeted to improve species richness and 
exclude reed canarygrass ( Phalaris arundinacea) 
prior to its invasion.  It is occasionally planted as an 
ornamental in and around backyard ponds. 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
In the Pacific Northwest, tall mannagrass is a long 
lived, cool season perennial bunchgrass with 
somewhat succulent stems (culms) that reach a height 
of 100 to 180 cm.  The form is erect, robust, and 
clumpy despite the production of slow growing 
rhizomes or underground stems.  Rate of spread may 
vary among populations.  Leaf blades are soft, 
ribbon-like, 6 to 12 mm wide and 15 to 25 cm long.  
The flowerhead (panicle) is loose, broad, pyramid-
like, and 8 to 27 cm long with spreading and 
drooping branches.   Populations previously 
described for  G. striata include plants that are shorter 
and tougher with smaller leaves (2 to 5 mm wide) 
and flower heads that are more closed.  G. elata  was 
primarily confined to the western states, but as  G. 
striata , it occurs across most of North America. 
 
Key to identification:  Physical differences described 
between tall mannagrass and  G. striata are 
inconsequential because they are now listed as the 
same species.  Tall mannagrass can be easily 
confused with reed mannagrass ( Glyceria grandis) 
which has smoother leaves and lack its slightly rough 
texture.  Others mannagrasses are easier to 
distinguish, but a botanical key should be consulted.   
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Seed ripens in July 
or August and retention within the flower head is fair 
to good.  Collections can be readily made along wet 
forest road ditches, but access can be difficult along 
streams or in denser, swampy brush where this 
species is commonly found.

Adaptation: Tall mannagrass widely occurs in  bogs, 
seeps, wet woods, thickets  or swampy areas, shaded 
ditches, and along or in st reams.  It may occasionally 
be found growing in full sun on summer damp soils 
as well as in standing water.  Reportedly, this species 
is best adapted to freshwater, semi-aquatic habitats 
( G. elata ) or those that are irregularly to seasonally 
flooded and saturated for up to 25 percent of the 
growing season (G. striata ).  However, local plants 
have thrived and flowered under continuous 
inundation (1-10 cm) for several years.  Tall 
mannagrass tolerates open areas but prefers shady 
habitats.  It may occur as single plants, small 
colonies, or larger st ands that dominate the 
understory of ash swales as well as willow, aspen, 
and other wetland forest or shrub communities.  Soils 
range from organic to mineral with a pH of 4 (acidic) 
to 8 (slightly alkaline).  This species does not tolerate 
salinity and needs moderately good fertility.  This 
species is very shade tolerant, similar to reed 
mannagrass, yet it can be grown in full sun to 
produce substantial 
seed.  
 
Establishment 
The presence of seed 
dormancy, if any, may 
vary among 
populations.  Seeds can 
germinate within 2 to 3 
weeks without 
treatment but   14 to 30 
days of cold moist 
stratification (moist 
pre-chilling) has 
resulted in faster but 
not necessarily higher 
germination rates.  
Others report the need for 150 days of stratification in 
cold water.  Fall sowing is preferred if dormancy is 
known or uncertain.  Seed hulls readily detach but 
removal is unnecessary.  There are approximately 
1,600,000 seeds per pound with hulls intact.  A 
seeding rate of 1lb pure live seed per acre will result 
is about 37 live seeds per square foot.  Seeding rates 
depend on methods used, objectives, and site 
conditions. 
 
Management  
Management considerations for utilization of  G. 
striata  by livestock may predictably apply to tall 
mannagrass.   Sites where it occurs are typically too 
wet for grazing when the herb age is most succulent. 
Therefore, access must be deferred until late in the 
season when soils are drier and quality has declined 
somewhat. Tolerance to fire and heavy grazing is not  well documented.   Tall mann
agrass can be grown for 
seed on upland sites with medium to fine textured 
soils if regular irrigation is applied in summer and 
fall. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Some strains or populations of  G. striata may contain 
cynogenetic compounds.  Cyanide poisoning from it 
as well as reed mannagrass has been reported in 
cattle.  Because tall mannagrass is now the same 
species or closely related, caution is advised for 
livestock utilization. Likewise, plant diseases that 
infect  G. striata  may apply to tall mannagrass.  This 
includes the fungal pathogens Epichloe glyceriae  
which causes floral castration and  Ustilago 
striiformis , better known as stripe smut.  Fungicides 
may be needed for control.  Consult with your local 
Extension Service agent, plant disease control 
handbook, or other experts for advice.  Other species 
of mannagrass are described as weedy in certain 
crops or wet areas, but concerns for tall mannagrass 
are not widely known. 
 
Line drawing reprinted with  permission, University of 
Washington Press 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seed sources and plants are regularly available 
throughout much of the species natural range within 
the United States. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 Edited: 21mar2006 jsp, 17sept2008 dcd; 080919 jsp  
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service