Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN LICORICE  
Glycyrrhiza lepidota  Pursch. 
Plant Symbol =  GLLE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 Copyright: Mike Haddock 
Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses Website 
 
Alternate Names 
Wild licorice, licorice-root, and dessert root 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Rangeland: Forage analysis indicates that 
American licorice produces highly digestible and 
nutritious forage which compares favorably with 
alfalfa. Forage of juvenile licorice is greedily eaten 
by cattle. Close grazing will eliminate American 
licorice from a stand by the time the pasture is 
considered to be in fair  condition. Its bur-like seed 
pod can become entangled in sheep wool and cause 
dockage when sold. 
  Wildlife value
: Deer and pronghorn antelope 
consume licorice foliage. Birds and small rodents eat 
the seed of licorice, while pocket gophers consume 
their roots. 
 
Erosion control: It has a deep root system extending 
some 12 feet into the prairi e soil. It is recognized for 
its soil binding capabilities and it has wide ecological 
amplitude. Licorice has extensive rhizome production 
and it exhibited vigorous growth on mine spoil sites 
in North Dakota. 
 
Ethnobotanical:  American licorice was widely used 
as medicine by the Indians of the Great Plains. The 
Cheyenne’s drank medicinal tea made from the 
peeled, dry roots of the pl ant for diarrhea and upset 
stomach. The Lakota’s used the root as a medicine 
for flu. The Dakota’s steeped the licorice leaves in 
boiling water to make a topical medicine for earache. 
The roots were also chewed and held in the mouth to 
relieve toothache. The Black feet made a tea from the 
root to relieve coughs, chest pain, and sore throat.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
This plant belongs to th e legume family (Fabaceae). 
Glycyrrhiza  is a Greek word that means “sweet root”. 
The species name,  lepidota, means “scaly” and refers 
to the minute scales on young leaves. American 
licorice is a native, perennial legume common to 
disturbed areas, draws, woods, and depressions over 
much of temperate North America. The plant 
reproduces by seed and underground stems called 
rhizomes. Licorice has an erect growth habit and is 
1.5 to 3 feet tall. Its st ems are smooth and branched. 
The leaves are smooth, alternately attached to the 
stem, and have many (7 to 21) leaflets that are 
arranged opposite each other along the leaf stem.  
The flowers are on short stalks and crowded on 
terminal spikes. Its flower s are yellowish-white and 
shaped similar to alfalfa fl owers. Flowers bloom June 
to August and seed matures from July to October. 
The seed pods are brown, leathery and ½ to 1 inch 
long. The pods are covered with many stout, hooked, 
brown spines which form a burr. This hooked pod 
assists the plant in dispersal since they stick to animal 
fur and are moved to new growing sites. The Dakota

name for licorice is “wi-nawizi” (jealous woman), 
refers to the burrs which “take hold of a man”. Seeds 
are green to reddish-brown, smooth and bean shaped. 
  
Establishment 
Seed scarification of licorice is important for quick 
and consistent germination of this legume species. 
Since this is a legume species it should be inoculated 
with r hizobium  Glycyrrhiza  Spec. 1 before planting 
to allow for nodulation of the plants. This inoculation 
will allow for the plant to produce nitrogen through 
the symbiotic relationship with the bacterium. 
 
Management 
Manage the plant for the intended use of the species 
whether that be for forage production, wildlife 
habitat, or conservation improvement.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A bruchid beetle  Acanthosclides aureolus  is a major 
seed predator of American  licorice. A rust fungus 
Uromyces glycyrrhizae  has been reported on 
American licorice in South Dakota. In germination 
and establishment studies with licorice scientists 
discovered that some populations of this species 
exhibited chlorophyll deficient seedlings that were 
fatal to the individual seedlings. American licorice 
plants grown in a monoculture situation did not 
produce very many flowering structures.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
The only environmental co ncern would be the fact 
that some people consider licorice to be prone to 
weediness. It does have aggressive vegetative 
reproduction via rhizomes in a monoculture situation. 
The bur-like seed pods can become entangled in 
domestic livestock or animal fur.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
At the present time there ar e no cultivar releases or 
any type of plant materials releases of American 
licorice. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Edited:  070817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of  race, color, national or
igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.