Plant Fact Sheet
FOWL MANNAGRASS  
Glyceria striata  (Lam.)  Hitchc.  
Plant Symbol = GLST  
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon   
 
 Photo by Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC.  
 
Alternative Names  
Alternate Common Names :  tall mannagrass 
Alternate Scientific Names :  Glyceria elata, Glyceria nervata, 
Glyceria striata ssp . stricta, Glyceria striata var . stricta, 
Panicularia nervata, Panicularia  striata 
 
Uses  
Fowl  mannagrass  is a rapidly establishing native species  
suitable for restoration of swamps , the edges of marshes, 
ponds, and  streams, and other wetland plant communities 
where an herbaceous understory is desired.    It  has versatility 
for  use along creeks and ditch bottoms where exposure may 
vary from full sun to dense shade , thereby improving soil 
stability beyond the use of woody plants alone .  Where this 
species dominates, herbage  production is high.  Palatability of 
G. striata  is rated good to very good for cattle and horses 
which consume both flower stems and leaves.  It is rated fair 
to good for sheep which tend to use only the leaves.  The seed  is food for waterfowl and birds while the foliage and tall stems 
provide good wil
dlife cover.  Foliage is seasonally grazed at a 
light to heavy rate by deer, muskrat, and bears.  Elk can make 
minor use of it as well.  Fowl mannagrass may be applicable 
to seeding mixtures targeted to improve species richness and 
exclude reed canarygrass  ( Phalaris arundinacea) prior to its 
invasion.  It is occasionally planted as an ornamental in and 
around backyard ponds.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status 
(e.g. threat ened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
In the Pacific Northwest, fowl mannagrass is a long -lived, 
cool season perennial bunchgrass with somewhat succulent 
stems (culms) that reach a heig ht of 100 to 180 cm .  The form 
is erect, robust, and clumpy despite the production of slow 
growing rhizomes or underground stems.  Rate of spread may 
vary among populations.  Leaf blades are soft, ribbon -like, 6 
to 12 mm wide and 15 to 25 cm long.  The flo werhead 
(panicle) is loose, broad, pyramid- like, and 8 to 27 cm long 
with spreading and drooping branches.   Populations 
previously described for  G. striata  include  plants that are 
shorter  and tougher with smaller leaves (2 to 5 mm wide) and 
flower heads t hat are more closed.  G. striata  occurs across 
most of North America.  
 
 Fowl mannagrass distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Key to identification: Fowl mannagrass can be easily confused 
with reed mannagrass ( Glyceria grandis), which has smoother 
leaves and lacks its slightly rough texture.  Others 
mannagrasses are easier to distinguish, but a botanical key 
should be consulted.