Plant Fact Sheet     
 
 
 
TANGLEHEAD 
Heteropogon contortus  (L.) P. 
Beauv. ex Roem. & Schult. 
Plant symbol = HECO10  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center and Ho olehua Plant Materials 
Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA NRCS Hoolehua PMC 2005 
 
Alternate Names  
Spear grass, pili, piligrass, twisted beardgrass, lule 
 
Uses 
Forage
:   Tanglehead is a good forage grass for the 
southwestern United States, and does not develop 
sharp awns if it is consiste ntly grazed. It is palatable 
to most livestock during the growing season, but as it 
matures, it becomes coarser, and loses palatability. 
Conservation
:   Primary recommendation for this 
grass  would be vegetation to aid erosion control.    
Tanglehead also has the potential for ecosystem 
restoration, re-vegetation of degraded habitats, and to 
increase diversity in riparian and other communities. 
Wildlife
:   Tanglehead can provide good cover for 
animals and it can also be  used as a grass for native 
habitat restoration projects.  Cultural
: 
 In ancient Hawaii, tanglehead was used as 
thatch for houses in drier areas. It was favored 
because of its pleasant odor  and its resistance to 
weathering. 
Ornamental
:  Tanglehead’s interesting looking 
seedhead makes it a good candidate for ornamental 
use. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Tanglehead is a member of the  Andropogoneae tribe 
of grasses.  It is an erect, warm season, perennial that 
may form rather large bunches reaching heights of 1 
to 3 feet tall under natural conditions.  At the 
Hoolehua PMC, under optimum conditions, 
tanglehead has been known to grow to heights of up 
to 5 feet tall.  There is a wide range of morphological 
and phenological variations within this species 
because of its wide range  of adaptability.  The stems 
are flattened, rather tough, smooth, and a pale bluish-
green.  Leaves are produced throughout the length of 
the stem and are flat or folded, 4-12 inches long, 
about 0.25 inches wide and rough to the touch.  The 
flowering heads have narrow, crowded flower spikes 
up to 4 inches long.  The spikelets overlap and each 
fertile one bears a conspicuous red-brown awn about 
4 inches long, made crooked with two bends.  The 
long-awned seeds are sharp pointed forming tangled 
masses as they mature.  When the seeds come in 
contact with moisture, the hygroscopic awns and 
sharp barbed tips arch and twist planting them into 
the soil.  The species is mostly apomictic (producing 
seed without pollination), but sexual reproduction has 
also been known to occur. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Tanglehead has a high degree of adaptability that has 
allowed it to survive in locations around the world for 
many years.  It can be  found on every major 
landmass between 35º N latitude and 35º S latitude.  
In Texas, it is found in sandy prairies, the coastal 
regions, the Trans-Pecos Mountains, and persists in 
well-managed pastures, although it was once a 
common grass in the coastal prairies.  In Hawaii, 
tanglehead occurs naturally on all the major islands at

sea level to about 2,000 feet elevation and favors dry 
habitats and rocky cliffs close to the ocean.       
 
For a current U.S. distribution map, please consult 
the plant profiles page for this species on the 
PLANTS web site.  
 
Establishment  
Tanglehead can be reproduced from seeds or 
vegetative transplants.  A stand of tanglehead was 
established at the Kika de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center using vegetative bunches split off of mature 
plants.  The seeds have a dormancy period of about 6 
months.  Although seeds will germinate before this 
period, the germ-rate will be very low.   Studies 
indicate that this dormancy can be broken with 
gibberelic acid.  Plant propagules in a sterile, well 
drained medium.  Germination should occur within 
5-7 days.  One week after germination, it is 
recommended that time-release fertilizer supplements 
be added.  After 2 months, place propagules in full 
sunlight to harden off.  Propagules should be ready to 
plant within 3-4 months. 
 
Management 
Tanglehead is adapted to low rainfall and low fertility 
soils, although nutrient am endments according to soil 
tests would be beneficial for rapid establishment.  
 
Burning is commonly used as a tool to maintain 
tanglehead pastures for grazing in other parts of the 
world.  Grazing fields can be shredded or burned on 
an annual basis to reduce dead plant matter and 
induce new growth, but burning during the dry 
season may reduce nutrient availability.  On the other 
hand, some of the south Texas accessions were very 
sensitive to burning, being slow to re-grow.  
Therefore, ample time should be given between 
burning and grazing periods.  For rotational grazing, 
forage height should be utilized between four to ten 
inches.  It is recommended that a minimum six-inch 
stubble height be maintained under continuous 
grazing.  Tanglehead does not develop seeds if it is 
consistently grazed, but populations will decrease if 
grazing is too heavy. 
 
Tanglehead can also be harvested as hay-bales 
containing viable seed, which have been used 
extensively for the Kahoolawe Island Re-Vegetation 
Project.  Since tanglehead seed-heads have a 
tendency to bunch-up or tangle when they are mature, 
harvesting can also be done easily with the ‘PILI 
COMB’, an implement that was developed at the 
Hoolehua Plant Materials Center.  The use of 
tanglehead seed bales and seeded hay-bales for re- vegetation of degraded native habitats requires 
further investigation.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests that are detrimental to the 
tanglehead life cycle. 
 
Grazing fields should be managed carefully as not to 
allow seeds to mature before grazing.  Mature seeds 
are sharp and rigid and can
 cause injury to grazing 
animals. 
 
Seed cleaning is difficult because the awn and callus 
are not easily removed without damaging the seed.  
However, without the removal of the awn and callus, 
mechanical planting is im practical since they can 
clog the planter.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Rocker’ is a NRCS Arizona Source Identified 
release of a naturally occurring tanglehead 
germplasm and has been unaltered. 
 
‘Kahoolawe Germplasm Piligrass’ is a NRCS Hawaii 
Source Identified release of a naturally occurring 
tanglehead germplasm and has been unaltered. 
 
Prepared By:  
John Reilly  and Shelly D. Maher, Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, Texas 
David Duvauchelle , Hawaii Plant Materials Center, 
Hoolehua, Hawaii 
 
Edited: 1Oct2002 SDM; 06dec05 jsp; 060801 jsp; jun08 DD; 080807 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.