Plant Fact Sheet     
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
UTAH SWEETVETCH
Hedysarum boreale Nutt 
Plant Symbol = HEBO  
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center 
 
 UCEPC, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Alternate Names 
Northern sweetvetch, chain-pod, northern sweet 
broom 
 
Uses 
Grazing/Rangeland/Wildlife:  Utah sweetvetch can be 
used as a complimentar y species in rangeland 
seedings.  It is considered succulent and its foliage is 
highly palatable to livestock and big game. Utah 
Sweetvetch also provides important habitat attributes 
for sage grouse.  It has been rated as medium for 
cover value and excellent for food value. 
 
Reclamation:  Utah sweetvetch is a legume capable of 
fixing nitrogen from the atmosphere (Nitrogen 
fixation is a process whereby inorganic nitrogen-N
2 
found in the atmosphere is converted into organic 
compounds usable by the plant with the aid of 
Rhizobia  bacteria). Eventually this nitrogen is 
released into the soil, thereby, improving soil quality.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description:  Legume Family (Fabaceae). Utah 
sweetvetch is a native perennial, cool season, 
herbaceous legume with deep taproots and several 
lateral roots.  The main stems arise from a woody 
crown and may grow 1 to 2 feet tall.  The leaves are 
compound (two or more leaflets) and hairless.  
Flowers can be pink, purple, or white arranged in a 
loose raceme.  Seeds develop in a long constricted 
pod, with several sections.  Each section contains one 
brown kidney-shaped seed. 
 
Adaptation: Utah sweetvetch can  grow on clayey or 
sandy soils, however, is more adaptable to well-
drained loamy soils. It is most often found on 
moderately saline or alkaline soils, but will grow on 
moderately acidic to neutral soils.  Utah sweetvetch is 
usually found at elevations between 4000 to 8000 
feet, in precipitations zones receiving 10 to 18 inches 
of moisture annually.  It grows better with 15 inches 
or more of precipitation and minimum competition. 
 
Establishment 
Planting should be done in early spring or late fall. 
Drill seed at about ¼ to ½ inch deep.  Inoculation 
with the proper rhizobium will enhance nitrogen 
fixation.  Germination occurs within 6 to 30 days.  
 
Management  
Reduce or withhold stocking during establishment 
and avoid overuse after establishment to maintain a 
healthy stand.  Utah sweetvetch is moderately to 
fairly tolerant of grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Utah sweetvetch is subject to root-rots, seed pod 
insects and some rust.  Rabbits, grasshoppers and 
crickets can become problems by reducing plant 
stand. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Some plant sources of Utah sweetvetch have been 
reported to spread rhizomatously.  However, Utah 
sweetvetch as a native plant has moderate 
competiveness. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Timp’ Utah Sweetvetch ( Hedysarum boreale Nutt.) 
is a seed-propagated cultivar.  The genetic material 
originated from two sources: (1) a site at the base of 
the Wasatch Mountains and east of Orem County in 
Utah, and (2) a single-plant selection made by Dr.

Robin Cuany.  ‘Timp’ was selected based on its 
seedling vigor, site adaptability, persistence, seed 
production, dinitrogen fixation, and stability.  It was 
released in 1994 by Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, 
Colorado State University Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Utah State University Agricultural 
Experiment Station, and USDA-Soil Conservation 
Service. 
‘Timp’ Utah sweetvetch is adapted to a wide range of 
soil types, however, performs better in well-drained 
loamy soils.  It has proven acceptable performance 
where the annual precipitation ranges from 12 to 18 
inches. 
 
‘Timp’ certified seed is available commercially and 
breeder seed is maintained at Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Manuel Rosales,  USDA NRCS Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado 
 
Edited: 070814 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.