Plant Fact Sheet
C OMMON  ST. 
JOHNSWORT  
Hypericum perf oratum L.  
P la n t  S ymbo l = H YP E 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Cape May Plant Materials  
Center  
 
Common St. Johnswort (Hypericum  perforatum) Photo by, Jolie Dollar, 
USDA NRCS.  
 
Ca uti on:  This plant may bec om e  i n vas i ve . 
 
Alternat i ve N a me s  
Common Alternate Names : 
Kla mathweed  
St. Johnswort  
Kla math weed  
goatweed  
perforate St. John’s -wo rt  
Tipton weed  
ro s in -ro s e  
 
Us e s  
Wildlife Us e: Co mmon  St. Johnswort provides a nectar 
source for pollinators and is we ll -suited for  use in 
pollinator  restoration habitat. Preliminary observation 
found that common St. Johnswort attracted 7 diffe rent 
s pecies  of Hymenoptera in  Cape May, Ne w  Jers ey. 
Bro wn -belted bumb le bee,  ( Bombus griseocollis ), 
common eastern bumble bee  ( Bombus impatiens), and 
s weat bee ( Lasioglossum tegulare ) were  most frequently 
observed visiting the flower. Fie ld observations suggest 
that pollinators exh ibit a  range of responses to this plant. 
There is not enough conclusive data to determine  if the 
plant is highly pre fe rred  o r  les s  p referred  a mo n g  
pollinators.  
  Erosion Control
: 
W it h  lateral root growth e xtending .4 –3 in  ( 1 –8 c m)  
below the surfa ce, and taproots extending 2 –5 f t d eep ,  St. 
Johnswort could  make a  good erosion control plant. 
However, the benefits of erosion  control should be 
weighed against the plant’s overall aggressive, invasive 
characteris tics .   
 
S tatus  
Pleas e cons ult the PLANTS Web s ite and your State 
Depart ment of Natura l  Resources for thi s plant’s current 
s tatus  (e.g .,  state noxious status, and wetland  indicator 
values ).  
 
Wee dines s  
St. Johnswort is an introduced species that is considered a 
noxious weed in 7 states in the U.S. Although the plant 
invades disturbed areas it does not easily invade natural 
areas. It tends to form dense colonies that crowd -o ut 
native plants.  Please consult with your loca l NRCS Fie ld 
Office,  Cooperative Extens ion Service office, s tate natural 
res ource, or s tate agriculture department regarding  its  
s tatus  and us e. Weed information is  als o available fro m 
the PLANTS Web s ite at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Pleas e 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile  for this 
species for further information.  
 
Des cripti on  an d A da pta tio n  
Description : Co mmon St. Johnswort is an erect,  mu lt i -
s temmed, pe rennial forb that grows to 1 –3 f t. It has long 
slender “runners” or stems growing at the soil surface or 
just below the ground. It  als o has  aggress ive rhizo mes .  St. 
Johnswort is part  of the fa mily Hypericaceae wh ich 
includes  trees , s h rubs , and herbs with resinous sap.  
 
T he numerous flowe rs (roughly 25 –1 0 0 p er s t e m) a re 
symmetrica l a round a central point, determinate,  in  f la t -
top clusters. The short -s talked flo wers  are about 1  in  
across, with five yellow to bright yellow -o ran g e flo wers . 
The  petals are peppered with black dots around the edges.   
 
Stems are  often reddish and woody at the base. There  may 
be several stems (up to 30) fro m the base of the plant. St. 
Johnswort has a tap root and v ertical roots e xtending to 5 
f t.   
 
The 1 –2 in long,  s t a lk-les s  leaves  are oblong or linear, 
opposite, round -tipped, and roughly ¼  in  wide. The pale 
green or yello w -green  leaves  have s cattered trans lucent 
dots that make the lea f  look perforated when held up to 
the light. The species name for this plant, perf oratum, 
denotes  this  characteris tic.

The s ticky s eed pod is  a 3-s ectioned capsule that turns  
deep reddish brown as it matures. The sma ll  (1  mm) ,  
round, darkly co lored seeds have a resinous smell like 
turpe ntine.  
 
Commo n S t.  Johnswort  (Hypericum  perforat um) distribution from 
U S DA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
Adaptation: St . Johnswort is perhaps most commonly 
found in grasslands, pastures, meadows, and rangelands. 
But it a lso occurs in forested areas that have been 
disturbed by fire ,  logging, or road constructio n. Common 
St. Johnswort prefers we ll -drained, coars e -te xtured soils 
and does not grow we ll under wet conditions. St . 
Johnswort has been found to perform equally  well  in acid 
and  calcareous  s oils .  Fo r updated  distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile p age for this species on the 
PLANTS Web s ite.  
 
Es tablishment  
Co mmon St. Johnswort is an early -flo wing  forb (June or 
July) that requires full sun or part shade. It can be 
propagated by seed, division, or by softwood cuttings. It 
g ro ws  we l l  in   mo is t , we ll -d ra in e d  s o ils .   
 
Fi rs t -year seedlings do not produce flowers or seeds. 
Seedlings are sma ll and tend to grow slowly and are  
improved when inoculated with arbuscular  mycorrhiza l 
fungi. When favorable growing conditions are met, there 
may be a s udden increas e in  plant density and new sprouts 
will create dens e mats  around the bas e of parent plant. 
Interspecies competition will  restrict seedling survival. 
Poor s ite quality appears  to be associated with increas ed 
vegetative propagation.  
 
Manage ment  
Co mmon St. Johnsw ort does not exhibit  invasive 
tendencies in undisturbed areas, but in disturbed areas it is  much  more  dominant. St. Johnswort can be potentially 
invasive in prairie ,  mountain grassland, western 
hardwoods, maple
-beech -birch comp le x, oak -hic kory and 
oak -pine  co mple xes .  Repeated cultivation has been found 
to destroy the weed. Colonies can also be controlled by 
mo wing several t imes before  maturation. Additionally, a  
covering of grass litter  may be used to reduce germination 
and sho ot extension of St. Johnswort.  Vegetative 
propagation may be encouraged by grazing or fire.  
 
Pe s ts  an d P ote nti al  Pr o bl e ms  
Winter warming and summe r droughts increase 
herbivory. Insect herbivory has a strong negative effect on 
populations and when treated with insecticide, treated 
plots  have twice the s eedling s urvival rates  as  untreated 
plots. There is a high degree of phenotypic and genotypic 
variation between St.  Johnswort populations, and 
herbivore res is tance is  als o variable.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
 
Co mmon St. Johnswort has small b lack glands that 
contain the photodynamic pig ment hyperic in.  Hyperic ins 
are found in the flowers,  leaves, and buds of the plant. If 
digested by livestock, hypericin can cause 
photosensitizat ion, blisters, and lesions; especially  in 
lig h t -skinned anima ls. M ore severe symptoms inc lude 
loss of appetite, diarrhea, blindness, convulsions, coma 
and death.  
 
Co ntr ol  
Pleas e contact your local agricultura l e xtens ion s pecialis t 
or county weed specialist to learn  what works best in your 
area and how to us e it s afely. Always  read label and 
safety instruc tions for each control  method.  
 
Prepare d By : Christopher M. Sheahan . USDA-N RC S,  
Cape May Plant Materials   Center , Cape May, NJ. 
 
Ci ta ti o n : Sheahan, C.M.
 2012 .  Fact s heet  fo r  common St . 
Johnswort  (Hypericum perforatum ). US DA-N R CS,  Ca p e  
May Plant Materia ls  Center.  Cape May,  NJ .  08210. 
 
Published  July 2012 
 
Ed it e d : 
 
For  more  info rmation about this and other plants, please 
contact your local  NRCS  fie ld office or  Conservation 
Dis t ric t  <
http://ww w.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials  Progra m Web s ite <
h ttp://plant-
materia ls.nrcs.usda.gov> 
US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER