Plant Fact Sheet     
 
NEEDLE AND THREAD 
Heterostipa comata  (L.) Trin. 
& Rupr.) Barkworth ssp.  
comata  
Plant symbol = HECOC8  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
needle & thread grass, needleandthread,  Stipa comata 
 
Uses 
Needle and thread is grazed readily by all livestock, 
especially in early spring and late fall.  It cures well 
on the stem and provides good forage in fall and 
winter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poacae).  Needle and thread is a 
native, cool-season, perennial bunch grass.  It ranges 
in height from 1 to 4 feet.  It has narrow basal leaves 
with the blade usually rolled inward, 3 to 12 inches 
long.  Leaves along the stem are shorter and wider 
than the basal leaves.  The seedhead is an open 
panicle 5 to 10 inches long that is loosely spreading 
with 1-flowered spikelets.   Each seed is 3/8 inch 
long.  The lemma has a slender awn usually 4 to 5 
inches long, sometimes 9 inches.  Part of the awn  next to the seed is tightly twisted and covered with 
fine soft hair.  The awn tip is rough and usually 
straight. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Periodic grazing deferments of at least 90 days and 
proper grazing use allow this grass to make 
maximum production and keep it in balance with 
associated grasses.  To pr event seed from injuring 
sheep and contaminating wool, remove sheep for 2 to 
3 weeks until seed ripen and fall to the ground. 
© W.L Wagner Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov
 
Establishment 
It grows in the early spring and in the late fall if 
moisture is available.  It produces an abundance of 
basal leaves, which stay green during most seasons.  
It reproduces from seed an d is primarily adapted to 
sandy or gravelly loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.