Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAXIMILIAN SUNFLOWER  
Helianthus maximiliani 
Schrad. 
Plant Symbol = HEMA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Uses 
Helianthus may be used as an ingredient in range 
seeding mixtures to provide a high quality forage for 
livestock, and food and cover for wildlife.  The 
plant’s long flowering period and spreading habit, 
along with its tendency to form thickets or large 
colonies, make it ideal for  wildlife food and cover.  
Livestock, especially sheep  and goats, readily eat the 
forage. 
 
It may be used as a natural hedge or tall screen to 
block out harsh areas.  It also makes a colorful, 
attractive landscape plant. 
 
It has the potential of being an excellent filter strip 
plant due to its seemingly great ability to uptake and 
use excess water and nutrients. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Helianthus maximiliani , Maximilian sunflower, is a 
tall, warm season, spreading, perennial forb which is 
a member of the true sunflower family.  Large, 
showy, yellow blooms occur throughout the full 5-7 
feet height of the plant in  great abundance during late 
summer and fall.  During this period, the plant adds a 
brilliant splash of color and texture to range sites, 
natural areas, and landscapes. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
‘Aztec’ Maximilian sunflower is adapted to the 
southern 3/4 of Oklahoma and to all parts of Texas, 
except the Trans-Pecos region.  It is adapted to many 
soil types, from sands to clays.  It favors good 
internal drainage and sunny locations.  Excessive 
long-term wetness or salinity may pose problems 
with keeping stands. ‘Aztec’ will perform best in 
areas receiving 18 inch es or more annual 
precipitation. 
 
‘Prairie Gold’ is adapted to 14-inch and greater 
precipitation zones in Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, 
western Iowa, and Missouri. 
 © James. L. Reveal 
Smithsonian Institute 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin in the late summer 
or fall prior to a scheduled spring seeding.  This will 
greatly help reduce excessive weed growth.  
Maximilian sunflower benefits from having a clean 
weed-free seedbed. 
 
Establish with range seeding mixtures at a rate of 1/4 
to l/2 pounds of seed per acre.  If it is to be planted in 
strips or blocks, plant at a rate of 1 pound of seed per 
acre.  Seed should be placed from 3/8 to 1/2 inch 
deep.  In rows for hedges or  screens, plant seed 1/2 to 
1 inch apart and thin to 8 inches apart when plants are 
about 2 inches tall.  Allow about 3 feet to each side of 
planting to allow for plants to spread. 
 
Management  
Once established, it will require little maintenance in 
range seeding situations.   Be aware that overgrazing 
of a range site, in which it is included, will destroy 
the planting.

Wildlife plots, strips, or hedge plantings may benefit 
from light applications of fertilizer to sustain 
production of mature plants.  Removal of previous 
years growth will help initiate early spring growth 
from dormant below-ground buds. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Plants may be susceptible to root rot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Aztec’ Maximilian sunflower was released from the 
Knox City (TX) Plant Materials Center in 1978 as a 
composite of five county collections from different 
parts of Texas.  It was released to provide a widely 
adapted perennial forb for wildlife and livestock 
browse. 
 
‘Prairie Gold’ Maximilian sunflower (KS origin) was 
released in 1978 from  the Manhattan (KS) Plant 
Materials Center in cooperation with the University 
of Nebraska Horticulture Department.  This cultivar 
has good competitive ability and cold tolerance. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.