Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MEADOW BARLEY  
Hordeum brachyantherum 
Nevski 
Plant Symbol = HOBR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names 
There are two subspecies:  H. brachyantherum ssp. 
brachyantherum  and ssp. californicum , the latter 
referred to as California barley.  Another name is 
little barley.  This species can hybridize with certain 
Hordeum  and Elymus  (wildrye) species.  
 
Uses 
Because of its high seedling vigor, wide soil 
tolerances, and rapid development, meadow barley is 
often used as a quick cover for soil stabilization on 
wet, dry, and saline sites.  It is sometimes used for 
forage where locally abundant, but resource value 
may be rated low to moderate for livestock.  The 
value for deer is considered high in spring.  
Palatability for ungulates is moderately good early on  but poor at maturity.  Sown at lower rates to allow 
other species to establish, meadow barley is an 
important component of freshwater wetland, tidal 
marsh, meadow, and riparian seed mixtures for 
restoration and revegetation.  In certain trials, 
meadow barley has shown higher potential to impede 
the progress of reed canarygrass compared to several 
other native wetland grasses.  It is regarded useful as 
a temporary nurse crop for longer lived species on 
dry, infertile sites.  The sp
ecies is occasionally used 
as a vineyard cover crop in California. Plants provide 
wildlife cover and the leaves and large seed may be 
of some value to small mammals and waterfowl. 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Meadow barley is a native, short to medium lived, 
cool season, perennial bunchgrass.  This species 
occurs primarily from Alas ka to California and east 
to the Rocky Mountains.  It can also be found 
sporadically in other states.
  Growth habit is an open 
tuft with erect to slightly spreading, smooth stalks 
(culms) that are 40 to 105 cm tall.  The flower head 
(panicle) is a narrow, flattened spike, 5 to 10 cm long 
with bristle-like awns and a brittle central axis 
(rachis) that breaks off in pieces from the top down at 
maturity.  Leaves are green  to bluish green, 2 to 9 
mm wide.  They may be primarily basal or extend up 
and down the stem.
 
 
Key to identification:  The flower heads are bristly 
and often purplish in color, becoming stubby at 
maturity which distinguishes it from timothy ( Phleum 
pretense ), meadow foxtail (Alopecuris pratensis ), or 
other grasses with narrow spikes.  It resembles 
common barley ( Hordeum vulgare ) which is an 
annual usually confined to cultivated areas.  Meadow 
barley is upright, while its closest relative, California 
barley, is shorter and more spreading. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Meadow barley is 
common to sporadic in moist meadows and clearings. 
It is most abundant in maritime environments.  Seed 
shatters (drops) readily requiring careful monitoring 
of maturity and multiple collections. 
 
Adaptation:  Meadow barley is moderately drought 
tolerant but best adapted to moist soils, including 
bottom lands, depressions, meadows, the edges of

streams and salt marshes, forest clearings, and ocean 
beaches from sea level to subalpine elevations.  It is 
tolerant to moderately alkaline and saline conditions, 
as well as low fertility, seasonally saturated soils, and 
intermittent flooding.  Soil texture can vary from 
coarse sand to clay. This species prefers full sun.  
This species can produce a seed crop the first year if 
sown in late fall or early spring.  This is among the 
more broadly adapted and easier to establish of all 
native grasses in the western US. 
 
Establishment 
There is usually 
no seed dormancy 
and meadow 
barley is easy to 
establish by 
sowing in the fall 
or early spring. 
The awns and 
nonviable florets 
(flower structures) 
attached to each 
spikelet should be 
removed to reduce 
bulk and allow for 
seed to flow 
through planting 
equipment.  The 
number of seeds 
per pound can 
vary widely, 
depending on the 
degree of seed 
conditioning.  
Bulky seed can range from 30,000 to 100,000 
seeds/lb, while highly processed seed will have 
approximately 150,000 seeds/lb (+/- 30%).  The latter 
will result in 3 to 4 seeds per square foot for each lb 
applied per acre.  Suggested seeding rates vary from 
8 to 40 lbs/ac when sown alone, depending on seed 
size, methods, site conditions, and purpose of 
planting.   
 
Management  
Meadow barley can be an increaser or decreaser 
under heavy grazing, depending on the palatability of 
other plants present.  Forage value is moderately 
good early on but poor at maturity. Livestock are 
likely to cause soil compaction on moist sites with 
fine textured soils where this species often thrives.  
Short-lived especially under drier conditions, 
regeneration may rely on a period of  deferred 
grazing during flowering and seed set every few 
years. The species is easily eliminated by close 
mowing early in the growing season.  It stays green  all summer if moisture is present and is capable of 
producing a second flush of seed heads later in 
summer.  Tolerance to pres
cribed burning is high.  
Specific management practices apply to cover crop 
use, particularly in vineyards. Under cultivation for 
seed, several harvests may be required to capture 
seed that matures unevenly and shatters easily. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Awns on the spikelets readily attach to hair and skin. 
Apparently they can harm certain animals by working 
into noses, mouths, or intestines. Others indicate little 
injury to livestock or deer that graze the foliage.  
Certain meadow barley popu lations are susceptible to 
fungal diseases, particularly head smut and leaf or 
stem rust.  Fungicides may be needed for control. 
Consult with your local Extension Service agent, 
plant disease control handbook, or other experts for 
advice.  The species has potential to be weedy under 
certain conditions and is listed as a weed in cotton. 
 Line drawing reprinted with 
permission, University of 
Washington Press 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Multiple sources of seed are readily available in 
California, as are several in Oregon. A limited 
number of seed sources from other regions are also 
available for use in certain western states.  
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 21mar2006 jsp, 16sept2008 dcd; 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.