Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CURLY-MESQUITE 
Hilaria belangeri (Steud.) 
Nash  
Plant Symbol = HIBE  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
curlymesquite, mesquite-grass, curlymesquite grass, 
common curly-mesquite, curly mesquite, common 
curleymesquite, curleymesquite 
 
Uses 
Curly-mesquite is grazed a ll year by horses, cattle, 
sheep, goats, antelope, and deer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Curly-mesquite is a native, 
warm-season stoloniferous perennial grass.  The 
height range is from 4 to 10  inches.  The leaf blade is 
flat, curly, and usually short.  The leaf sheath is 
shorter than the internodes and mostly basal.  The 
stem is erect and the plan t is stoloniferous.  The 
seedhead is a solitary spike usually 3/4 to 1 inches 
long. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Management 
For maximum production, this grass requires proper 
grazing use and periodic grazing deferments of 30  to 
40 days all year. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in late the spring and the seedheads 
will start emerging 30  to 40  days later.  It reproduces 
primarily from stolons.  Some stolons are aerial and 
produce leaves and no roots.  Others creep along the 
ground and produce both leaves and roots at the 
nodes, which usually have a ring of hairs.  It grows 
mostly in pure stands, but sometimes grows in 
clusters from auxiliary buds on the basal nodes.  It 
does not tolerate shade.  The plant is pale green and 
not a vigorous competitor.  It grows on a wide variety 
of soils, though it grows best on loams to clay loams 
that have a pH of 6.8 to 7.4. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.