Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
OCEANSPRAY 
Holodiscus discolor  (Pursh) 
Maxim.  
Plant Symbol = HODI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
      
 
 
Alternate Names:  Also known as Holodiscus 
boursieri  (Carr.) Rehd.,  Holodiscus microphyllus  
Rydb.,  Spiraea discolor  Pursh, Sericotheca discolor  
Rydb., and Schizonotus discolor  Raf. Additional 
common names include creambush, arrowwood, 
ironwood, hardhack, ro ck spiraea and mountain 
spray.
 
 
Uses:  This hardy species, tolerant of wide moisture 
regimes, soil types, and both sun and shade, is useful 
for low maintenance riparian plantings, reclamation 
of droughty and rocky or disturbed sites, and 
windbreaks. This broad adaptation and abundant mid-
summer flower clusters at the tips of arching 
branches make oceanspray a popular ornamental for 
highway and landscape plantings and an important 
host for beneficial insects. Palatability for livestock 
and wildlife is generally considered to be low but 
varies with climate and incidence of fire. It is  browsed by cattle, deer, elk, snowshoe hares and 
dusky-footed wood rats but not moose. As a common 
understory species, oceanspray provides cover for 
numerous birds and small mammals and also 
treefrogs. Seeds were eaten by Native Americans 
who also used the hard straight stems for arrow, spear 
and harpoon shafts, halibut hooks, digging sticks and 
sewing and knitting needles. Pioneers used the wood 
as pegs in place of nails. Medicinally, an infusion of 
dried seed was used to treat diarrhea and prevent 
contagious diseases. A poultice of oceanspray bark 
and leaves was applied to burns or sores. 
 
Legal Status: 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current stat us (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description:  Oceanspray is a moderately long-lived, 
moderately fast growing perennial shrub of the Rose 
family. It is native to western North America from 
British Columbia to southern California including 
areas of Montana, Colorado and Arizona.  Multiple 
arching stems achieve 6 to  20 feet with the taller 
specimens found in shade or  nearer the coast. The 
deciduous, alternate leaves  are oval to triangular with 
deep veins and shallow lobes plus very fine teeth. 
They are green above and dull green beneath due to 
fine hairs and turn reddish in fall. Drooping, 4 to 7+ 
in. clusters of very small creamy white, sometimes 
pinkish flowers turn to beige then brown and often 
persist through winter. Fruit develops in mid to late 
summer and consists of five  tiny, hairy, light yellow 
achenes (dry, one-seeded fr uit) per flower. The bark 
is red-grey and peels from older stems. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution:  Oceanspray performs 
well in shade or full sun and is adapted to course, 
medium and fine textured soils with pH 5.0 to 7.5. 
Ranging from sea level to 7000 ft., this species has 
moderate drought tolerance and low fertility 
requirements. Oceanspray is  abundant near the coast 
and common west of the  Cascades where it often 
dominates the forest shrub layer. Remnant stands 
occur among higher peaks of Great Basin mountain 
ranges. Oceanspray habitat varies considerably and 
includes streambanks, the understory of moist woods, 
cutover timberland and dry rocky soils and talus 
slopes. For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.

Pests and Potential Problems: The genus is largely 
free of insect pests and diseases although 
susceptibilities to fireblight (Erwinia amylovora), a 
fungal leaf spot ( Septogloeum sp.) and aphids have 
been reported. It is also  a host of the root parasite, 
pine broomrape ( Orobanche pinorum ). 
 
 From the Illustrated Flora of  British Columbia, © Province of 
British Columbia 
 
Establishment:  Oceanspray is typically propagated 
by seed requiring 15 to 18 weeks of cold moist 
storage (stratification) to  overcome dormancy. There 
are more than 5,000,000 seeds per pound. Seed 
viability is reported as less than 10%. Seedlings 
develop slowly. Oceanspray can also be propagated 
from softwood or hardwood cuttings or by layering. 
Success in rooting varies wi dely depending on clone 
and technique. Softwood cuttings taken in spring may 
be treated with a rooting hormone and grown under 
mist with bottom heat. Better results may be expected 
with fall or winter collected hardwood cuttings, also 
treated with rooting hormone. Autumn is the best 
time to transplant container stock. 
 
Management:  As a poor competitor, oceanspray 
benefits from weed control when young. The fibrous 
root system requires well drained soil at least 12 in.  deep.  Consider supplemental irrigation during 
establishment year or years with low rainfall. Cutting 
back mature stems will encourage vigorous growth 
suitable for cutting wood. 
 
Environmental Concerns:
 Oceanspray spreads 
slowly either by seed or by root sprouting although it 
will re-colonize rapidly following fire or other 
disturbance. It is non-toxic to humans and wildlife. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin): Oceanspray is available as seed, 
container stock or bare-root from west coast native 
plant nurseries.  It is a popular ornamental in parts of 
Europe where the cultivar ‘carneus’ may be 
available. A more compact growing related species, 
Holodiscus dumosus , native to the east side of the 
Cascade and Sierra Nevada mountains is sometimes 
called dwarf oceanspray.  The Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center has two selected class germplasms 
pending release for western Washington and Oregon.  
 
Prepared By:  Pete Gonzalves  and Dale Darris .  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon.  October 2007. 
 
Species Coordinator:  Pete Gonzalves .  USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Line Drawing Source Document:  Douglas, G.W., 
D.V. Meidinger, and J. Pojar (editors). 1999. 
Illustrated Flora of British Columbia. Volume 4: 
Dicotyledons (Orobanc haceae Through Rubiaceae). 
B.C. Ministry of Environment, Lands & Parks and 
B.C. Ministry of Forests. Victoria, British Columbia. 
 
Edited: 26Oct2007 PG; 080107 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.