Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NORTHERN 
SWEETGRASS 
Hierochloe hirta  (Schrank) 
Borbas ssp.  arctica (J. Presl) 
G. Weim.  
Plant Symbol = HIHIA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Cultural: The cultural uses of sweetgrass include 
ceremonial incense, perfume, hair wash, bedding, 
basketry, dermatological aid, cold remedy, cough 
medicine, eyewash, febrifuge, respiratory aid, 
analgesic, insecticide, vete rinary aid, decoration and 
adornment. 
 
Because of the sweet, van illa-like fragrance that 
develops once the plant has been harvested and 
begins to dry the use of sweetgrass as incense and 
fragrance is fairly ubiquitous among Native 
American tribes.  The longer leaves are often braided 
and burned for religious and peace ceremonies, to 
invoke good power, and for various other rituals of 
cultural significance.  In addition, sweetgrass has 
been utilized for several medicinal and cosmetic 
purposes.  Whether alone, as adornment and perfume, 
or soaked in water for tea and other solutions the 
therapeutic applications of sweetgrass are scattered 
throughout the tribes.  Another traditional use of this 
invoke good power, and for various other rituals of 
cultural significance.  In addition, sweetgrass has 
been utilized for several medicinal and cosmetic 
purposes.  Whether alone, as adornment and perfume, 
or soaked in water for tea and other solutions the 
therapeutic applications of sweetgrass are scattered 
throughout the tribes.  Another traditional use of this 
plant, particularly among the people of the Great 
Lakes and Northeast, is in  handicrafts.  Sweetgrass is 
often employed to craft or decorate baskets, bowls, 
trays and mats.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sweetgrass is a native perennial grass.  The culms are 
semi-erect, up to 30 inches tall and arise from 
slender, creeping rhizomes.  Leaves are few, rough-
edged and have shiny, hairless undersides.  Often it 
has a reddish-purple color near the base of the plant.  
The highly prized longer l eaves that grow on sterile 
shoots reach 18+ inches in  length. The inflorescence 
is an open, pyramid-shaped, golden brown panicle 
with slender branches.  Spikelets have 3 florets with 
awnless lemmas; glumes are thin, translucent and 
nearly equal in length.  The fruit is a caryopsis. 
Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing , Michigan 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sweetgrass is circumpolar, being native to both the 
western and eastern hemispheres.  In North America 
its extensive range traverses the northern regions 
from Alaska to Newfoundland, moving down to New 
England, across the Great  Lakes region and the upper 
Midwest to Oregon, and into the Southwest.  In the 
Great Lakes, Northeastern and Midwestern regions 
sweetgrass usually inhabits moist ground on shores 
(fresh or brackish), mea dows, low prairies, at the 
edges of woods, bogs and marshes.  Normally, it is 
not found in pure stands but among other grasses and 
shrubs in mid-successional communities. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.

Establishment 
Sweetgrass spreads vigorously by often-deep 
creeping rhizomes.  In the spring these rhizomes 
produce inconspicuous fruiting stems with sparse, 
short leaves.  Longer leaves develop later from 
separate sterile basal shoot s.  Although sweetgrass 
can reproduce by seed, it is mostly infertile, 
producing few seedheads th at contain few seeds.  
This species is extremely cold hardy.  It will go 
dormant in cold weather  and resprout once ground 
temperatures reach 40 
oF.  For the Great Lakes, 
Northeastern and Midwestern regions flowering 
begins in the spring. 
 
Sweetgrass development from seed is very slow.  
This coupled with the infertile nature of the species 
explains why plant division is the most successful 
method of reproducing sweetgrass.  Dividing a plant 
is accomplished by separating the individual 
propagules that have developed from the rhizomes of 
a spreading plant.  Each propagule can then be placed 
in a container for further separation or future 
planting.   Newly separated plants will do best if 
placed in the shade for 2–3  weeks while their roots 
establish.  After this, tran splant at 1-foot spacings 
into areas of partial shade to full sun.  
 
Management 
As sweetgrass is not drought tolerant, keep the soil 
moist but not saturated.  Fertilize with a balanced 
lawn-starter 2-3 times during the establishment year 
and years following harvests.  Organic fertilizers may 
also be used at 5 lbs. per 100 square feet.  Sweetgrass 
should be weeded at least every other year. 
 
 
Longer leaves of the sterile shoots may be harvested 
several times during the year, however, the mid-
season growth is considered  to be superior.  These  leaves are gathered by grasping the shoots firmly 
near the ground and pulling until they break from the 
rootstock an inch or two 
below the surface of the soil.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush, Agronomist, USDA NRCS Rose Lake 
Plant Materials Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
Rose Lake Plant Materials Center EastLansing,Michigan