Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CUCUMBERLEAF SUNFLOWER  
Helianthus debilis  Nutt. ssp. 
debilis 
Plant Symbol = HEDED  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
beach sunflower 
 
Uses 
Cucumberleaf sunflower is used for stabilizing the 
backdune area of coastal sand dunes, providing wind 
erosion protection, and beautifying beaches.  Its seed 
provides food for wildlife.  The plant acts as a 
perennial in southern Florida and as a reseeding 
annual throughout central Florida. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Cucumberleaf sunflowe r is a low-growing 
herbaceous perennial.  Leaves alternate along the 
stem and are deep green on both upper and lower 
surfaces.  Leaves are broad, wedge-like to heart-
shape, and approximately 2 to 3 inches long.  Flowers 
are a daisy-like composite, bright yellow, and about 
2¾ inches across; they  can appear from March 
through November.  The plant is broadly branched  along the short stems.  Many branches are decumbent 
or horizontal.  The plant 
spreads readily by above 
ground stolon-like runners. 
 
Adaptation 
While the species  Helianthus debilis  has a range from 
South Carolina to coastal Texas, the subspecies 
debilis  is native to Florida.  It is adapted to well-
drained, droughty, nutrient poor soils, such as those 
found on beaches, as well as on some disturbed sites, 
parks, and solid waste reclamation sites. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
It is best to work with vegetatively propagated plants.  
Although plants can be started from seed, there is no 
guarantee that the resulting plants will be true to type, 
since the various subspecies of  Helianthus debilis can 
cross-pollinate.  Generally no site preparation is 
required, and planting can be done December 1 
through February 1 in southern Florida, March 1 
through April 15 in northern Florida, or June 1 to 
August 1 during the rainy season throughout Florida.   
Brooksville Plant Materials Center Brooksville, Florida
 
Plant rootmass of transplants ½ to 1 inch below the 
prevailing soil surface in ro ws on a 12- to 30-inch 
spacing.  Offset plants in ro ws to deter wind erosion.  
Place 1/3 ounce of 14-14-14 slow release fertilizer in 
the hole with each plant or broadcast 100 to 150 lb of 
10-5-10 fertilizer per acre 2 to 3 weeks after planting.  
Adequate water is necessary for up to 6 months, to 
insure survival of the planting.  The plant should 
dictate by visible stress signs when water is needed. 
 
Management  
Broadcast 10-5-10 or equivalent at the rate of 150 to 
200 lb per acre annually in mid-summer. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Plants may get occasional leaf spotting (cause 
unidentified) that disappears on its own after about 
30 days.  Thick vegetation can decay underneath, 
most likely due to poor air circulation.  Insects do not 
appear to be a problem on cucumberleaf sunflower.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Flora Sun’ (Martin County, Florida) was released by 
the Brooksville, Florida Plant Materials Center in 
1991.  The cultivar was selected for its ease of 
establishment and propagation, low water 
requirement, foliage density, plant spread, and 
aesthetic value.  It is adapted for use on the east coast 
of Florida from St. Johns County south and on the 
Gulf coast of southern Texas.  It is not recommended 
for the west coast of Florida (in particular from 
Pinellas to Sarasota County) because of the potential 
for genetic mixing with other Helianthus debilis 
prominent in that area. 
 
Prepared By:  
Clarence Maura (retired), Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida 
 
Sam Sanders  (retired), USDA NRCS, Gainesville, 
Florida 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Clarence Maura (retired), Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.