Plant Fact Sheet
SMOOTH  OXEYE 
Heliopsis helianthoides (L.) Sweet 
Plant Symbol = HEHE5  
Contributed by: Colorado, Kansas and Maryland Plant 
Materials Programs 
Christine Taliga,  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials Program  
Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Early sunflower, Smooth 
sunflower, False sunflower, Oxeye  daisy, Oxeye, Oxeye 
sunflower,  Heliopsis sunflower, S unflower Heliopsis.  
 
Uses  
Forage :  Live stock and deer sometimes graze S mooth 
oxeye .   
 
Landscape :  Smooth oxeye is considered one of the best 
hardy plants for a wildflower garden border .   It performs 
well in dry (xeric) locations,  in  poor  to average soils , and 
in full sun to partial shade .  Flowering can be extend ed by 
removing spent flowers.   Staking may be necessary in 
shady locations.  
 
Pollinators :  The ground nesting bee,  Holcopasites 
heliopi s,  is a specialist pollinator  of  Heliopsis 
helianthoides .  The nectar of Heliopsis attracts butte rflies 
and other pollinators .  Birds utilize the seed as a food 
source, and stems  provide winter cover for beneficial 
insects.  
Status  
Please consu lt the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department  of Natural  Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Description 
 
Heliopsis from the Greek word helios for "sun" and opsis 
for "appearance."  Helianthoides  also from the Gr eek 
meaning "like Helianthus ,"  the sunflower.  
Smooth oxeye is a member of the sunflower family 
(Asteraceae). It is a vigorous, upright, native, perennial 
forb growing 3 ’ to 4’ in height.   
 
The leaves are oppositely attached to the stem 
consistently to the  top of the plant and have coarsely 
serrated margins. The toothed leaf blades are oval to 
triangular or lance -shaped.  
   
The stem is rough to the touch and may contain a single 
flower head or be branched at the apex into mul tiple 
stems with several yellow f lowers. The flowers of 
Heliopsis  have both orange -yellow center disk and yellow 
ray flowers.  Blooming occurs in summer beginning in 
July to August and extends for up to two months, making 
it one of the earliest blooming  sunflowers.  Heliopsis  
forms clumps 2’  to  4’ in diameter.  
 
 
Adaptation  
Its native range is widely distributed mainly east of the 
Rocky Mountains from Ontario to Florida and 
Mississippi.   Smooth ox eye is adapted to full sunlight and 
dry to moderately moist soil conditions. It c an be found 
growing in prairies, roadsides, and open  woods, edge of 
fields and thickets, and waste areas .  This species tolerates 
some drought and also a wide range of  soil types, 
including nutrient -poor soils.  It has
 proven to perform 
best  in areas rece iving >5” of rainfall.  Smooth oxeye is 
not  salinity -toleran t.
 
 
Smooth oxeye distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
  
R. Alan Shadow , USDA NRCS  Manhattan PMC  
Establishment 
Seed:  Heliopsis helianthoides establishes readily from 
seed when planted in the winter/fall or early in spring 
(March to April).   Germination generally starts four 
weeks after sowing if soil temperatures remain in the 60 –  
70  degree Fahrenheit range.  Seed s ripen  approximately 
one  month  after flowering, however as with many Asters, 
plants are self sterile. It may be necessary to crack open a 
few seeds to make sure they are viable.     
 
Cuttings and Divisions:   Five to seven node cuttings taken 
from the top 12 inches of growth in late spring root easily.  
Cuttings are sometimes reluctant to overwinter. Divide 
plants in the fall for best results.  
Management  
During the establishment period weeds should be mowed 
or spot treated with a herbicide.  Plants will produce 
viable seed the first year of establishment in mid to late 
August to September . Seeds readily shatter when mature.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
None known at this time.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no env ironmental concerns or probability of this 
plant becoming a weed problem in cultivated agricultural 
systems or pasture lands. Rock (1981) however, indicates  that 
Heliopsis  may spread widely and has the tendency to 
become weedy in landscape settings.   
Culti vars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
‘Midas’  was released by the  Manhattan, Kansas Plant 
Materials Center (PMC) in 1984.  It is recommended  for 
the more western extent of the native range of this 
species.  
 
Northern, central and southern Iowa source identified 
materials were released in the mid and late 1990’s  by the 
Elsberry, M issouri  P lant Materials Center.  
Prepared by:  
Christine Taliga ; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA 
NRCS , Denver, Colorado.   
 
Richard L. Wynia; Plant Center Manager , USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant  Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas . 
 
Shawn  V. Belt; Horticulturist, USDA NRCS, Norman A. 
Berg National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, 
Maryland.  
 
 
Citation  
Taliga, C.E., R.L. Wynia, S.V. Belt.  2012. Plant Fact 
Sheet for false sunflower ( Heliopsis helianthoides (L.)  
Sweet ). USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Denver State Office. Denver C O., 80225- 0426. 
Published September  2012 
Edited:   10Sep2012jld,   10Sep2012cga  
For more information a bout this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
   
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER