Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH OXEYE 
Heliopsis helianthoides (L.) 
Sweet var. scabra  (Dunal) 
Fern. 
Plant Symbol = HEHES  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Material Center 
 
 R. Alan Shadow USDA NRCS Manhattan PMC 
 
Alternate Names  
Smooth Oxeye, False Sunflower, Oxeye, Oxeye 
Daisy, Heliopsis Sunflower 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: It is reported th at American Indians 
made a tea from this plant as a cure for various lung 
ailments. 
 
Landscaping and Wildlife :  Smooth oxeye is a very 
hardy plant that produces many attractive, yellow 
flowers throughout the summer.  It does well in 
flower gardens, especially in drier areas, and is 
relatively maintenance free.  It also makes an 
attractive roadside plant.   Insects are attracted to its 
bright flowers during the summer, and birds are 
attracted to its seed in the fall. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Smooth Oxeye is a member of the daisy family, 
Asteraceae.  It is a vigorous, upright, native, 
perennial forb growing to .4-2 meters in height.  The 
stem is smooth while the leaves are coarsely serrated, 
having rough, siliceous-based  hairs on both surfaces.   
The stems may be topped with a single, yellow 
flower, or may branch in to multiple stems with many 
yellow flowers.  The flowers have 10 or more rays 
and are 3-7 cm in diameter .  Unlike sunflowers, each 
ray may form a fruit that yields a viable seed.  The 
seed is smooth and hard having four sides with fine 
hairs for wind distribution of seed.  It generally does 
not have a pappus.  Though it is a perennial, it is 
often short-lived. 
 
Distribution : This species is widely distributed across 
the eastern half of the United States, though it is most 
often found in the prairie regions of the central 
United States.  It prefers dry soil and open spaces, but 
will also tolerate moist areas.   It can often be found in 
disturbed areas. 
 
Establishment 
Smooth Oxeye can be established from seed.  
Planting should occur in the spring, between March 
and April.  Cold, damp stratification for 30 days at 4
o 
C is suggested to improve germination, but is 
reportedly not necessary.  The seed may be drilled on 
32-40 inch rows at 4.7 pounds per acre or broadcast 
at 5.2 pounds per acre.  The target rate is 45 PLS/ft 
when drilled and 15 PLS/ft
2 when broadcasted.    
 
Management 
Smooth Oxeye is a very hardy plant with relatively 
few problems.  This species has proven to perform 
best in the 11.8+ cm (4.6 inches +) precipitation zone 
and moderate levels of N, P, K are desirable.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Birds will feed on the seed of Smooth Oxeye in the 
fall.  This may be of concern to the commercial 
growers.    Plant size often inhibits cultivation after 8 
weeks when planted in rows.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Midas’ – (Kansas) was released in 1984.  It is 
adapted to the eastern half of Nebraska, Kansas, and 
Oklahoma extending into western Iowa, Missouri, 
and Arkansas.  This cultivar is tolerant of dry 
conditions, though adequate moisture is necessary for 
proper growth.  Midas is readily available through 
commercial sources. 
Central Iowa Germplasm  – (Iowa) was released in 
1996.  It is source – identified material that is 
especially adapted to central Iowa.  It is 
commercially available. 
Northern and Southern Iowa Germplasms  – 
(Iowa) were released in  1997, and are also source - 
identified materials that ar e especially adapted to 
those regions in Iowa.  They are also commercially 
available.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 Edited: 25jan06 jsp; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.