Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STIFF SUNFLOWER 
Helianthus pauciflorus  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = HEPA19  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
few-leaved sunflower 
 
Uses 
This wildflower can be used to add diversity in 
prairie restoration and range mixtures.  It also 
provides erosion control, quality forage, and wildlife 
benefits. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Stiff sunflower is a strongly rhizomatous, native, 
perennial forb which often forms dense colonies.  
Plant height varies from 1 to 5 feet.  The stiff, 
leathery leaves occur mostly at the base of the plant 
and have 3 prominent ribs; stems are stiff and rough.  
Blossoming occurs in late summer.  The 2½ inch 
wide flowers have yellow petals surrounding the 
brown to purplish centers.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Stiff sunflower is primarily native to the Midwest, 
from Michigan and Indiana to Montana and New 
Mexico; it occurs less frequently in the Northeast.   The plant grows on many different soils but usually is 
found on upland range sites with silty, shallow, thin 
soil.  This plant is readily eaten by livestock, so it is 
rarely found on lands which have been long 
overgrazed. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Stiff sunflower is not usually seeded as a single 
species but rather in a mix of other native species.  
On moist sites, it can be included with little bluestem, 
big bluestem, and switchgrass.  On drier sites, it can 
be mixed with blue grama, little bluestem, and 
western wheatgrass.  There are approximately 85,000 
seeds/lb.  As part of a mixture, a seeding rate of ¼ 
pure live seed (PLS) lb/ac will result in about one 
seed per every two square feet.  If a denser stand of 
stiff sunflower is desired for specific areas, seeding 
rates up to 1 PLS lb/ac may be used. 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center Bismarck, North Dakota
 
Stiff sunflower is a small, smooth seed that flows 
easily through most drills.  Generally, seed is mixed 
with other native species.  If seed settles to the 
bottom of the box, it should be added in frequent 
intervals rather than all at once.  The seed should be 
planted into a firm seedbed at a depth no greater than 
½ inch.  Seed of stiff sunflower has high dormancy.  
A majority of the seed planted in the spring may not 
germinate until the following spring.  Dormant 
seeding with winter stratification will enhance 
germination. 
 
Management
 
Stiff sunflower is persistent and long-lived with good 
management using key grass species as indicators. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Seed weevils and other insects may pose problems 
for seed production. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
On adapted sites, stiff su nflower may spread rapidly 
by rhizomes.  This species is not recommended in 
small garden or prairie landscape plantings unless 
spread is not a concern, or precautions are taken 
(edging, hand-rogueing, or herbicides).  Stiff 
sunflower is readily controlled by most broadleaf 
herbicides.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Bismarck Germplasm (North Dakota composite) stiff 
sunflower is a pre-varietal release of Helianthus 
pauciflorus  ssp. pauciflorus  from the Bismarck, 
North Dakota Plant Materials Center. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Mike Knudson , Assistant Manager/Forester, 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, North 
Dakota 
 
Dwight Tober , Plant Materials Specialist, USDA 
NRCS, Bismarck, North Dakota 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.