Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN INDIGO 
Indigofera miniata Ortega var. 
leptosepala  (Nutt. ex Torr. & 
Gray) B.L. Turner 
Plant Symbol = INMIL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
Alternate Names 
Coast indigo, scarlet pea and Texas indigo 
 
Uses 
Western indigo is used as a warm-season forage 
legume for livestock and deer forage in range seeding 
and pasture plantings.  It can be used as revegetation 
of surface-mined soils, wildlife food and cover, range 
and pasture improvement, and stabilization of 
critically eroding areas, and cover for sandy soils 
with high erosion hazards and minimum levels of 
saline or alkaline sites.  It is a host for about six 
species of butterflies and the Federal Highway 
Administration recommends it for roadside plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Legume Family (Fabaceae).  A native, warm-season 
legume, either sprawling or trailing with grayish-
green hairy perennial from woody taproot. Stems 
solitary or several, usually much branched, from 1-4  feet long.  Flowers are thre
e-quarters of an inch long 
with brick-red to dark rosy-red, and five petals with 
the upper petal erect.  Flow ers are 8-25 inches in 
terminal spike (raceme), from axils of leaves and 
spike longer than subtending leaf and with 7-10 
blooms per spike.  The leaves are alternate, short-
stalked with blades divided into five to nine leaflets, 
and rarely each leaflet to one-inch long.  With a deep 
root system, it is drought tolerant and normally 
prostrate to 50-inches long, and equipped with 
tendrils for climbing.  The mature seed pods range 
from one-two inches long, with a sharp point.  Pods 
have an average of 10 square seeds, which are 2 mm 
wide and 3 mm long. Seed pods are harvested with 
the combine and threshed with the hammer mill 
before cleaning.  There are approximately 97,000 
seeds per pound. 
 Clarence A. Rechenthin USDA NRCS Texas State Office 
 
Adaptation:  Western indigo is found in native 
grassland throughout much of central and east central 
Texas, where it is recognized  as one of the valuable 
native legumes.  It is apparently adapted to moist soil 
types, from sandy loam through clay loam.  It will 
compete with other plants and has a tendency to 
flatten out under grazing pressure.  Plants range from 
Kansas south to Texas, Florida, Mexico, and Cuba. 
 
Establishment 
Western indigo should be seeded as early in the 
spring as possible.  It can be planted in range and 
pasture mixtures, especially where a drought tolerant 
legume is needed.  Mechanical and acid scarification 
and soaking in hot water can enhance germination.  
Native grass drills equipped with coulters and legume 
box such, as Truax, Great Plains, or Tye are the best 
units for planting.  If a drill is not available or cannot 
be used due to undulating terrain, broadcasting the 
seed and after tracking the ground with a bulldozer is 
also an excellent planting method.   
 
Management  
Western indigo has few management needs, except to 
not overgraze so that it can produce seed for new 
plants to grow. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no cultivars of western indigo in 
the commercial production.

Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Rudy G. Esquivel, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Knox City, Texas 
 Edited: 23mar2006 jsp; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.