Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE FLAG 
Iris versicolor L.  
Plant Symbol = IRVE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
This species is primarily utilized for its brightly 
colored floral display.  The root mass of established 
colonies provides good shoreline protection.  
Although the seed is large an d kernel-like, there is no 
documentation of wildlife consumption; the root 
stock is fed upon by aquatic rodents.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Blueflag’s sword-like leaves emerge from thick 
horizontal root stock (corm) which are covered with 
fibrous roots.  This emergent will grow to heights of 
four feet in spreading clumps.  The individual leaves 
are somewhat shorter than the entire plant.  This 
species will radially grow less than 2 feet per year. 
 
From the nearly straight  flowering stems emerge 
large blue to violet-blue showy flowers.  They bloom  from May to July.  The three petaled flowers are 
often finely variegated with yellow, green, and white.  
The flower develops a three celled capsule which is 
about 1 1/2 inches long and 3/4 of an inch in 
diameter.  Within each cell, two rows of flattened 
round seeds form.  There ar
e an average of 18,000 
seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The native distribution of blue flag spans from 
Newfoundland to Manitoba, south to Florida and 
Arkansas.  It is typically encountered in marshes, 
swamps, wet meadows, along shorelines, and in 
forested wetlands.  It perf orms best on sites with 
unconsolidated soils high in organic content, in direct 
sunlight.  It will tolerate moderately brackish water, 
partial shade, and permanent inundation up to 6 
inches deep. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Like many wetland species, this perennial emergent 
can be effectively established using vegetative and 
seed techniques.  To propagate wild iris by vegetative  © Jim Stasz 
MD-National Capital Park &  Planning Commision 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
means, single corms or bulbs can be divided or cut 
from the parent root syst em.  These propagules are 
then potted or directly field planted before the end of 
July.  Plant along the water line.   
 
To field or nursery grow seedlings, the seeds should 
be stratified in moist peat moss for at least three 
months at 36 to 0 degrees Fahrenheit.  Naturally the 
seed will shatter from their pods in fall; wash on land 
at the soil/water interface and over winter at that 
location; then, germinate in spring.  Fall seeding can 
be considered, but is often met with less success than 
with nursery transplants.   
 
This plant is easily established and increased under 
nursery conditions.  With organic soils, minimal 
fertilization, and good water depth control, this 
perennial will thrive.   
 
Management  
Under proper hydric environment and soil organic 
levels, this flowering plant thrives without the 
addition of commercial fertilizers.  There are no 
known insects or diseases which negatively impact 
this species, but muskrats will eat the root.  Blueflag

is easily over-topped by aggressive rhizomotous 
emergents.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This wild iris has been utilized to develop certain 
ornamental bulbs that are commercially available.  
Seedlings or divisions of locally or regionally 
collected ecotypes are available from wetland plant 
nurseries.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.