Plant Fact Sheet
YAUPON 
Ilex vomitoria Aiton   
Plant Symbol = ILVO 
Contributed by: U SDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center   
 
Photo courtesy: USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center   
 Caution:   Ingestion of berries causes nausea and 
vomiting.  Yaupon is the only plant native to North 
America that contains caffeine.  
Alternate Names  
Yaupon holly, cassena, cassina, cassine, evergreen 
cassena, evergreen holly, Indian black drink, Christmas 
berry.   
Uses  
Ethnobotanical :  Native Americans in the s outheastern 
United States used this plant extensively.  They used the 
wood to build arrows , and roasted  leaves  and shoots to 
make a dark, tea like drink called “ black drink” .  This 
drink was used medicinally to induce vomiting and for 
ceremonies to purify the body.  It was also  used socially 
as a drink or offering to indicate friendly intentions to 
guest.  
 
Landscaping:  Yaupon makes an excellent hedge  plant .  It 
is an evergreen, and when trimmed correctly, produces a 
thick screen of vegetative material .  Individual specimens 
can be  readily trimmed into ornamental designs and 
shapes.  Yaupon is adapted to a wide array of soils and 
climate conditions.  It is disease free, moderately fast 
growing, and tolerates drought extremely well once 
established.   Female plants produce numerous , showy red berries in the fall as long as male
 plants  are available fo r 
pollination.    
 
Wildlife :  Many species of song and game birds utilize the 
berries in the fall.  Small mammals such as raccoons, 
skunks, foxes, and armadillos will also consume berries.  
Deer browse the foliage, but it is not considered preferred 
browse.  Yaupon is capable of formin g dense, monotypic, 
thickets, which provide excellent cover for a wide array of 
wildlife, especially in winter after most plants have 
dropped their leaves.                    
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Res ources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Yaupon is a native, perennial, evergreen shrub capable of 
reaching approximately 30 feet in height  under ideal 
conditions .  The bark is smooth , light grey with  lighter 
grey to nearly  white splotches .  The leaves are alternate 
and oval in shape.  They are dark green with a leathery 
appearance and a lighter colored underside.  The leaf 
margins have  a slight serration that easily distinguishes 
this species from the  similar looking, invasive,  non-
native , Chinese prive t,  Ligustrum sinense  Lour.  Chinese 
privet has come to occup y a similar niche in the 
environment  since it was introduced through the 
hort iculture and landscape industry  in the late 1800s.      
 
Yaupon  fruits are small berries with a beautiful, 
translucent, red color.  They form in dense clusters 
throughout the plant and remain attached through winter 
and into spring  making them an important  winter food 
source for a variety of bird  s pecies .  Each fruit contains 4 
hard,  oblong seeds or nutlets that have a striated 
appearance.           
Yaupon  can be found t hroughout the s outheastern United 
States, especially along the coastal plains , on soils with 
pH  between 4.5 and 7.0.   It is adapted to a wide variety of 
soils  textures , but typically prefers sandy sites.  It is shade 
tolerant and moderately tolerant to salinity  and salt spray .  
Fire and prescribed burns reduce its presence in the 
understory.