Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
WINTERBERRY  
Ilex verticillata (L.) Gray 
Plant Symbol = ILVE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Warning:  Although this shrub species is a good 
provider of wildlife food, its fruits are poisonous 
to humans. 
 
Uses 
The attractive bright red fruit of winterberry is eaten 
by small mammals and more than 48 species of birds.  
The leaves and stems of winterberry are not a 
preferred source of brow se, but moose, whitetail 
deer, cottontail rabbits, and snowshoe hare do utilize 
this plant.  The persistent bright red fruit of this shrub 
make it very popular for landscaping.  It is 
recommended for planting in shady moist areas, even 
though its growth and form are best under open 
grown conditions. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Winterberry is an erect moderate sized shrub, 
growing to heights of 5 to 15 feet tall.  The smooth 
bark of winterberry is gray to blackish, with knobby 
lenticels  The dense branches of this shrub grow in a 
zigzag pattern with an upri ght spreading crown.  The 
twigs are slender, with gray  to gray-brown color and 
small buds. 
 
The simple, smooth, obovate to oblong-ovate foliage 
is sharply double toothed, with medium fine texture.  
The deciduous leaves are  arranged alternately along 
the stems.  Each leaf is 1 1/2 to 4 inches long, with 
dark green summer color turning yellow in fall, then 
drop off by mid-October. 
 
Small, inconspicuous, axillary, greenish to yellowish-
white flowers bloom from April to July, after leaves 
have emerged. Like most others in the holly genus, 
winterberry is dioecious.   Three years after planting, 
pistillate flowers begin to emerge in small clusters 
plants and staminate flowers develop on male plants 
with up to twelve flowers in a cluster; only now can 
plant gender be determined. Scarlet red to orange, 
globular fruit mature by late summer, often 
remaining on the plant into mid-winter.  The berry-
like fruit is about 1/4 inch in diameter, occurring 
singlely or in pairs, each containing 3 to 5 small 
nutlets.  There are an average of 92,000 seeds per 
pound. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Winterberry is found throughout the eastern United 
States. For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Planting units of winterberry are propagated by seed, 
rooted stem divisions, and stem cuttings alike.  The 
germination is usually hindered by hard seed coats 
and embryo dormancy.  Utilizing proper after 
ripening and cold moist stratification procedures, 
germination can be stimulated.  Seed should be 
covered with at least 1/8 to 1/2 inch of soil on nursery 
beds.  Fall seedings should be mulched for winter 
protection. 
 
When seedlings are acquired , the sex of the plant is 
typically indeterminable, in contrast to those 
propagated vegetatively.  In late fall root suckers can 
be directly dug and transplanted, while actively

growing softwood cuttings are taken from late spring 
to mid-summer.  The cuttings are first placed under 
glass or plastic, but once roots form and begin to 
grow, they can be transplanted into containers or 
nursery beds for further development. 
 
Utilize standard tree and shrub planting procedures to 
plant bare rooted transplants, containerized, or balled 
and burlapped stock. 
 
Management 
It is important to plant both male and females within 
40 feet of one another for adequate pollination.  For 
wildlife plantings, it is advantageous to plant higher 
numbers of females.  Weed control by mowing or 
chemical application is necessary to keep competing 
vegetation from over-topping winterberries. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are a number of ornamental varieties, selected 
for berry and leaf color, available from commercial 
nurseries. Local and regionally collected materials 
are available from native plant nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.