Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MARSH ELDER 
Iva frutescens L. 
Plant Symbol = IVFR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New Jersey State 
Office & Cape May Plant Materials Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
High-tide bush 
 
Uses 
The marsh elder is normally associated with the mid 
to high marsh ecosystem, forming the last line of 
defense for shoreline erosion control.  More recently 
this species has become associated with the lower 
marsh system by colonizing the dredged material 
resulting from construction of ditches and ponds for 
mosquito control. 
 
Habitat: During extreme high tides, both small 
mammals and birds have been reported to use 
emergent vegetation as island of refuge.  The marsh 
elder would readily serve this purpose.  Marsh elder 
also provides suitable nesting habitats for various  species of birds, like the 
red-winged blackbird and 
the marsh wren. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Marsh elder is a perennial, deciduous shrub 
commonly growing between 3-8 feet high.  The 
succulent leaves are egg-sh aped to narrowly lance-
shaped and oppositely arra nged except for the upper 
reduced leaves.  The lower leaves grow 4-6 inches 
long and 1-2 inches wide.  Many greenish-white 
flower heads are arranged on terminal stems 
subtended by tiny green, leaf-like appendages.  It is 
often confused with groundsel ( Baccharis 
halimifolia ) which exhibits succulent, coarsely-
toothed leaves alternately arranged on the stem. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The marsh elder naturally grows in the mid to high 
salt marsh-estuarine area, back dunes, and on muddy 
sea shores from Massachusetts to Florida and Texas.  
Here it commonly occurs with groundsel tree to form 
the salt bush community.  These plants usually only 
occur at elevations where  their roots are not subject 
to prolonged water table flooding, such as the upland 
border of salt marshes.  However, there are 
occasional exceptions where  these associated plants 
are found at lower elevations associated with 
drainage ditches and canals.  
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS 1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Marsh elder is generally established as 1 to 2 year old 
containerized plants, however 1 year bare root 
seedlings have been transp lanted successfully in the 
spring.  Since this plant has the ability to root from a 
dormant, unrooted cutting it may have application in 
soil bioengineering systems for tidal shoreline 
stabilization.  
 
Management  
No specific management recommended.

Pests and Potential Problems 
None. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Plants are commercially available from specialized 
coastal and wetland plant nurseries.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators: 
Christopher Miller , PMS-Southern NE/Mid-Atlantic, 
USDA NRCS, Somerset, New Jersey 
 
William Skaradek , Mgr. 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May Court 
House, New Jersey 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.