Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN HOLLY 
Ilex opaca Ait. 
Plant Symbol = ILOP  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
The attractive evergreen foliage and bright red fruit 
of this small tree make it a very popular for 
landscaping.  The same attributes that allow this tree 
to be a desirable ornamental make it one of the most 
sought after greens for Christmas decoration.  The 
firm bright red berries are consumed by white-tail 
deer and 18 species of birds.  The dense foliage also 
provides cover and nesting habitat for various 
songbirds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
American holly normally grows to heights of 15 to 30 
feet tall, but records indicate mature heights of up to 
100 feet.  On the poor soils of coastal beaches, this 
holly may never exceed shrub size.  The bark of it is 
smooth, and grayish to grayish-brown.  The dense 
branches of this holly grow nearly horizontal in a 
spreading crown, which takes on a pyramidal 
silhouette. 
 
The evergreen foliage is stif f and leathery in texture, 
with large, remotely spined teeth.  The leaves are 
arranged alternately.  They are 2 to 4 inches long, 
satin green and smooth abov e, and yellowish-green 
below. 
 
Small, axillary, greenish-white flowers bloom from 
April to June. Like most others in the holly genus, 
American holly is dioecious.  Pistillate flowers 
emerge in small clusters from one plant, while 
staminate flower clusters develop on another.  Newly 
established plants will not flower for 4 to 7 years; 
prior to flowering there is  no practical means of 
determining the gender of a plant.  Bright red, rarely 
orange or yellow, globular fruit mature from 
September to October, but may be retained on the 
plant into the following spring.  The berry-like fruit is 
about 1/3 inch in diameter, and contains 4 to 9 small 
nutlets.  There are an average of 28,430 seeds per 
pound. 
 © William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS Adaptation and Distribution 
American holly grows from Massachusetts to Florida, 
west to Texas and Missouri, and is adapted to a wide 
range of site conditions.  It grows best on well 
drained, sandy soils, but will tolerate those which are 
somewhat poorly drained.  This small tree has good 
shade tolerance, but does well in direct sun.  
Although this species is often found growing on 
coastal sand dunes, it is not very salt spray tolerant. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Utilize standard tree and shrub planting procedures to 
establish containerized or balled and burlapped 
plants.  Bare rooted transplants usually have marginal 
success.   
 
When establishing American holly, it is important to 
plant males as well as females if berry production is 
desired.  In a nursery situation the gender ratio should 
be 1:10, males to females.  Establish American holly 
only where surrounding vegetation or physical 
barriers protect the plants from harsh winds.  Holly 
plants prefer partial shade, with some full sun 
exposure during the day.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are many ornamental varieties, available from 
commercial nurseries, selected for berry and leaf 
color.  There are also commercial sources of locally 
and regionally collected material available from 
native plant nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.