Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LITTLE WALNUT  
Juglans microcarpa Berl. 
Plant symbol = JUMI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
Alternate Names 
Texas walnut, Texas black walnut, dwarf walnut, 
river walnut, nogal, nogalillo, nogalito 
 
Uses 
The wood of little walnut is dark brown, hard and 
heavy, but not strong.  The sapwood of little walnut 
is a lighter reddish gray to white color.  Little walnut 
wood is sometimes used to make cabinets, furniture, 
paneling, and veneer, but its lack of abundance limits 
its use.  The nuts produced by this tree are consumed 
by wildlife and considered a  valuable food source for 
many small mammals.  In Texas, little walnut 
rootstock is used to establish non-native walnut 
types.  Little walnut shows promise as a small tree for 
use in windbreaks and shelterbelts. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Walnut Family (Juglandaceae).  Little walnut is 
considered a small to medium tree growing to a 
height of 20 to 30 feet.  Plants may have a single or 
multiple trunk with spreading low branches.  The 
bark is gray to dark brown becoming deeply fissured  
with age.  Little walnut has a long taproot allowing  the plant to reach moisture from shallow water tables.  
Alternate, odd-pinnately co
mpound leaves are 9 to 12 
inches long.  The 11 to 25  narrow leaflets are serrate 
with small teeth.  The leav es are dark yellow to green 
with a dull surface and the lo wer surface is somewhat 
paler. 
 
Little walnut is monoecious with slender staminate 
catkins developing on previous year’s wood.  
Yellow-green pistillate flowers are borne singly or in 
clusters on the current year 's growth.  The fruit or 
nuts are 0.5 to 0.8 inch in diameter, hard, dark brown 
and covered by a thick fibrous husk.  The nut of little 
walnut is the smallest of all walnuts ( Juglans spp.).  
 M.J. Houck USDA NRCS Knox City PMC 
 
Little walnut is a native and grows from southwestern 
Kansas through Oklahoma and Texas, south into 
northeastern Mexico.  Little walnut would commonly 
be located within the narrow riparian forests 
adjoining a river or creek bottom. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by seed is the recommended way to 
produce little walnut seedlings.  Like most walnut 
species, the seeds are characterized by a dormant 
embryo.  Seed dormancy can be broken by artificial 
stratification at 34 to 41degrees F (1-5 degrees C) for 
90 to 120 days.  Stratified seeds will normally 
germinate within 4 to 5 weeks.  Seeds may be 
naturally stratified by planting in the fall in moist, 
well-drained, deep soil, then allowing at least 90 days 
with soil temperatures below 41 degrees. 
 
Management  
Little walnut trees will first bear seed at 
approximately 15 years of age with abundant seed 
crops being produced at irregular intervals.  Once 
seedlings are established, young plants generally 
grow rapidly.  Small seedlings will need to be 
protected from browsing animals. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The walnut husk fly may infest ripening fruit of little 
walnut in late summer.  Damage by this insect varies, 
but generally tends to be less in exposed windy areas.  
Little walnut is highly susceptible to root or crown 
rot when periodically flooded. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no known cultivars  of little walnut at this 
time.  The species can be  obtained commercially

from some state forestry associations and seed 
companies. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Morris J Houck , USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Knox City, Texas 
 Edited: 23mar2006 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.