Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHORE JUNIPER 
Juniperus conferta Parl. 
Plant Symbol = JUCO12  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Shore juniper is an ornamental, low growing shrub 
from Japan that has good salt tolerance. It is 
especially adapted for use on back dune seashore 
landscapes. When planted on banks and terraces, the 
dense vegetative mats provide good soil erosion 
protection. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Shore juniper consists of upright layered stems, 
growing to one foot tall, that emerge from low 
growing runner-like stems.  Where these stems 
contact soil adventitious roots will form.  Vegetative 
mats typically form due to this layering process.  The 
evergreen needles have a greenish-blue color, with a 
waxy coating.  The current year’s growth will be 
terminally located, succulen t, and a lighter tone of 
green.  The needles are 1/2 to 1 inch in length and 
soft.  Good color is maintained through winter. 
 
Aromatic, round, blue-green fruit are produced 
annually.  These fruits are produced on second year 
growth, and are about 1/2 inch in diameter.  Shore  juniper shows no signs of weediness from natural 
establishment. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Shore juniper will grow well under a wide range of 
site conditions, from loams to very sandy soils.  It 
performs best under full sunlight, allowing it to 
perform well under seashore conditions.  Sand dune 
and critical area plantings benefit from partial wind 
protection and the addition of some top soil in the 
planting hole.   
 
Shore juniper is sometimes girdled by mice where 
snow covers are of long duration.  Thus it may best 
be used on coastal areas from New Jersey south even 
though hardy to the north. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
Establishment 
Due to the poor production of desirable seed, shore 
juniper is propagated vegetatively.  Cuttings of this 
juniper are harvested during the dormant season. The 
use of a rooting hormone increases the success 
establishing cuttings of shore juniper.  Prior to field 
planting, rooted cuttings should be transplanted into 
containers. When plants have developed adequate 
root systems, they can be ou
t planted.  As with most 
rooted cuttings special care must be taken not to 
damage the root system when transplanting.  To aid 
establishment of shore juniper on sandy sites, a 
gallon of peat moss should be added to each planting 
hole.  A small amount (100 to 300 lbs./ac./yr.) of a 
balanced fertilizer, applied w ithin the plants dripline, 
will also help this species get established.  Mulching 
with bark or wood chips will help conserve moisture 
and suppress weed invasion.  Do not use mulches that 
may attract rodents. 
 
On field sites plant 18 to 24 inches apart.  If fertility 
and weed control are adequate full ground cover can 
be expected within two years.  To establish nursery 
cutting blocks, in-row spacings can range from 2 to 4 
feet, with 4 to 8 feet row spacing desired. 
 
Management  
This section is under development.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are numerous cultivated varieties available 
from commercial nurseries, most of which have been 
developed for ornamental use.  There is only one 
variety commercially available which is 
recommended for use on coastal sand dunes in the 
northeast; this cultivar is ‘Emerald Sea’ (Japan).  The 
breeder’s block of ‘Emerald Sea’ shore juniper is 
maintained at the Cape May Plant Materials Center in 
Cape May Court House, NJ.  To acquire this plant 
check with local retail nurser ies, or your state’s Plant 
Material Specialist. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.