Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN 
REDCEDAR  
Juniperus virginiana   L. 
Plant Symbol = JUVI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Windbreaks: Plant eastern redcedar in the outer rows 
of multi-row plantings where it will  not be 
overtopped by taller trees.  It can be used in single-
row windbreaks when a dense, medium height barrier 
is desired. 
 
Wildlife : This species provides food and cover for 
numerous birds and mammals.  Winter food and 
protection is particularly important for pheasant, 
mule deer and whitetail deer. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: It is suitable for 
screen plantings.  Its year-long coloration and 
attractiveness to wildlife adds variety to recreational 
plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Juniperus virginiana  L., eastern redcedar, is a small 
evergreen tree, commonly 10 to  40 feet, of pyramidal 
shape becoming rounder in age.  Fruits pale-blue with 
whitish bloom, fleshy ‘berries’ (cones), 1/4 inch 
diameter, ripening the first season, seeds 1 to 2 in 
each cone, bony-coated; flow ers small, cone-like on 
end of short twigs, male and female borne on 
separate plants.  Leaves opposite, scalelike, covering 
older twigs closely in alternating pairs to 1/8 inch 
long, on new shoots awl shaped, sharp pointed and 
spreading, 1/4 inch long, dark green.  Stem single 
with upright or spreading branches, bark reddish-
brown, thin and shreddy, branchlets very slender; 
roots deep, widely spreading. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is native to eastern Nort h America, where it occurs 
strongly on limestone derived soils. and is cultivated 
in Wyoming and Colorado for shelterbelts and 
ornamental uses below 6,000 feet.  This species has a 
wide distribution and is found on many types of soil 
ranging from acid sands to those derived from 
limestone.  It does best on dry soils in full sunlight, 
and is winter hardy and tolerant of droughty and salty 
soils.  Like most junipers, it is very slow growing and 
is moderately long lived. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Eastern redcedar is distributed throughout the east , 
and lower and upper midwest.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedlings should be planted in a firm weed free bed 
at a spacing of 3 to 6 f eet.  Seedlings should be 
placed in a hole or furrow  large enough to contain the 
entire root system without bending. 
 
Management  
Weed and other competing vegetation must be 
controlled the first two years of establishment.  This 
plant will survive in moist, deep loam to sand at pH 
of 6.0 to 8.0, will tolerate alkaline and saline 
conditions.  This plant is invasive in poorly managed

or extensively grazed pastures and rangelands, 
especially those with neutral pH soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
It is relatively free of serious insect and disease 
problems. It is the alternate host for the cedar-apple 
rust disease which does very little harm to this 
species but causes serious damage to apples and other 
pome fruits. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Eastern redcedar seedlings are available from most 
commercial nurseries and government nurseries 
dealing with conservation species.  ‘Canaert’ and 
‘Taylor’ are two cultivars. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.