Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK WALNUT 
Juglans nigra L. 
Plant Symbol = JUNI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
Uses 
Traditionally the dark colored wood was used for gun 
stocks, fencing, airplane propellers, and cabinetry.  
Today the high valued wood is utilized for some of 
the finest quality furniture.  The large nuts produced 
by this tree are consumed  by wildlife and humans. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Black walnut usually matures in about 150 years.  An 
average site will produce mature black walnut trees 
which are 70 to 80 feet in height and attain diameters 
of 2 to 4 feet when grown in a forest stand.  On the 
best sites this tree may reach up to 150 feet tall and 
over 8 feet in diameter.  Wh en grown at low stocking 
or in open fields, black walnut produces a short, wide 
spreading crown. 
 
A deep, wide spreading root system supports this 
large tree.  Mature trees ha ve a deeply furrowed gray-
brown to nearly black bark.  The brown to orange- brown twigs are stout, with large, shield shaped, 
conspicuous leaf scars.  The deciduous leaves are 1 to 
2 feet long, alternate, and compound.  The 15 to 23 
leaflets are stemless, unequally rounded, and wider at 
the base than at the pointed tips. 
 
Unisexual flowers emerge on black walnut from mid-
April to mid-June, appearing with the leaves on a 
separate inflorescence of th
e same tree.  A globular 
fruit is produced which contains a corrugated nut in 
its yellowish-green husk.  The nut is usually 1 1/2 to 
2 1/2 inches in diameter, containing an oil-rich, 
sweet, and edible seed.  The large fruit ripens 
between September and October.  Upon ripening the 
husk softens and turns dark brown to black. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS,  1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Found throughout the eastern U.S., black walnut 
thrives in deeper, well drained, neutral soils.  Black 
walnut is a shade intolerant species, and must have 
direct sunlight to grow optimally.  It requires about 
35 inches of annual precip itation, an annual average 
temperature of about 55 degrees F., with no less than 
170 growing days for optimum growth and 
development.  This species survives beyond its ideal 
site requirements as it approaches the limits of its 
native range.  Black walnut is found naturally 
growing from Vermont to Minnesota, south to 
Florida and Texas. 
 
When acquiring planting stock it is important to 
utilize local or regional sources, since climatic 
variation has been noted. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seed dormancy is broken  by natural over-winter 
freezing and thawing conditio ns or artificially with 
cool moist stratification. 
 
Natural : Shortly after leaves fall from the tree, the 
nuts fall.  This species is naturally distributed by 
various wildlife, as they store nuts in the soil for 
winter.  After the freezing  and thawing of winter, 
those nuts not consumed by wildlife will normally 
germinate the first or second spring.  On good sites, 
seedlings will grow 3 feet the first year and double 
that the second year.

Nursery: Propagating seedlings under nursery 
conditions is a viable choice, but precautions must be 
taken to protect against rodent predation.  Direct 
seeding onto raised beds or at a site will lead to 
productive results.  Seedlings should be distributed as 
1/0 bare-root or containerized stock.  On fertile 
nursery soils, black walnut should not require 
additional nutrients for adequate growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
European canker and walnut caterpillar are the only 
two pests documented to  attack black walnut. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Over 100 varieties of black walnut have been 
selected for their nut quality, but most commercially 
available seedlings are produced from local 
collections.  Specific varieties are typically 
propagated from grafts. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.