Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON RUSH 
Juncus effusus L. 
Plant Symbol = JUEF  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
Soft rush 
 
Uses 
The dense stands that soft rush form have deep 
fibrous root systems, which provide very good 
shoreline protection, filter suspended solids, up-take 
nutrients, and facilitate substrate oxidation. With its 
low pH and metal tolerances, soft rush often survives 
polluted conditions. The seed and vegetative parts of 
soft rush are utilized by waterfowl, muskrats, non-
game birds, moose and domestic livestock for food or 
cover. The stems of this grass-like plant have been 
traditionally used for making floor mats, and chair 
seats. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Juncus  effusus  is a slow spreading, clump forming, 
grass-like perennial which emerges from a stout 
branching rootstock.  The short, finely divided 
rhizomes are 6 to 10 inches long, growing from 1/4 to 
2 inches beneath the soil surface.  The culms are 
smooth, erect, bright green and hollow, with reduced 
basal leaves.  New shoots emerge and develop in late 
summer, reaching up to 4 f eet tall at maturity the 
following spring.   
 
The flowers are inconspicuous in compact clusters    
to 4 inches long.  The flowers emerge and mature 
from March to September, peaking in July.  
Pollination typically occurs by wind, but occasionally 
it is by insects.  A three celled obovoid capsule 
develops after fertilization, which contains many 
small (.02 to .025 inch long) straw colored seeds.  
There are an estimated 18,000,000 seeds per pound.  
Due to the small size and tacky outer coating, the 
seed of  Juncus effusus  can be disseminated by wind, 
water or animals.  After shatter, seeds may remain 
viable for greater than 60 years if over-topped with 
sediments. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS Soft rush is naturally found throughout the temperate 
and sub-tropical areas of North America, Europe, and 
Asia, with the exception of the arid and high altitude 
regions.  It inhabits fresh to brackish marshes, 
swamps, ditches, and moist seasonal wetlands and 
meadows.  Soft rush is tolerant of diverse site 
conditions, but thrives in direct sun, finely textured 
soils, salinity less than 14ppt., pH from 4.0 to 6.0, 
and shallow water (less than 6 inches). 
 
Common rush is distributed throughout most of the 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Juncus  effusus  can be easily grown from seed or 
vegetative divisions, but seed dispersal is the primary 
means of natural reproduction.  For germination to 
occur seed must be in contact with moist soil, receive 
direct sunlight, and over-wi nter on the soil surface.  
As long as moist conditions can be sustained and 
early competition reduced, seedlings will develop the 
following spring.

Nursery and greenhouse production are effectively 
accomplished with seed or vegetative divisions.  
High seedling emergence can be expected under the 
controlled environment of the greenhouse.  Moist 
stratification improves germination of soft rush.  
Stem divisions (bare root and containerized) are 
reliable when planted on adequate sites before mid-
June. Greenhouse produced containerized stock can 
be ready for field planting 6 weeks after 
transplanting.  Two year old clumps of soft rush will 
yield an average of 80 planting units.  A planting unit 
should contain 3 to 5 culms.  They can be planted by 
hand or mechanically. 
 
Management  
Soils with low content of organics or fines will have 
good production if 300 to 500 lbs per acre per year of 
10-10-10 commercial fertilizer is applied.  Annual 
draw down periods must be scheduled to maintain 
vegetative parts and encourage seedling 
establishment of soft rush. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Sumter Germplasm soft rush was released as source 
identified material by the Jimmy Carter Plant 
Materials Center (GA) in 2008. It can be used in 
small constructed wetlands, wetland restoration and 
riparian buffers.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp; 080122 mo & jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.