Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROCKY MOUNTAIN JUNIPER  
Juniperus scopulorum  Sarg.  
Plant Symbol = JUSC2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Plant Rocky Mountain juniper in the 
outer rows of multi-row plantings where it will not be 
overtopped by taller trees.  It can be used in single-
row windbreaks when a dense, medium height barrier 
is desired. 
 
Wildlife : This species provides food and cover for 
numerous birds and mammals. Winter food and 
protection is particularly important for pheasant, 
mule deer, and whitetail deer. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: The year-long 
coloration and attractiveness to wildlife makes this 
species useful for recreational plantings.  It tends to 
stay green all winter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Juniperus scopulorum  Sarg., Rocky Mountain 
juniper, is a small evergr een tree to 35 feet, often  with an irregular crown.  A native of western North 
America, it occurs in mixed or pure stands of open 
scrub woodland over Wyoming and Colorado at 
elevations of 5,000 to 7,500 feet, often on dry, rocky 
ridges.  It does well in cultivation, adapted to a wide 
range of soils and moisture conditions, and is winter 
hardy, slow growing and very long lived. 
 
Fruits blue with whitish bloom, fleshy “berries” 
(cones), 1/4 inch in diameter, ripening the second 
season, seeds 1 to 2 inches each cone, bony-coated; 
flowers small, cone-like, borne separately on male 
and female plants; leaves opposite, scalelike, 
covering older twigs closely in alternating pairs to ¼ 
inch long, pale to dark green, on new shoots awl 
shaped, sharp pointed and spreading; stems short, 
often dividing near ground, branches thick and 
ascending, bark red to gray-brown, furrowed, thin 
and shreddy, branchlets very slender; roots deep, 
widely spreading. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Below 7,500 elevation; water relations 10 
precipitation equivalent; tolerant of droughty and 
moist, well-drained sites. USDA NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center 
Bridger, MT 
 
Rocky mountain juniper is distributed throughout the 
West.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedling should be planted in a firm weed free bed at 
a spacing of 3 to 6 feet.  Seedling should placed in a 
hole or furrow large enough to contain the entire root 
system without bending. 
 
Management
 
Care should be taken to protect young seedlings from 
feeding damage by small rodents, rabbits, and deer.  
Weeds and other competing vegetation must be 
controlled during the first and second years of 
establishment. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Rocky Mountain juniper is relatively free of serious 
insect and disease problems.  It is the alternate host 
for the cedar-apple rust disease which does very little 
harm to this species, but causes serious damage to 
apples and other pome fruits.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Bridger-Select (Northern Great Plains composite) 
was developed as a selected pre-varietal release.  
Seedlings of Rocky Mountain juniper are available 
from most commercial nurseries in the Rocky 
Mountain area. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060801 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.