Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK  
NEEDLERUSH 
Juncus roemerianus Scheele. 
Plant Symbol = JURO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
Black needlerush, black grass, Roemer’s rush. 
 
Uses 
Dense stands of black needlerush form deep fibrous 
root systems, which provide very good shoreline 
protection, filter suspended solids, uptake nutrients, 
and facilitate substrate oxidation. With its range of 
salinity tolerances, black needlerush is used in tidal 
estuary restoration along the  Atlantic and Gulf coasts. 
Seed and vegetative parts of black needlerush are 
utilized by waterfowl, muskrats and non-game birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Juncus  roemerianus  is a moderate growing, bunch 
forming, grass-like perennial. The plant is course and 
rigid, 0.5-1.5 m tall.  The leaves are terete, stiff and 
pungent.  The inflorescence is lateral with an 
involucral bract that is terete and erect.  The perianth 
is usually brownish, 3-3.5 mm long with sepals 
longer and is more pointed than petals.  Seeds are 
dark and .0.6 mm long.  Black needlerush flowers 
from May to October; the seed matures from July to 
November. It is found growing in brackish marshes 
in dense zonal stands. 
 
Distribution and Adaptation 
Black needlerush is one of  the dominate species in 
the marshes on the southern Atlantic and Gulf coasts. 
It dominates 20.7% of the marsh in the south Atlantic 
states and 7.3% of Gulf coast marshes. But, it covers 
more marsh area on the Gulf coast than the Atlantic 
coast. Its distribution is continuous from Maryland to 
Florida and westward to southwestern Texas. Black 
needlerush occupies the edge of ditches and 
shorelines of bays, back bays and tributaries of tidal 
systems in coastal systems.  It is well adapted to fine 
and medium textured soils, has a high tolerance to 
anaerobic conditions, high tolerance to calcium 
carbonate (CaCO
3) and tolerates pH ranges from 4.0-
7.0 
 William B. Skaradek 
USDA NRCS Cape May 
Plant Materials Center 
It is usually restricted to coastal marshes and 
estuaries, but it may extend 10 to 15 miles inland 
along river estuaries. For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website.
 
Establishment 
In the wild, black needlerush establishes from seed, 
rhizomes or vegetative divisions from storm derived 
floatsum. Researchers have shown that black 
needlerush seeds from th e Mississippi Gulf coast 
require light for germination. This seed remains 
viable for one year and will germinate at a high 
percentage any time after maturity, and without a 
cold wet stratification.                                                                                
 
Nursery and greenhouse pr oduction are effectively 
accomplished with seed or vegetative divisions.  
Divisions should include several good roots, a node 
and three to five green stems.  Seed can also be 
stratified in saturated soil-less potting media with 
high percentage of fine organics.  Seed and media 
can be thoroughly moistened by placing the mix into

zip lock bags and stored at approximately 36°F. for 
60 days.  Materials can be direct seeded into 
greenhouse starter trays with  diurnal temperatures of 
80 °F days and 50 °F nights and 14 hour 
photoperiods.  Seedling emergence was limited and 
rate of growth slow.  
 
For greenhouse forced vegetative divisions use 
similar environmental photo-periods and diurnal 
temperatures listed above.  
 
Consult your local university extension service agent 
for pesticide recommendations.  
 
Management 
In the mid-Atlantic, several major nursery pests may 
present themselves and required IPM strategies.  
These pests can include pythium, brown patch, 
fungus gnats and algae.  This is based upon 
professional experiences at the NRCS Cape May 
Plant Material Center New Jersey and diagnosis of 
pests by Rutgers University Turf Grass Department 
staff. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
No improved varieties are known, but numerous 
wetland nurseries carry local or regional ecotypes. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
William Skaradek, USDA NRCS Cape May Plant 
Materials Center, Cape May Court House, New 
Jersey 
 
Reviewed and Edited By: 
James Henson, Robert Glennon and Joel Douglas  
USDA NRCS 
 Edited: 070326 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.