Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KOCHIA 
Kochia scoparia (L.) 
Plant Symbol = KOSC 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas 
 
  Figure 1. P. Allen Casey. 2009. USDA-NRCS. Kochia that exhibits red colored stems.  Found on a disturbed site along a gravel road. Riley County, Kansas 
 
Alternate Names 
Bassia scoparia; Bassia sieversiana; Kochia alata; 
Kochia trichophila; Kochia trichophylla; 
burningbush; Mexican fireweed; mock cypress; 
fireweed; mirabel; summer cypress; common kochia; 
Mexican summer-cypress; railroad weed; belvedere; 
firebush; poor man’s alfalfa; common red sage 
 
Caution: This plant is highly invasive. 
Caution: This plant can be toxic. 
 
Uses 
Kochia is used by wildlife for food and cover.  It can 
be hayed or grazed directly for livestock feed.  
Kochia can be planted for soil erosion control and 
bioremediation of some contaminated sites.  It is used 
in some Asian cultures for food and in some parts of 
Europe and Asia it is planted for making brooms.  
Kochia contains compounds that could be used in 
medicines. 
 
Status 
This plant is or can be noxious and/or invasive in 
some areas.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Kochia is an introduced, erect, annual forb.  The 
simple, alternately arranged leaves are linear to 
narrowly ovate to 2 inches (5.5 cm) long and can 
have hairs, depending on age.  Leaves are very short 
petioled or sessile.  Stems are green, red tinged, or 
red depending on age.  The flowers are green leaf-
like bracts. It has a spike.  Kochia has small fruits 
with an oval, brown to black seed.  Kochia varies 
widely in morphological characters partially due the 
environment where it is found. 
 
Kochia is native to central and eastern Europe and 
Asia.  Kochia can be found in a very wide range of 
temperatures and climatic regions throughout the 
world, but is particularly adapted to arid and semi-
arid regions.  Kochia is common in rangelands, 
pastures, fields, disturbed sites, gardens, roadsides, 
ditchbanks, and in soils with high salinity.  It can be 
found in areas with as little as 6 inches (15.24 cm) of 
annual rainfall.

Kochia distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Soil should be plowed or disked and weed free. 
Planting should be done late April to early May.  
Liming of the soil to a pH of 6.0 is recommended. 
Nitrogen should be applied before planting and 
topdressing the remainder later depending on the 
anticipated yield.  Planting can be done by drilling or 
broadcast planting by hand or by airplane. 
 
Management 
Kochia is palatable to all classes of livestock.  It can 
be toxic to livestock and may cause death if 
consumed in large quantities.  It is recommended that 
kochia forage should consist of not more than 50% of 
livestock ration.  Kochia stands can be grazed by 
livestock directly or it can be cut for hay or silage.  
Care should be taken to prevent poisoning. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Kochia may be host to various fungi, pathogens, and 
insects, some of which can be detrimental to crops 
like sugarbeet, potatoes, and tobacco. Grasses will 
out compete kochia.  Volunteer kochia is likely to be 
a problem in crops that are planted following kochia. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Kochia is highly invasive and is able to establish and 
persist in harsh environments where other plants are 
limited.  Kochia may be hard to control once it is 
established in an area.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Herbicides generally become less effective as the 
plant matures.  Some populations have shown 
resistance to 2, 4-D, triazine, auxinic herbicides, 
dicamba, and sufonylurea.  The herbicide 2, 4-D, 
itself, does not provide acceptable control regardless 
of formulation, dose, or timing of the application. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources as an ornamental.  These plant 
materials are not readily available from commercial 
sources for use as livestock forage. 
 
Prepared By  
P. Allen Casey, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Citation 
Casey, P.A. 2009. Plant Fact Sheet for kochia 
(Kochia scoparia). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Kansas Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, KS. 
 Edited: 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District <www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimination write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer." 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.