Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
LESPEDEZA  
Kummerowia striata  (Thunb.) 
Schindl.  
Plant Symbol = KUST2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
Alternate Names 
Lespedeza striata (Thunb.) Hook. & Arn. 
 
Uses 
Annual lespedezas are gene rally used for wildlife 
food and cover, forage, cover or nurse crop, and as 
temporary cover for erosion control. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Common and Korean lespedezas ( Kummerowia 
stipulacea ) are introduced, annual, warm-season 
legumes.  Flowers and seeds are borne in the leaf 
axils at the tips of stems and branches in the Korean 
lespedeza and in the leaf axils all along the stem in 
common lespedeza.  Two types of flowers are 
produced. One is readily seen as purple-bluish and 
the other has no petals and is inconspicuous.  Korean 
lespedeza has a much broader leaflet and stipule than 
common, and growth is generally larger and coarser.  
Common lespedeza grows more prostrate.  The seed 
varies from the shiny black of Korean to the stippled 
seed of common.  There are approximately 343,000 
seeds per pound of comm on lespedeza and 240,000 
seeds per pound of Korean lespedeza. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Korean is better adapted than common lespedeza in 
the North because of its shor ter life cycle.  Both types 
grow in a pH range of 4.5-7.0, but do best at 6.0-6.5. 
Common lespedeza (cultivar ‘K obe’) is more tolerant 
of acid soils.  They both grow in soil textures ranging 
from sands to clays and at fertility levels from low to 
high. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991.  Southern Wetland Flora  
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Common lespedeza is distributed throug hout the east 
and southern Midwest.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seeding should be done in the early spring at a rate of 
25 to 40 lb/acre in a well prepared seedbed.  Seeding 
may be accomplished by drilling or broadcasting.  If 
drilling, the seed should be placed at a depth of ½ 
inch.  When broadcasting the seed, incorporate 
lightly by raking and then  pack the soil surface.  As 
with all legumes, the co rrect species rhizobial 
bacteria innoculant shou ld be used.  Annual 
Lespedeza may be seeded alone or preferably mixed 
with grain, grass, or other legumes.  Soil fertility 
should be adjusted according to soil test 
recommendations.  
 
Management  
Annual lespedezas should  be grazed or cut for hay 
when in ½ bloom stage.   All harvesting methods 
should leave a 3-inch stu bble.  Lespedezas are good 
companions with bun ch-type grasses such as timothy, 
orchardgrass, and tall fescue.  Sod-forming grasses 
such as Kentucky bluegrass provide too much

competition.  The advantage of using lespedeza with 
grasses is that the legume can provide much needed 
summer grazing when cool-season grasses are 
dramatically slower in biomass production.  
Lespedezas will reseed themselves but must be 
mechanically reseeded at some point to maintain 
adequate stands.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Annual lespedezas are relatively unaffected by insect 
pests and diseases. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Kobe’ is the one important variety of common 
lespedeza.  The three cultivars of Korean are 
‘Climax’, ‘Harbin’, and ‘Rowan’.  Seed is readily 
available from commerc ial seed dealers 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp  For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.