Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE JUNEGRASS
Koeleria macrantha   
(Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes 
Plant Symbol = KOMA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Oregon PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Other scientific names include  Aira cristata L., Aira 
macrantha  Ledeb., Koeleria mukdenensis  Domin, 
Koeleria cristata  (L.) Pers., Koeleria gracilis  Pers., 
Koeleria mukdenensis  Domin, Koeleria nitida Nutt., 
Koeleria yukonensis  and Koeleria pyrmidata  (Lam.) 
Beauv. Common names include Junegrass, mountain 
Junegrass, and crested hairgrass.  
 
Uses 
Prairie Junegrass is useful in seed mixes for 
restoration of native prairie, savanna, coastal scrub, 
chaparral and open forest habitats across much of 
North America. Good drought tolerance and fibrous  roots make it useful for revegetation and erosion 
control on mined lands, over septic systems, and on 
construction sites, burns and other disturbed areas. 
Active growth begins early in spring providing good 
forage for livestock, deer, antelope and elk. Declining 
palatability during seed formation rebounds in late 
summer where there is adequate moisture. Bighorn 
sheep and mountain goats graze this species from 
rocky soils at high elevation. It provides feed for 
upland game birds, small mammals, and numerous 
grasshoppers and leafhoppers. Prairie Junegrass may 
also be cultivated for forage or fodder and is used as 
a low input turfgrass (e.g. golf courses) and as an 
ornamental grass. Native Americans used the seeds to 
make flour for bread and mush. They also fashioned 
paint brushes and brooms from the leaves. 
 
Status 
Prairie Junegrass is considered endangered in Ohio 
and Kentucky and critically 
impaired in Louisiana.  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Prairie Junegrass is a highly variable, moderately 
long-lived, cool season perennial bunchgrass that 
grows 0.5 to 2 ft. tall. Clusters of narrow, markedly 
veined, light green to blui sh green leaves grow to 
about 7 in. tall. The leaves are flat to in-rolled with 
slightly rough edges and boat-shaped, pointed tips. 
Erect seedheads appear as dense, pale green to 
purplish spikes, tapered at both ends, and 2 to 5 in. 
long, that are often held well above the foliage. They 
fluff open somewhat during flowering. There are 2 to 
4 flowers per spikelet. 
 
Adaptation  
Prairie Junegrass is adapted to a wide variety of 
climates, soils and native plant communities. The 
North American distribution of this circumpolar 
species ranges from easte rn Alaska, down through 
California into Mexico, and east to Alabama, 
Delaware, and Ontario. For additional information on 
distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. Prairie Junegrass 
is most commonly found on rocky to sandy loam 
soils of low fertility but also occurs on clay bearing 
soils with adequate drainage. This plant prefers a soil 
pH of 6.0 to 8.0. A frequent component of both seral 
and climax plant communities from 4,000 to 12,000

ft., prairie Junegrass occasionally dominates northern 
plains mixed prairie. Depending upon seed source, it 
tolerates cold, heat, drought, fire and serpentine soils. 
It does not tolerate high soil salinity. 
 Line drawing courtesy of University of Washington Press 
 
Establishment 
Prairie Junegrass seed has little dormancy following 
cold storage through winter and is generally planted 
in spring. There are about 1.8 million seeds per 
pound (+/- 20%) although viability is often below 50 
percent. For seed production, 0.75 to 2 lb. PLS (pure 
live seed) per acre is drilled shallowly (for light 
exposure) in rows 24 to 36 in. apart, depending on 
available irrigation or rainfa ll. Narrower (12 in.) rows 
may be used where cultivation between rows is not 
required. At least 1 lb. per acre is used to seed pasture 
which may require 2 to 3 years for establishment 
prior to grazing. Application of fertilizer to wild 
ecotypes is usually not recommended. Selective 
herbicides are available for seed production fields or 
to aid in pasture or native habitat establishment.  
 
Management  
Prairie Junegrass flowers in April to June and seed 
matures in July or August depending upon location 
and climate. Once established, it will tolerate 
moderate grazing to 3 or 4 in., even during the fall 
months as long as moisture is available to stimulate 
re-growth. In park settings, this grass tolerates foot 
traffic better than many other native grasses. At least  partially due to its small stature, prairie Junegrass is 
very resistant to fire and will often increase in percent 
cover after a fire or other disturbance. In turf settings, 
this species tolerates repeated low mowing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Prairie Junegrass is often 
free of significant insect 
and disease problems but is  occasionally the target of 
striped flea beetles, rusts, leaf spots or blights.
 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Prairie Junegrass usually spre ads slowly if at all, and 
only by seed. However, it played an important role in 
prairie revegetation following severe drought and 
dust storms in the 1930s. It generally provides 5% or 
less of the herbaceous cover in natural settings. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials 
‘Barkoel’  prairie Junegrass is an improved cool-
season turfgrass cultivar developed from plants 
native to northern Europe. ‘Barkoel’ seed is available 
from Barenbrug USA, Tangent, OR. Two native 
germplasms selected for roadside planting, prairie 
restoration, and landscaping have been released from 
the Elsberry Plant Materials Center in Elsberry, IA. 
 
Prepared By 
Pete Gonzalves  and Dale Darris , USDA NRCS, 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Species Coordinator 
Daniel G. Ogle,  USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, 
Boise, Idaho  
 
Edited: 23apr08pjg; 080915jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.