Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUE FLAX 
Linum perenne  L. 
Plant Symbol = LIPE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
   Mark Skinner   USDA NRCS NPDC 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland: The cultivar 'Appar' is noted to 
have fair forage value for livestock and wildlife 
during spring and winter.  It stays green throughout 
the growing season providing some forage value.  
Birds use the seed and capsules in fall and winter.  
All species of flax provide  diversity to the seeded 
plant community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : All species of flax are 
noted for their value in mixes for erosion control and 
beautification values. 
 
Wildlife : The leaves and seed of flaxes are considered 
desirable forages for deer, antelope, and birds.  Flax 
plants may also provide  some cover for selected 
small bird species.  They provide diversity to the 
plant community. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Linum perenne  is introduced from Eurasia.  In 
general, flax is an annual or short-lived, semi-
evergreen perennial forb, sometimes semi-woody at 
base with attractive flowers ranging from white to 
blue to yellow to red in color.  Flax is common to the 
western United States. 
 
Flax plants have many narrow, small, alternate 
(rarely opposite), simple and entire leaves that are 
sessile (lacking stalks) on the stems.  The generally 
showy flowers are borne in clusters.  The flower is 
five-parted, the fruit a capsule, and the seeds in most 
species are slimy when wet.  Cultivated flax is grown 
both for fiber (flax) and for seed oil (linseed). 
 
Adaptation 
Flaxes do best on well drained soils.  Most types do 
well on infertile, disturbed soils.  They have excellent 
cold winter and drought tolerance.  They will tolerate 
weakly saline to weakly acidic sites.  They are 
usually found in open areas, but will tolerate semi-
shaded conditions.  They are fire resistant because the 
leaves and stems stay green with relatively high 
moisture content during the fire season.  
 
Blue flax is distributed throughout the midwest to the 
northeastern portions of the United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Flax should be seeded with a drill or broadcast at a 
depth of 1/4 inch or less into a firm seedbed.  The 
ideal seeding depth is 1/8 inch.  Flax is not 
recommended for single species seedings.  The full 
seeding rate (not recommended) for this plant is 5 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 30 PLS per 
square foot.  When used as a component of a mix, 
adjust to percent of mix desired.  For mined lands and 
other harsh critical areas, doubling the seeding rate of 
the flax component of a mix is not required.  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
late fall to very early spring (because many mixes

contain cool season grasses) on heavy to medium 
textured soils and in late fall on medium to light 
textured soils.  Late summer (August-mid September) 
seeding is not recommended.  Dormant fall seedings 
(preferred seeding period for flax) will prechill seed 
and reduce seed dormancy which may be present.  
Mulching, irrigation, and weed control all benefit 
stand establishment.  Seedling vigor is good, but not 
as good as most grasses.  Germination normally 
occurs the first growing season, but may not occur 
until the second growing season.  Full flowering 
should not be expected until at least the second 
growing season. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because flaxes are broad-leaved, use 
of 2,4-D is not recommended.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage.  New stands may also be 
damaged by grasshoppers and other insects and 
pesticides may be needed. 
 
Management 
Growth of flax begins in early spring and flowers 
appear in mid May through early July depending on 
species.  Weed control and removal of very 
competitive species may improve flax establishment.  
Damage from wildlife and rodents may occur and 
these animals may need to be controlled. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Disease problems are minimal with flax. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Flax species establish and spread relatively quickly 
via seed distribution.  They are not considered 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions.  They coexist 
with other species and add biodiversity to those plant 
communities. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Appar' blue flax ( Linum perenne L.) is a selected 
release from seed originally collected in the Black 
Hills of South Dakota.  'Appar' was selected by the 
Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center for outstanding 
vigor, beauty, and competitiveness with grasses 
prevalent on sites where it was collected.  It was 
released in 1980 by  the Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, University of Idaho 
Agricultural Experiment Station, Utah Division of 
Wildlife Resources and the Forest Service Forest and 
Range Experiment Station.  'Appar' was released as a 
native flax ( Linum lewisii ), but was later determined  to be a naturalized species from Europe.  'Appar' was 
named in honor of A. Perry  
 
Plumber, Forest Service wh
o collected the original 
material.  'Appar' is a hardy, relatively short-lived, 
introduced perennial forb, 12 to 36 inches tall with 
deep blue flowers that bloom profusely for about six 
weeks beginning in mid May.  It is well adapted to 
sunny open slopes, well drained soils from 
moderately basic to weakly acidic, 10 to 18 inch 
rainfall areas, at 1,000 to 6,000 feet elevation.  It has 
some shade tolerance, but is not tolerant of poor 
drainage, flooding, or high water tables.  It does well 
seeded in mixtures with other species.  Its intended 
uses are erosion control, reclamation, highway right-
of-ways, homes, gardens, parks, diversity and 
beautification.  Certified seed is readily available 
through commercial sources  and breeder seed is 
maintained by the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center.  
Foundation and registered seed are available for each 
variety through the appropriate state Crop 
Improvement Association or commercial sources to 
grow certified seed. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.