Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GREEN 
SPRANGLETOP  
Leptochloa dubia (Kunth) 
Nees  
Plant Symbol = LEDU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
zacate gigante, green spangletop. 
 
Uses 
Green sprangletop is grazed readily by all livestock, 
especially when green and succulent.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Green sprangletop is a 
native, warm-season, short-lived, perennial bunch 
grass.  The height ranges from 1 to 3 feet.  The leaf 
blade is 6 to 18 inches long, usually flat, and 
sometimes folded.  The leaf sheaths are sometimes 
longer than the internodes, flattened, and often 
purplish.  The ligule is hairy.  The seedhead is a 
spreading, open, nodding panicle 4 to 12 inches long, 
consisting of 5 to 20 slender, well separated branches 
2 to 5 inches long.  Each spikelet is 5- to 8-flowered. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
During the dormant season, it furnishes good quality 
forage, but should be supplemented with a protein 
concentrate.  It is used in range seeding mixtures.  
When this grass is a key management species, no 
more than 50 percent of current growth by weight 
should be removed at any season.  Summer and fall 
grazing deferments of at least 90 days improve vigor, 
increase seed production,  and provide forage for 
winter use.  The seedhead turns pale and droops at 
maturity. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov
 
Establishment 
Growth starts about April.   If moisture is scarce, it 
may become semi-dormant in the summer and make 
new growth after the fall rains.  It becomes dormant 
in the late fall.  It may produce two seed crops, one in 
the spring and one in the fall.  It is best adapted to 
deep sandy soils in Florida and to rocky hills and 
canyons in the rest of its range.  It is seldom found on 
deep clay or deep sandy soils in the western part of 
its range. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.