Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHINESE 
LESPEDEZA  
Lespedeza cuneata  (Dum. 
Cours.) G. Don  
Plant Symbol = LECU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Caution: This plant may become highly 
invasive.  Check for its status in your 
area. 
 
Alternate Names 
Sericea lespedeza 
 
Uses 
Chinese lespedeza is used for hay, pasture, erosion 
control, cover crops, and wildlife food and cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or  agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Chinese lespedeza has light green stems 3-5 feet tall 
having few branches.  New growth arises from the 
crown each year.  A plant two or three years old may 
have 20-30 stems.  New shoots are succulent and 
tender until they reach 12 to 18 inches, when they 
become woody and fibrous.  Roots are widely 
branched and penetrate the soil more than three feet.  
A high percentage of seeds produced may be hard 
seed.  These seeds, which may comprise 20%-30% of 
the seed lot need to be scarified to germinate.  There 
are approximately 372,000 seeds per pound of 
unscarified and 335,000 seeds per pound of the 
scarified seed. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Chinese lespedeza is adapted  to the southern portions 
of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and central New Jersey 
southward into the southeast states.  It is best suited 
to areas receiving at least 30 inches of rainfall 
annually.  It can survive short periods of subzero 
temperatures when fully established, but prolonged 
freezing will contribute to wi nter kill.  It grows best 
on deep, well-drained, medium to coarse textured 
soils.  Chinese lespedeza is tolerant of low pH (4.5) 
and infertile soils.  Optimum pH range is 6.0-6.5.  On 
some sites it has been very competitive and hindered 
the re-colonization of native species. 
© William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Chinese lespedeza should be seeded in the early 
spring (two to three weeks before normal corn 
planting time) in a firm seedbed free of weed 
pressures.  Because stand establishment is slow, it is 
best seeded with a quick establishing grass such as 
weeping lovegrass.  Seed ma y be drilled or broadcast.  
Use 10-12 lbs./ac. if usin g hulled and scarified seed; 
10-15 lbs./ac. if seed is  unhulled or unscarified.  
Inoculate with the a ppropriate rhizobia. 
 
Management 
Chinese lespedeza responds to regular applications of 
lime and fertilizer according to soil test

recommendations.  Since it is a legume, nitrogen is 
not necessary, however phosphorus and potassium 
may need to be applied every two to three years.  
Fertility helps maintain stand density and palatability.  
Chinese lespedeza may be mowed or grazed 
frequently if well fertilized.  Graze or cut when plants 
are 12 inches tall.  Leave a three inch growth after 
each harvest.  On critical areas, mow at least once 
every two years if competing vegetation is to be 
controlled. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Commercially available cultivars adapted to the 
northeast include ‘Interstat e’, ‘Serala’, ‘Caricea’, and 
‘Appalow’ (Japan). ‘Appal ow’ is a prostrate form 
developed at the Quicksand Plant Materials Center in 
Kentucky. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.