Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHRUB LESPEDEZA 
Lespedeza thunbergii (DC.) 
Nakai  
Plant Symbol = LETH4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Uses 
Shrub lespedeza was introduced primarily to provide 
legume food and cover to popular game animals.  
Target wildlife have included ring-neck pheasants, 
bobwhite quail, cottontail rabbits, and white-tailed 
deer, but honeybees have also  been attracted to their 
flowers.  The value of shrub lespedeza for wildlife 
improves when planted in conjunction with rows of 
switchgrass ( Panicum virgatum ). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.   Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Shrub lespedeza is a perennial legume native to 
eastern Asia.  It grows 4 to 6 feet tall stems that may 
reach 1/2 inch in diameter.  These stems die back to 
the ground annually.  The leaves are usually 2 inches 
long and 1/2 inch wide, with a more linear 
appearance than oval.  The pink to purple colored 
flowers emerge in great masses during late summer.  
Bees and insects are necessary to adequately pollinate 
lespedezas.  This species of lespedeza easily 
hybridizes with others of the genus, so isolation is 
necessary.  The small, black, bean-like, seeds are 
singly produced in pods which open when mature.  
Seed maturity occurs from  late September to early 
October.  Approximately 300 to 500 pounds of seed 
is produced per acre on production fields.  There are 
about 72,000 seeds per pound.  This species has a 
high frequency of hard-coated seed which must be 
cracked or removed to initiate germination. 
 USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Shrub lespedeza performs well on droughty, well 
drained, or somewhat poorly drained soils of variable 
texture.  This species does not tolerate poorly drained 
sites.  For seed to fully mature, a growing season no 
less than 160 days long is required. 
 
Shrub lespedeza is distributed throughout the East.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Shrub lespedeza can be established with 1 year old 
field-grown seedlings, but  direct seeding is the 
preferred method.  For seedings to be effective, good 
site preparation is necessary.  In mid-spring a weed 
free, firm, seedbed must be well worked for good 
seed establishment.  To insure first year germination, 
the seed should be first be scarified by abrasion or 
acid.  Do not forget that  prior to sowing, the proper 
bacteria should be used to inoculate the seed.  
Seeding should occur from th e date of last expected 
frost to no later than June 1.  If established with 
broadcasting techniques, 8 to 10 pounds of seed per 
acre should be used on well-worked soils; if drilled 
into rows, 6 to 8 lbs./ac.  will be acceptable.  When 
co-planting switchgrass with shrub lespedeza, add 5 
to 7 pounds of grass seed to the rates listed above.

Seed should be sown 1/2 to 1 inch deep depending on 
soil conditions. Sawdust, wood chips, hay, straw, or 
wood fiber mulching is eff ective at holding seed in 
place on highly erodible sites, and retaining moisture 
on droughty sites. 
 
To establish shrub lespedeza in nursery beds, place 
12 to 20 seeds, 1/4 to 1/2 inch deep, per linear foot of 
row; space rows 3 to 4 feet apart.  Use the seeding 
recommendations stated above.  Use normal tree 
planting procedures to establish seedlings at 2 to 3 
feet in row spacings with 3 to 4 feet row spacing.  
This method is usually more expensive than seeding, 
but a good stand can be attained more quickly. 
 
Management  
Since shrub lespedeza is a  legume, capable of fixing 
its own atmospheric nitrogen, inorganic forms are not 
necessary.  Before or at the time of seeding, 300 to 
500 pounds of 0-12-12 or 0-20-20 fertilizer can be 
applied to the planting area.  The site’s pH should be 
corrected to 6.5, if it is below 5.5. 
 
Seedlings do not compete  well with over-topping 
weed growth.  Control is best attained by allowing 
weeds grow to a height of 18 to 24 inches tall.  Then, 
mow the weeds to a height equal to that of the 
lespedeza seedlings. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Two cultivars of shrub lespedeza have been 
developed and released to the commercial market by 
the USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
‘VA-70’ (Manchuria, China)  was selected for its 
wildlife value and cold hardiness by the Cape May 
Plant Materials Center, Cape May Court House, NJ.  
‘Amquail’ (Japan) was developed at Americus, GA  
Plant Materials Center for its wildlife food and cover 
attributes for use in the s outheastern U.S.  Foundation 
seed for both released cultivars is available to 
commercial nurseries. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.