Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
          DOTTED   
     GAYFEATHER          
Liatris punctata Hook. 
Plant Symbol = LIPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, Texas.  
 
Alternate Names 
Dotted blazing star, blazing star, Nebraska blazing 
star, Kansas blazing star, bu tton snakeroot, starwort 
 
Uses 
Forage:  Dotted gayfeather is a forage or a browse 
species that is consumed  by sheep and also wildlife 
species such as deer and antelope. Its forage quality 
is rated as fair to good and it will decrease under 
continuous heavy grazing. 
  
Ethnobotanical: American Indian tribes used dotted 
gayfeather for both food and medicinal
 purposes. The 
Kiowa gathered the roots in the spring when they 
were sweet and baked them over a fire. Gayfeather 
roots were said to vary greatly in palatability  depending on the time of 
year collected. Although 
widely distributed over the prairies, gayfeather is not 
mentioned widely as a food source of native people. 
The Lakota pulverized the roots of gayfeather and ate 
them to improve appetite. For heart pains they 
powdered the entire plant and made a tea. The 
Blackfeet boiled the gayfeather root and applied it to 
swellings. They made a tea for stomach aches, but 
sometimes just ate the root  raw instead. The Pawnee 
boiled the root and leaves together and fed the tea to 
children with diarrhea. The Omaha powdered the root 
and applied it as a poultice for external inflammation. 
They also made a tea from the plant to treat 
abdominal troubles. The root s were also used as a 
folk medicine for sore thro ats and as a treatment for 
rattle snake bite. 
 
Horticultural:  Gayfeather plants are becoming more 
popular for ornamental uses, especially fresh floral 
arrangements and winter bouquets. The 
inflorescences make good long lasting cut flowers. If 
spikes are picked at thei r prime and allowed to dry 
out of the sun, they will retain their color and can be 
used in dried plant arrangements. Dotted gayfeather 
is a good addition to a sunny flower garden or a 
prairie planting for its long lasting purple color in late 
summer and early fall. This species also offers 
promise for roadside and rest stop beautification 
projects in the Great Plains region.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
 General:  Dotted gayfeather belongs to the composite 
or sunflower family (Asteraceae). Dotted gayfeather 
is a native, perennial species that is 1 to 2.5 feet tall 
with one to many stems arising from a woody crown. 
It has a deep tap root which extends up to 7 feet in 
heavy clay soils and to 16 f eet in lighter soils. Strong 
lateral roots branch in the first three feet, but they all 
penetrate deeply and most absorptive rootlets are at 
the deeper levels. Its leaves are alternately arranged 
on the stem, are closely spaced and linear, being up 
to six inches long and ¼ inch wide. The leaves are 
dark green with a light colored midrib and covered 
with translucent glandular dots. Dotted gayfeather 
leaves arch upward, have ciliate or hairy margins and 
get progressively shorter the closer they get to the 
stem apex. A dense spike up  to a foot long at the end

of the stems has many small rose-purple flower heads 
of four to eight disc flowers each. Flowering occurs 
from August to October in Kansas. Spikes bloom for 
a long time as flower heads bloom successively from 
the top down. The fruits are black ribbed achenes that 
are approximately ¼ of an inch long and have 
numerous feathery bristles at the tips. The achenes 
are easy to collect from the spikes when they are dry 
in October into November.   
 
Adaptation:  This species is ideally suited to grow in 
dry, coarse soils with its extensive root system and 
limited foliage of linear, narrow leaves. 
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. Dotted 
gayfeather is found through much of the plains region 
from southern Manitoba and Alberta and from 
western Missouri to New Mexico and into northern 
Mexico. 
 
Establishment 
Dotted gayfeather can most easily be established 
using seed. Cold, moist stratified seed can be planted 
in the field in spring or non-stratified seed can be 
planted in the fall. Typical seedbed preparation 
should be followed to improve the chances of 
success. Prepare a firm, weed free seedbed by 
disking, harrowing and cultipacking the planting site. 
Chemical weed control can be used prior to planting 
to minimize weed competition. Plant the seed units of 
dotted gayfeather utilizing a drill with a legume box 
and depth bands to ensure that correct depth of 
planting (1/4 inch) and good seed to soil contact. If 
establishing this species for seed production 
purposes, planting in rows is desirable with a rate of 
30 Pure Live Seed (PLS) per foot of row. For prairie 
restoration or diverse plantings intended for wildlife 
use, 4 ounces of seed per  acre can be incorporated 
into the seeding mixture. Apply no fertilizer the 
establishment year unless the soil test indicates 
severely limited potassium or phosphorus levels at 
the planting site. No nitrogen should be used the 
establishment year to reduce the level of weed 
competition. Seedling vigor of this species is good, 
but first year growth is prioritized to the root system. 
Establishment is comparatively easy when weed 
competition can be successfully controlled.  
   
Management  
Liatris punctata  often needs lime or potash to 
strengthen its stems in moist environments. 
Observations indicate that  its leaves are erect in a 
natural, drier climate zones.  
 
 Photo byline: Steve Hurst@PLANTS Database 
Dotted gayfeather achenes with tufts of feathery bristles. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Rodents will eat the flower buds, seedlings, new 
leaves and roots of  Liatris punctata. A medium 
amount of lodging can be  a problem during seed 
maturity in a field monoculture situation.  
  
Environmental Concerns 
There are no environmental concerns with dotted 
gayfeather. This species will reproduce from seed 
and produce volunteer seedlings, but will not do so 
aggressively.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no released varieties or 
germplasm lines of  Liatris punctata from the NRCS 
Plant Materials Program.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia, USDA  NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Cente
r 
 
Edited: 080303 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.