Plant Fact Sheet
RIVERBANK LUPINE 
Lupinus rivularis  Douglas ex 
Lindl.  
Plant Symbol =  LURI 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center,  2008  
Alternate Names  
Alternative Common Names:  r iverside lupine, streambank 
lupine,  stream lupine,  nine finger   
Alternative  Scientific Names:  Lupinus lignipes  A. Heller , 
Lupinus amphibium  Suksd.  
Uses  
Erosion control : Given  riverbank  lupine’s rapid growth, it 
can be used as quick cover on critical erosion sites,  
including droughty, steep, low -fertility slopes.   Because 
of the species’ ability to add nitrogen to the soil (through 
N -fixing bacteria), it c an also facilitate the establishment 
of grasses and other wildflowers in restoration seedings.  
Wildlife  and Livestock : Several species of birds use the 
seed for food.  Birds,  r abbits , and other small game  use 
the  abundant stems  for cover .  The flowers provide pollen 
and nectar for bumblebees and other native pollinators 
and beneficial insects.   This species is a potential  butterfly 
host  plant for the orange sulphur ( Colias eurytheme) and 
the western tailed blue ( Everes amyntula).  Riverban k 
lupine appears to be compatible with livestock grazing as 
it has low levels of alkaloids, and does not contain 
anagyrine, a compound found in many other lupines that 
causes the birth defect known as ‘crooked calf disease’.  
Likewise,  the cultivar ‘Hederm a’ produced no toxic  symptoms in sheep or calves in a feeding trial
, and was 
found to contain very low concentrations of alkaloids . 
Cover  Crop: For soil enrichment through nitrogen 
fixation  and addition of organic matter , riverbank  lupine 
can be seeded as a winter cover  and  green manure crop , or 
used in reforestation projects.   From laboratory assays, 
nitrogen fixation rates of its root nodules appear high, but 
actual levels of increase in field soil nitrogen have not  
be en fully quantified.  
Ornamental : The plant’s showy floral display and 
pleasant scent make it appropriate for certain  landscape 
uses  along roadsides,  around residential areas , and within 
parks where a  larger, short -lived wildflower is desired.  
Ethnobotanic : The plants are reported to hav e been used 
medicinally by the Thompson Indians of British 
Columbia.    
Status  
Riverbank lupine is on  red list 1 -E (endangered) in British 
Columbia , but is fairly common throughout the rest of its 
range .  It is considered  a facultative  upland plant  (usually  
occurring in non -we tlands, but occasionally found i n 
wetlands)  in  the northwest, but a facultative plant (equally 
likely to occur in wetlands or non -wetlands) in California.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Riverbank  lupine is a native, rapid -developing, deep tap-
rooted, multi -stemmed, erect forb,  1 to 5 feet tall.  The 
plant may be an annual, biennial, or short -lived perennial.  
In Oregon, its habit can be  like a n evergreen  subshrub.  At 
least some populations appear to possess few if any basal 
buds ,  with most new shoot growth arising primarily  from 
aerial portions of the plant  in the second year.  The leaves 
are alternate, palmately compound, with 5 to 9 leaflets 
that average 1½ inches long.  Attractive purple -blue  to 
white  pea-type flowers bloom  March to July, depending 
on latitude and elevation,  a nd last for about two to four  
weeks.  The sparsely hairy  pods  up to 2 inches long 
contain  6-10  seeds  that are gray  with dark mottling,  often 
with  a black  stripe on each side.    
Riverbank  lupine is adapted to  well-drained, sandy or 
gravelly soils  of Oregon  and  Washington  west of the 
Cascades , southwestern  British Columbia, and 
north western California at elevations below 6 ,000 feet in 
regions  with a precipitation range of 18  to 100  inches.  
Persistence is best on soils low in nitrogen,  such as  sand 
dunes , cut slopes along roadsides,  or dredge spoils ,  where