Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ROUNDHEAD LESPEDEZA  
Lespedeza capitata  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = LECA8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Kanoka Roundhead Lespedeza                                    Alan Shadow, USDA-NRCS, Manha ttan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas. 
 
Alternate Names  
roundhead bush clover, bushclover, rabbit foot 
 
Uses 
Roundhead lespedeza is a palatable and nutritious 
native legume that is readily grazed by livestock 
(Phillips Petroleum Co., 1963). It is a desirable 
component in warm season grass mixtures, providing 
nitrogen input and adding protein to the consumed 
forage. It decreases with continuous heavy grazing 
(Stubbendieck et al., 1989).  Upland game birds 
consume the seeds. Native Americans made tea from 
the leaves and burned pieces of moistened stem on 
the skin as a counter-irritant to treat rheumatism 
(Haddock, 2005). Roundhead lespedeza has been 
reported to lower blood cholesterol levels and remove 
nitrogenous compounds from the blood and it has 
been the subject of some pharmaceutical research 
(Kindscher, 1992). Although roundhead was not 
generally used in Anglo medicine, it was listed as a 
diuretic and emetic by B.B. Smythe in his 1901 
“Preliminary listing of Medicinal and Economic 
Kansas Plants” (Smythe, 1901). Its seedheads, which 
are attractive in wildflower  gardens, can also be  picked and used in dry flower arrangements and 
bouquets (Kindscher, 1992).  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Bean Family (Fabaceae).  This herbaceous, native, 
perennial plant has stiff, er ect stems that are .6-1.5 m 
tall. Stems are usually unbranched except for short 
branches at the top that support the inflorescences. 
Leaves are arranged alternately on the stem. The 
petioles are 2-5 mm, shorter than the stalk on the 
terminal leaflet. The compound leaves have three 
moderately large leaflets (18X45 mm) which are 
often crowded along the stem . Both leaves and stems 
are densely covered with appressed hairs, giving the 
plant a silvery sheen. Flower ing occurs in August and 
September.  The flowers are crowded in conspicuous 
green ball like clusters that are grouped together at 
the tips of the stems. The  pea-like flowers are easy to 
over look unless the plant is examined closely.  The 
flower petals are white w ith a purple spot on the 
banner petal. The flowers are surrounded by the 
narrow pointed lobes of the calyx. The calyx remains 
as a part of the cinnamon brown seed heads that 
persist on the plant after the leaves have dropped. 
The typical fruits (legume)  are indehiscent, and one 
seeded. Tap roots can grow to a depth of 2.5 meters, 
but there are also many branched roots near the soils 
surface that extend up to a meter in all directions 
from the plant. The roots absorb water mainly from 
the lower soil depths (Weaver, 1958). Rhizobia, 
nitrogen fixing bacteria, live in nodules on the plants 
roots. Roundhead is quite tolerant of drought 
conditions.     
 
Establishment 
Germination of roundhead lespedeza is very low 
without mechanical scarification (Rock, 1972).  Acid 
scarification can also be utilized to hasten 
germination. Smith and Smith (1980) recommended 
moist stratification for 10 days in addition to 
scarification. Germination generally occurs within  3 
to 10 days. To initiate seedling growth scarify seed, 
inoculate with rhizobium and plant 6mm in the soil or 
greenhouse container. Seedlings grow well under 
greenhouse conditions or can be started in the field. 
The two dark green cotyledons are thick and

elongate, dorsally convex with slightly squared tips. 
The first true leaf is trifoliate compound and emerges 
within 2 to 3 weeks of germination.  
 
Management 
Roundhead is found in both upland and lowland 
prairie sites, but it tends to be more common in 
uplands. Weaver and Fitzpatrick (1934) found it in 
55% of the upland prairies and an equal proportion of 
the lowland prairies that  they studied although 
usually not in great abundance. Shirley (1994) stated 
that it grows well at a soil pH between 6.5 and 8. 
Weaver (1954) considered it a decreaser under heavy 
grazing pressure. Eddy (1992) found it to be much 
more abundant along none grazed roadsides than in 
grazed pastures in the Flint Hills of Kansas.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) ‘Kanoka’ roundhead lespedeza was 
released in 1998 by  the USDA, NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center in Manha ttan, Kansas. ‘Kanoka’ is 
recommended for use in plantings on critical areas, 
road right-of-ways, parks, and recreation areas for 
soil stabilization and beautification, wildlife habitat 
areas, and for prairie restoration. ‘Kanoka’ was 
selected from an assembly  of 20 accessions collected 
in Kansas, Nebraska and Oklahoma. Two collections 
from Woodson County, Kansas and one collection 
from Nowata County, Oklahoma were bulked and 
assigned the Plant Introduction Number (PI-468118). 
The selected accessions consistently produced seed 
of higher quality and quantity and were taller and 
bloomed later than the other materials. The Elsberry, 
Missouri PMC has also released three source 
identified Lespedeza lines fo r Central, Northern, and 
Southern Iowa.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or  
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Roundhead does not spread aggressively by rhizomes 
or runners and we have not found it to be an 
aggressive seeder (Platt and Harder, 1991).  
 
Prepared By:  Richard Wynia  and Alan Shadow , 
USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials Center; 
Manhattan, Kansas. 
 
Species Coordinator:  M. Kat Anderson, USDA, 
NRCS, Plant Data Center;  Baton Rouge, Louisiana.   
 Edited:  060803 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.