Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ITALIAN RYEGRASS 
Lolium perenne L. ssp. 
multiflorum  (Lam.) Husnot  
Plant Symbol = LOPEM2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 
 Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the No rthern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Lolium multiflorum Lam., annual ryegrass 
 
Uses 
Italian ryegrass is primarily used for quick cover in 
erosion control plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable  vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Italian ryegrass is quite similar to perennial ryegrass 
except it is an annual or biennial, depending on 
climate and/or length of growing season.  It may 
grow a little taller than perennial ryegrass, from 2 to 
3 feet tall.  Plants have a bunchy form, with 
numerous long, narrow, stiff leaves near the base of 
the plant.  The under surf aces of leaves are bright, 
glossy, and smooth.  Inflorescence stems are nearly 
naked.  The seeds of this sub-species have awns 
(bristles). 
 
Adaptation 
These grasses have a wide range of adaptability to 
soils, but thrive on dark rich soils in regions having 
mild climates.  They do  not withstand hot, dry 
weather or severe winters.  They will stand fairly wet 
soils with reasonably good surface drainage. 
 
Italian ryegrass is distributed throughout the entire 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A fine, firm seedbed gives the best results.  Mulched 
seedings on graded soil ge rminate readily.  Spring 
seedings of ryegrass may occur in March, April, or 
May.  Seeding rates will vary with local conditions 
and purpose of plantings.  Generally, a seeding rate 
of 20 to 25 pounds per acre is used if ryegrass is 
seeded alone.  Lesser amounts per acre are used in 
mixtures, depending upon uses and companion 
species.  Do not exceed 4  pounds per acre in mixes 
with alfalfa. 
 
Management  
This section is under development. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This section is under development.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Ryegrasses cross-pollinate freely so many types have 
developed.  It is difficult to maintain their genetic 
purity; consequently, Italian ryegrass is marketed as 
common ryegrass or domestic ryegrass, and it is often 
a mixture of annual and perennial species.  There is 
no certification of this seed since pure varieties of 
Italian ryegrass are almost non-existent. 
 
Seed of cultivars and common annual ryegrass is 
readily available from local commercial suppliers. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.