Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWEETGUM 
Liquidambar styraciflua  L. 
Plant Symbol = LIST2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
redgum, sapgum, starleaf-gum, bilsted 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Sweetgum is a good choice as a 
windbreak tree because of its fast growth and 
tolerance of a wide variety of sites. 
 
Wildlife : Its seeds are eaten by birds, squirrels, and 
chipmunks. 
 
Timber : Sweetgum is primarily used for lumber, 
veneer, plywood, slack cooperage, railroad ties, fuel 
and pulpwood.  Its wood is used for veneer, furniture, 
interior trim, and wooden ware, in addition to 
pulpwood for fine papers. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: It is used as a 
specimen plant, shade tree, and street tree. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Liquidambar styraciflua  L., sweetgum, is native to 
southeastern, east-central , and south-central United 
States, southern Mexico, and central America.  It is a 
large deciduous hardwood tree, which can grow to 
over 100 feet in height and  3 to 5 feet in diameter, 
with a symmetrical, cone-shaped crown.  The bark is 
grayish brown, deeply furrowed into narrow, 
somewhat rounded ridges. The leaves are alternate, 
simple, and palmately lobed with 5-7 points 
resembling a star in shape, dark green and lustrous 
above, paler underneath.  Flowers are monoecious, 
female, on a slender stalk  terminated by a ½ inch 
diameter globose head consisting of 2-beaker ovaries 
subtended by minute scales. The fruit is a dangling 
brown, woody spiny tipped “gum ball” with seeds 
brownish and winged. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
In the wild, sweetgum gr ows in bottomland areas 
with rich, moist soil, but can tolerate a variety of soil 
conditions.  The tree does not do well planted in 
locations where roots are limited in their 
development.  It grows best on moderately coarse to 
fine soils that are well drained and slightly acid (pH 
6.1- 6.5).  It develops a deep taproot with numerous 
highly developed laterals on well drained bottomland 
sites and a shallow, wide spreading root system on 
poorly drained sites.  Sweetgum is very intolerant to 
shade but tolerant to flooding.  It also tolerates 
seaside sites if protect ed from high winds. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Sweetgum is distributed throughout the east and 
southeast portions of the United States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Sweetgum can regenerate naturally from root sprouts 
following logging.  It can be successfully established 
using quality seedlings with a large root-collar 
diameter of at least ¼ inch.  Mycorrhizae can 
significantly improve seedling quality.  Soil amended 
with as little as ½ inch of sewage sludge (disked into 
the soil) can result in better growth at outplanting. 
 
Leafy cuttings taken with a heel can be readily rooted 
under mist in summer. Transplant balled and 
burlapped plants in spring into deep, moist, slightly 
acid soil, full sun.  The root system is fleshy, not 
greatly fibrous, and takes a while to reestablish.

Seeds exhibit only a shallow dormancy, but 
germination rate is considerably increased by cold, 
moist stratification at 41  °F for 15 to 90 days in moist 
sand.  Prechilled seeds should be broadcast or drilled 
to achieve a seedling density of 20-25 per square ft.  
Seeds should be sown on the soil surface and lightly 
pressed into the soil.  A mulch of sawdust, sand or 
chopped pine needles should be applied.  There are 
approximately 0.8 lb of clean seeds per bushel of 
fruit and the average number of seeds per lb is 
82,000. 
 
Management  
Adequate sunlight is required for sweetgum to reach 
its potential.  Young trees are able to withstand 
crowding, however, they become intolerant to 
competition with increasing age.  Removal of 
overstory trees results in rapid growth of young 
sweetgum trees. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Sweetgum is susceptible to iron chlorosis on high pH 
soils, frost damage to late summer shoot growth, 
occasional bleeding necr osis, leader dieback, 
sweetgum blight, leaf sp ots, sweetgum webworm, 
caterpillars, cottony-cushion scale, sweetgum scale, 
and walnut scale. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Burgundy,’ ‘Moraine,’ ‘Festival,’ ‘Obtusiloba,’ 
‘Gumball,’ ‘Palo Alto,’ ‘Levis,’ and ‘Variegata.’  
Sweetgum seeds are commercially available from 
forest seed companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, Maryland 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.