Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TALL FESCUE 
Lolium arundinaceum 
(Schreb.) S.J. Darbyshire  
Plant Symbol = LOAR10 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Schedonorus phoenix (Scop.) Holub , Festuca 
arundinacea  Schreb. 
 
Uses 
Tall fescue has been over-used in the past, prior to 
the understanding of its endophyte status and 
implications. For decades KY-31 tall fescue was 
planted widely as a forage and erosion control plant 
because it is widely adapted and easy to establish and 
long lived under harsh conditions and mistreatment. 
It is now recognized that the presence of the 
endophyte (in this grass and others) contributed to 
both the tough nature of the grass and the poor 
performance of grazing animals in the warmer 
months. It is suspected that  this endophyte infected 
cultivar has been deleterious to wildlife as well. For 
these reasons, there are effo rts by some groups to ban 
the use of tall fescue in some states, and it still may 
be overused.  Please consult the links on the 
PLANTS Profile for this species for additional 
information. 
 
Now there are many cultivars of this species, some of 
which are produced without endophyte contamination  of the seed for forage production use. Fine leafed 
cultivars are intended as turf
 grasses, and often are 
intentionally endophyte infected to capitalize on the 
competitive advantage that the endophyte confers to 
the plant. Testing services are available to have 
existing stands of this grass evaluated for endophyte 
presence. Infected tall fescue is used best as pasture 
or hay when it is stockpiled for feeding only after fall 
frosts and freezes have occurred. 
 
The old standby KY-31 (with endophyte) is a very 
good critical area treatment grass due to its tolerance 
of poor soils and abuse or neglect. However, the user 
should be sure this grass will meet all the planting 
objectives and that there are not good alternative 
species before specifying its use. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA, NRCS 1989 
Midewestern Wetland Flora  @ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Tall fescue is a robust long-lived, comparatively deep 
rooted, bunchgrass. The leaves of forage types are 
broad, while turf types have been selected for narrow 
leaves. The flat leaves are smooth and shiny on the 
underside, with pronounced  ribs on the upper surface. 
The stems are 3-4 feet ta ll, supporting a nodding 
panicle that is 4-12 inches long.  There are 227,000 
seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Tall fescue is adapted to cool and humid climates and 
most soils with a pH of 5.5 to 7.0.  Tall fescue will 
grow fairly well on soils low in fertility, but it is 
better adapted to fertile conditions. Tall fescue will 
produce top growth when soils are as cold as 40 
degrees F, and it continues growth into late fall in the 
south.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation ServiceTall fescue is distributed throughout the majority of 
the United States.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. .  
 
Establishment 
Tall fescue is easy to establish due to its rapid 
germination and good seedling vigor. It may be 
planted by any common method such as grass 
seeders, hydroseeding, and broadcasting. Seeding 
rates for turf are very high in order to obtain a dense, 
even turf-usually 50-100 pounds per acre. In mixtures 
with other seed for critical area treatment work, the 
tall fescue component is typically 10-15 pounds per 
acre. 
 
Management 
While tall fescue is tolerant of abuse and low fertility, 
it does respond to fertilizer inputs. Follow the soil 
test recommendations for turf and forage uses. The 
management considerations for forage use of 
endophyte infected stands are discussed under  Uses. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Several cultivars are recommended in the Northeast 
for turf; consult university extension publications for 
the latest ratings. For cool season grass critical area 
uses, KY-31 is difficult to  beat, but there are often 
other alternatives to this species which will have 
better wildlife benefit. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.