Plant Fact Sheet
TWINBERRY 
HONEYSUCKLE  
Lonicera involucrata (Richardson)  
Banks ex Spreng . 
Plant Symbol =  LOI N5  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Figure 1. Leaves and black berries of twinberry honeysuckle. Photo by 
Sonja Johnson.                       
Alternate Names 
Common  alternative names:   Black twinberry, twinberry, 
bearberry honeysuckle, bush honeysuckle , bracted 
honeysuckle  
Scientific alternative names:   Lonicera involucrata var. 
involucrata,  Distegia involucrata,  and Xylosteum  
involucratum . 
Uses  
Conservation-  Twinberry honeysuckle is  a valuable  shrub 
for  streambank  erosion control and restoration of riparian 
areas, swamps, bogs, moist woodlands, scrub- shrub 
wetlands , and  sandy  coastal areas  within its native range .  
Winter d ormant branches  are  useful as live st akes, 
fascines, and other soil bioengineering practices  for 
stabilizing  streambank s, moist slopes,  and  the i mmediate 
shoreline  of lakes  or ponds . The species is  also used in 
hedgerow s and pollution  resistant wind shelters.  
  Wildlife
 -  The berries are eaten by  bears,  small mammals, 
game birds  including  quail and grouse , and song birds 
such as thrushes.  The  flower is  a  source of nectar for 
hummingbirds and butterflies . The plant is  host for  the 
larva of certain butterfl ies including  Gillett’s 
checkermallow.  V alue as general wildlife cover  is  high, 
but as browse  its  desirability  is rated  low fo r most large 
game animals .  However, elk, moose,  mountain goats, and 
deer  are reported to utilize the leaves or twigs in some 
areas. The species is rated as  poor forage  for domestic 
cattle  and fair for sheep.  
 
Ethnobotanic – R eports on the fruit vary from poisonous, 
to mildly toxic, to bitter and unpalatable,  to edible and 
use ful as  food, depending on tribe, region or publication.  
The berry  was used as a source of dye. Medicinal uses 
were many and varied among tribes.  These included the  
leaves,  berr ies or bark as a decoction , infusion, or poultice  
for sores, body cleansing, swellings,  dandruff,   wounds, 
infections, sore throats,  paralysis, coughs, burns, itches, 
vener eal diseases, boils, stoma ch troubles, pains of the 
legs or feet , arthritis,  and sore eyes.  Sometimes the leaves 
or bark were simply  chewed for treating ailments  or used 
as a ceremonial emetic (i .e. to induce vomiting) . 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS W eb site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Twinberry honeysuckle (family: Caprifoliaceae) i s an 
upright deciduous shrub that grows up to 12 (16) ft tall.  
The leaves are in opposite pairs , egg or broadly lance 
shaped , pointed,  and often hairy  beneath .  The flowers are 
tubular, in pairs , and yellow (except for the orange- red 
tinted flowers for the coastal variety ledebourii) . The 
d ouble or “twin” shiny black berries  that ripen in July or 
later are  cupped by prominent purple -red colored  bracts.               
Figure 2. Stem, leaves, fruit, and flower of twinberry honeysuckle. 
Reprinted with permission, Universit y of  Washington Press .

Twinberry honeysuckle occurs from the sea coast to high 
elevations in alpine regions . It ranges from Alaska south 
to Mexico and west through the Rocky Mountain  states , 
as well as most of Canada.  The species  is adapted to  soils 
that  vary  from course  sand  to fine textured silt  and clay 
with a pH of 5  to 8 (moderately high acidity to slightly 
basic) .  Found  on moist, seasonally wet , and  flooded sites, 
habitats  include moist woods, thickets, riparian  zones and 
bogs.  It also occurs in brackish tidal swamps  and sandy 
areas  along the coast .  While tolerant of full sun, 
twinberry honeysuckle  is most commonly found  under 
shady  conditions.  It will grow on upland soils  with 
moderate fertility but drought tolerance is lacking.  
 
 
Figure 3. Twinberry honeysuckle distribution from USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database . 
P lease consult the Plant Profile page  for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Seed is obtained by coll ecting the ripe berries from July 
through September then  macerating the fruit to separate 
the seed from the pulp.  The seed should be  cold moist 
stratified ( moist chilled at 33 -36° F) for  30  to 90 days  in 
order to overcome embryo dormancy and improve 
germination.   Air dried seed can be stored in sealed 
containers under cool temperatures for  up to  15 years. 
There  is an  average  of 327,000 seeds per pound. 
Unstratified s eed should be fall sown and covered  with a 
thin layer of soil and 1 -2 in . of  organic  mulch.  
 
Vegetative  propagation in containers or beds is easy from 
hardwood ( winter dormant), softwood (spring) and  semi-
hardwood (summer)  cuttings , or layering  of stems  if  the 
soil or growth media is kept mo ist. Rooting hormones are 
generally  not required , but may be helpful for some 
clones or populations .  In western Oregon  and western 
Washington,  establishment from direct installation of live 
stakes on streambanks and other moist revegetation sites  in fall or winter
 has been moderately successful .  Live 
stakes are unrooted, dormant 18  to 36 in.  cuttings made 
from older branches and planted with at least 70  percent  
of the length in the soil. As  with container or bareroot 
nursery  stock, survival  and growth  are improved if stakes  
are mulched or irrigated the first full growing season, 
weeds are suppressed, and animal browse curtailed.  
Management  
Plants should be monitored for survival and pest problems 
the first few growing seasons and remedial action taken as 
needed.  Brush cutting can be  used as a  management tool 
to increase or decrease the attractiveness of twinberry 
honeysuckle to browsing by ungulates in transportation 
corridors.   In British Columbia, c utting the shrubs in July 
r esults in less attractive fall and winter browse.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Among  the insect pests are aphids , serpentine leaf miners, 
and scales .  Disease problems have not been widely 
reported but may include those of other honeysuckles.  
Environmental Concerns  
The  bitter ripe  berries may be mildly toxic or poisonous to 
humans.  There is some suggestion the foliage or other 
plant parts may have a  mildly toxic effect on cattle.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known cultivars or name d selections . 
However , provenance testing  and anecdotal observations  
show clear distinctions in bud break and growth patterns 
in northern versus southern and continental versus coastal 
sources  of this species . S uch di fferences are probably 
adaptive  and reflect  geographic origin. Thus, source  of 
stock should be carefully considered  for planting s.     
Prepared By   
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS, Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center  
Citation  
Darris, D. 2011. Plant fact sheet for twinberry 
honeysuckle  ( Lonicera involuc rata). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis, OR.  97330.  
Published  September 2011 
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <http:// www.nrcs.usda.gov/
>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER