Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIRDSFOOT TREFOIL  
Lotus corniculatus  L. 
Plant Symbol = LOCO6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center, Lansing, Michigan 
 
Alternate Names 
birdfoot deervetch 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Birdsfoot trefoil is used along 
roadsides to control wind and water erosion. 
 
Wildlife : Birdsfoot trefoil is a choice food for Canada 
goose, deer, and elk.  As ground cover, it provides 
green cover most of the year and blooms profusely.  
It is used for pheasant cover on shooting preserves 
and around ponds at duck clubs.  
 
Livestock : This species is used for green chop, hay 
and pasture.  It is seeded in combination with grass 
and grazed as a non-bloating legume.  It yields 4 tons 
of hay per acre on deep, well-drained soils receiving 
irrigation or adequate rainfall.  As a dryland pasture  legume, birdsfoot trefoil produces 20% more growth 
after July 1 than most dryland grass legume mixtures. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Birdsfoot trefoil is a moderately long-lived 
herbaceous perennial legume.  It has a well 
developed, branching, tap-like root with side roots 
near the soil surface.  Most cultivars are erect and 
grow to a height of 2 to 3  feet.  The stems are slender, 
branch well, and are moderately leafy.  Leaves are 
smooth and consist of 5 leaflets.  The bloom is made 
up of a cluster of bright yellow flowers arranged in a 
whorl at the end of the flow ering stems.  When ripe, 
the brown seed pods extend outward from the stalk 
and look like a bird's foot.  The plant remains green 
and succulent during and after seed ripening.  There 
are an average of 375,000 seeds per pound. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Birdsfoot trefoil is generally used in areas that 
receive 20 inches of precipitation or more.  It is 
suited to low and moderately fertile soils with 
relatively poor internal drainage but is usually less 
productive than alfalfa on fertile, deep, well-drained 
soils.  It performs well on soils too shallow or too 
poorly drained for alfalfa.  It is equal to alfalfa in 
tolerance to saline-alkaline soils and is adapted to 
soils of medium acidity.  The best pH range for 
establishment is 6.0 to 6.5 though it tolerates a 
broader pH range of 5.5 to 7.5. 
 
Birdsfoot trefoil is distributed throughout the 
majority of the United States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website.

Establishment 
For forage production birdsfoot trefoil is typically 
seeded at 4 to 8 pounds per acre either alone or with a 
grass.  Seeding rates for erosion control practices 
may run considerably higher depending on the mix 
and geographic location.  Seed should be inoculated 
and drilled 1/4 inch deep during early spring or late 
summer, with orchardgrass, timothy, meadow foxtail, 
or tall fescue.  If planting in late summer or in sandy 
soils, increase seeding depth to ½ inch.  Midsummer 
seedings are hazardous unless soil moisture is above 
normal and growing conditions are good.  Seedbed 
preparation and seeding must be done carefully.  
Seed is small and many stands are lost by poor 
seedbed preparation, deep seeding, inadequate soil 
fertility, poor inoculation or failure to use specific 
inoculant, and excessive competition from weeds.  
The seedbed needs to be mellow, firm and smooth.  
Band seeding of birdsfoot trefoil is highly 
recommended. Fertilize an d lime according to soil 
tests.   Phosphorous is particularly critical in low 
fertility soils and is best utilized if banded 1½ - 2“ 
directly below the seed.  Since birdsfoot trefoil 
seedlings grow quite slowly, rapidly growing weeds 
will shade and stunt its growth.  Early weed control 
will greatly improve the  chance of a successful 
planting.  Control pests, especially spittlebugs and 
leafhoppers. 
 
Management  
Regrowth of birdsfoot trefoil differs from that of 
alfalfa in that it originates  at buds formed in leaf 
axils. Close grazing that takes all stem growth is very 
detrimental to regrowth and stand life.  Delay spring 
grazing until plants are at least 8 inches high.  Allow 
24 to 38 days regrowth between grazings and leave a 
4 inch stubble after grazing.  Additionally, 60 day 
rest periods every 3 years helps to maintain the stand.  
Hay harvest should leave 4 to 6 inches of stubble to 
ensure good regrowth.   
 
Birdsfoot trefoil does not cause bloat in ruminant 
animals.  To protect the life of the stand, it does 
require careful management.  Birdsfoot must be 
allowed to grow to maturity  every third year or so in 
order to produce a seed crop--thus sustaining the 
stand.  Birdsfoot trefoil benefits from readily 
available phosphorous.  Phosphorous should be 
applied annually based on local soil testing 
recommendations. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Crown and root rots are the  most significant diseases 
of birdsfoot trefoil.  Th e trefoil seed chalcid,  Bruchophagus kolobovae
 Fed., is a small, black, 
wasp-like insect that can be  destructive in seed fields. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Some of the most common upright or hay-type 
varieties used in the Northeast US are ‘Norcen’, 
‘Viking’, ‘Mansfield’, and ‘Leo’.  ‘Empire’, ‘Dawn’, 
and ‘Fergus’ are low-growing, pasture-type varieties.  
The European trefoil is not a variety, but merely 
refers to trefoil seed imported from Europe.  
European trefoil is lower yielding than the US 
varieties and this seed is not recommended.  
‘Cascade’ (France), ‘Granger’, ‘Mackinaw’ (IA 
naturalized), and ‘Kalo’ (France) are principal 
cultivars in the west.  Seed is readily available at 
commercial seedhouses. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush 
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center, East 
Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.