Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TULIP POPLAR 
Liriodendron tulipifera  L. 
Plant Symbol = LITU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
yellow-poplar, tulip magnolia, tulip tree, whitewood 
 
Uses 
The wood of tulip poplar is moderately light, soft, 
brittle, moderately weak, and  is very easily worked.  
It is used for furniture stock, veneer and pulpwood. 
 
Tulip poplar makes a desirable street, shade, or 
ornamental tree but the large size it attains makes it 
unsuited for many sites.  Its good points for aesthetic 
use are:  (1) rapid growth (2) pyramidal form (3) 
resistance to insect and di sease damage (4) unusual 
leaves and attractive fl owers, and (5) yellow 
autumnal color. 
 
This species has some wild life value.  The fruits 
provide food for squirrels in the late fall and winter 
months, and the white-tailed deer often browse on the 
twigs. 
 
Tulip poplar is planted for reforestation purposes 
because of its rapid grow th and the commercial 
importance of its wood, and is often planted as an 
ornamental.  Tulip poplar and white pine were the 
largest trees in the eastern forest. 
 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Tulip poplar actually is not a poplar, but a member of 
the magnolia family.  The leaves are tulip-shaped, 
alternate, and simple.  The leaf is smooth on both 
surfaces, dark green and lustrous above, pale and 
often with a slight whitish bloom beneath. 
 
Twigs are moderately stout,  olive-brown, to reddish 
brown, very smooth and usually lustrous; the large 
terminal bud has two large duck-bill shaped scales. 
 
Tulip poplar produces tulip-shaped, light greenish-
yellow flowers from April to June.  It is a prolific 
seed bearer but has a low percent germination.  The 
cone shaped fruit clusters usually persist on branches.  
There are about 12,000 seeds per pound. 
© William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
The bark on younger trunks and branches is quite 
smooth, light ashy-gray with very shallow, 
longitudinal, whitish furrows.  With age the bark 
becomes very thick, having deep interlacing furrows 
and rather narrow rounded ridges. 
 
This tree is rapid growing, attaining heights of 80-
120 feet and a trunk diameter  of 2 to 5 feet.  Young 
trees have a pyramidal form. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Tulip poplar is exacting in soil and moisture 
requirements.  It does best on moderately moist, 
deep, well drained, loose textured soils; it rarely 
grows well in very dry or very wet situations.  It will 
tolerate a pH of 4.5 to 7.5. 
 
Tulip poplar is distributed throughout the east and 
southeast portions of the United States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Natural regeneration of tulip poplar is usually by 
stump sprouts and seed.  Regeneration from seed 
requires a seedbed of mineral soil, adequate soil 
moisture, sufficient direct sunlight for early growth; 
seedlings are intolerant of shade.

Forest plantings are planted at spacings ranging from 
6' x 7' to 10' x 10'.  One year old nursery grown 
seedlings are used. 
 
Management  
The rapid growth of tulip poplar can present a 
challenge to other tree species in a mixed stand.  This 
should influence the numbers of tulip poplar included 
in a mixed planting for conservation purposes, and 
may require thinning to maintain the values provided 
by other species.  Moderate thinnings at 8-10 year 
intervals are recommended for timber production. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Tulip poplar is unusually free from insects and 
disease.  The yellow-poplar  weevil, nectria canker, 
and fusarium canker are three of the more important 
enemies of this species. 
 
This species is prone to wind damage and ice damage 
in exposed situations. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are selections  from tree nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York  
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.