Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PERENNIAL RYEGRASS  
Lolium perenne  L. 
Plant Symbol = LOPE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the No rthern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
Perennial ryegrass is a valuable forage and soil 
stabilization plant.  This species is the predominant 
forage grass in Europe, and has been used in the 
United States for forage and lawns.  Generally 
speaking, the tetraploid cultivars are used for forage, 
and diploid cultivars are for lawns and conservation 
plantings.  Users should double check the intended 
use of the available cultivars before buying seed.  
Italian ryegrass is primarily used for quick cover in 
erosion control plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Perennial ryegrass grows from 1 to 2 feet tall with a 
bunchy form, and has medium longevity.  Some turf 
varieties are longer lived.  There are numerous long, 
narrow, stiff leaves  near the base of the plant.  The 
under surfaces of leaves  are bright, glossy, and 
smooth.  Inflorescence stems are nearly naked.  
Seedheads are spikes w ith spikelets growing 
edgewise to the seedhead stem.  Seeds do not have 
awns (bristles).  There are approximately 230,000 
seeds per pound. 
 
Italian ryegrass is quite similar to perennial ryegrass 
except it is an annual or biennial, depending on 
climate and/or length of growing season.  It may 
grow a little taller than perennial ryegrass: from 2 to 
3 feet tall.  The seeds of this sub-species have awns. 
 
Adaptation 
These grasses have a wide range of adaptability to 
soils, but thrive best on dark rich soils in regions 
having mild climates.  They do not withstand hot, dry 
weather or severe winters.  They will stand fairly wet 
soils with reasonably good surface drainage. 
 
Perennial ryegrass is distributed throughout the entire 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A fine, firm seedbed gives the best results.  Mulched 
seedings on graded soil ge rminate readily.  Spring 
seedings of ryegrass may occur in March, April, or 
May.  Perennial ryegrass may also be seeded mid-
August to early September.  Seeding rates will vary 
with local conditions and purpose of plantings.  
Generally, a rate of 20 to 25 pounds per acre is used 
if ryegrass is seeded alon e.  Lesser amounts per acre 
are used in mixtures, depending upon uses and 
companion species.  Do not exceed 4 pounds per acre 
in mixes with alfalfa. 
 
Management  
Ryegrass is generally cut for hay when seed is in the 
soft-dough stage.  Ryegra ss responds well to good 
management, such as intensive rotational grazing and 
fertilizer applications.

Pests and Potential Problems 
This section is under development. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Ryegrasses cross-pollinate freely so many types have 
developed.  It is difficult to maintain their genetic 
purity; consequently, Italian ryegrass is marketed as 
common ryegrass or domestic ryegrass, and it is often 
a mixture of annual and perennial species.  There is 
no certification of this seed since pure varieties of 
Italian ryegrass are almost non-existent. 
 
There are many cultivars of perennial ryegrass 
available for turf application.  Newer turf-type 
cultivars are often intentionally infected with an 
endophytic fungus to improve stress-tolerance.  
Tetraploid forage cultivars also abound.   
 
Seed of cultivars and common annual ryegrass is 
readily available from local commercial suppliers. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.