Plant Fact Sheet
AMERICAN FLY 
HONEYSUCKLE  
Lonicera canadensis   
  Bartram ex Marsh  
Plant Symbol = LOCA7  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Cap e May Plant Materials 
Center and Columbus Service Ce nter,  New Jersey   
 
W illiam B. Skaradek ,  USDA NRCS  
 
Alternate Names 
Canadian  fly honeysuckle, Fly honeysuckle , Xylosteon  
  ciliatum  
Uses  
Current uses are primarily  for the restoration of natural 
areas on National Park Service lands.  American fly 
honeysuckle  is a valuable pollinator support species , and 
should be incorporated in seeding mixtures for wildlife 
habitat and plant community diversification.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
American fly honeysuckle is a native perennial shrub that 
grows to about 2 meters  (7.5 ft.)  in height.  It is loosely 
branched with slender twigs and spreads slowly.  From 
April -Ju ly it flowers with yellow and whitish blooms; 
fruiting in July- Aug.  It occurs in  native woodlands and is  readily located in many diverse eco
-tones w hich include; 
rock outcrops, droughty gravels/ rocky soils as well as 
marginal lowlands where soil is more m oist and fertile.  
Fly honeysuckle  seems to  tolerate full sun to partially 
shaded sites.  
 
Establishment  
American f ly honeysuckle roots readily from cuttings and 
is successfully propagated from seed.  Plant m aterials 
were out -planted  from nursery  1-quart an d 1-gallon pots  
for plant community restoration .  Plants from both sizes 
exhibited a high level of survival when out -planted in the 
spring and late spring months , and when  standard 
guidelines for shrub plantings were followed . 
 
Management  
During the year o f establishment, as with most shrubs, 
ensure adequate water is made available to the planting 
site.  Also protect from mowers and traffic during the first 
year.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
This native shrub does not seem to exhibit any major 
damage from  pests, disease or browse.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Not know n to be invasive.  Consult PLANTS database 
since this shrub has been listed as extirpated and 
endangered in several states.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin):  
Currentl y commercial availability of American fly 
honeysuckle is very limited and commercial c ultivars are 
not known.  
 
Prepared By:   
William B. Skaradek   
USDA NRCS  Columbus Service Center, Columbus,  NJ 
Christopher Miller   
USDA NRCS Cape May P lant Materials  Center , Cape 
May, NJ  
 
Species Coordinator:  
William B. Skaradek  
USDA NRCS  Columbus Service Center, Columbus, NJ  
Published:  November 2009  
Edited:  09Sep07jfh 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation