Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PERENNIAL PEA 
Lathyrus latifolius L. 
Plant Symbol = LALA4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Perennial pea is a long-lived erosion control plant 
that provides a low mainte nance and attractive cover 
in highly erodible areas. It requires little input once 
established.  Perennial pea is  also useful as a wildlife 
cover plant. When planted with grasses and other 
legumes, it will inhibit the ability of other plants to 
invade the stand after it achieves full cover, and can 
be used to control woody plant encroachment of 
utility rights-of-way.  Perennial pea can be 
overseeded on rip-rap to hide the bare rock. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Perennial pea is a rhizomatous, deep-rooted legume 
that climbs through the use of tendrils and can attain 
heights of 5-7 feet if support is available.  When no 
support is nearby, the plant forms a viney mat 18-30 
inches thick.  In either  case, a well established stand 
forms a dense mat of vegetation.  The stems and 
petioles are winged with leaf-like appendages.  The 
leaf consists of two long, narrow leaflets with parallel 
veins and bears the tendril from juncture of the 
leaflets.  The flowers range from deep purple, to 
white or pink and bloom from mid-June to mid-
August.  The seeds produced are in 2.5-3.5 inch long 
seed pods that contain the  hard round seed.  Both the 
seed and the pod are black or dark gray at maturity.  
Perennial pea closely resembles sweetpea and flatpea.  
Perennial pea has about 8,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Perennial pea is adapted th roughout the Northeast US 
and states around the Great  Lakes on soils that are 
moderately well to well-drained. It grows best in full 
sunlight and is not well adapted to acid, droughty 
sites. Low fertility and acid soils can more 
successfully be stabili zed with flatpea. 
©Jim Stasz 
Maryland-National Capital Park & Planning Commission 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Perennial pea will not establish successfully unless 
the seed is incorporated into the soil. Broadcast and 
hydroseeding will not work unless subsequent 
erosion covers the seed, or a heavy mulch is applied.  
The best way to incorporate perennial pea seed on 
disturbed sites is to track it in with a bulldozer.  
Inoculated flatpea seed must be spring planted, or 
dormant planted in mid-fall.  A drill can also used to 
plant the seed 1-1 1/2 inches deep.  Perennial pea is 
always planted with a grass companion (typically tall 
fescue) to provide quick cover during the 2-3 year 
establishment period.  With good agronomics on a 
good site, flatpea will cover the soil in 2 years.  With 
poor methodology it may never be successful. 
 
Lime is needed if the soil is below a pH of 5.0, and 
moderate levels of phosphorus and potash are 
beneficial.  Coat the seed with the specific inoculant 
immediately prior to planting.   Plant perennial pea at 
20 pounds per acre(for a solid stand) with 15 pounds 
per acre of  tall fescue or perennial ryegrass.  To add

some color to a grass planting, use 5 pounds per acre.  
More seed will not make up for lack of incorporation 
as outlined above. 
 
Management  
None is required.  Mow the stand no more than once 
per year, after full bloom, and no sooner than the 
third year after planting. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Lancer’ (MI), the only cultivar commercially 
available, was jointly released by the Rose Lake, 
Michigan and Big Flats, New York Plant Materials 
Centers operated by USDA-NRCS. ‘Lancer’ is 
available in the seed trade. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.