Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RICE CUTGRASS  
Leersia oryzoides (L.) Sw. 
Plant Symbol = LEOR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names 
Plant synonyms include  Homalocenchrus oryzoides  
(L.) Pollich, and  Phalaris oryzoides  L.  Another 
common name is sickle grass. 
 
Uses 
Rice cutgrass is valuable for wildlife habitat 
improvement, wetland restoration, and erosion 
control in ditches and other watercourses.  The seeds 
are an important food source for waterfowl, small 
mammals, and shorebirds.  Ducks pull up and 
consume underground stems (rhizomes).  Dense 
colonies  provide cover and habitat for fish, reptiles, 
and amphibians.  The forage produced is highly 
palatable.  This plant’s creeping rhizomes and 
spreading habit are good for sediment stabilization 
along the immediate shorelines  of streams and lakes.  
Tolerant of highly acidic conditions (pH=3), the  species is being studied for use in constructed 
wetlands and the treatment of acid mine drainage.  It 
may have potential for vegetated drainage ditches 
that mitigate agricultural runoff, including pesticides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Rice cutgrass is a native cool  season grass that grows 
and flowers comparatively late in summer.  The seed 
ripens in late August to early October, more typical 
of a warm season species.   This short to medium 
lived perennial spreads by scaly, underground 
rhizomes and often forms dense colonies.  The stalks 
(stems) are upright to sprawling, velvety at the nodes 
(joints), and 90 to 125 (150) cm tall.  Leaf blades are 
7 to 30 cm long, 6 to 15 (20) mm wide, and yellow-
green in color.  They have a coarse or rough upper 
surface and are lined with  tiny teeth along the 
margins.  The flowerhead (panicle) is open, often 
drooping, and 10 to 20 cm long.  Some panicles 
remain enclosed within the lower leaf sheaths and 
release seeds upon decay of  the stem.  The seed hull 
is covered with minute bristles that readily cling to 
clothing or fur for dispersal.  Rice cutgrass is 
widespread across southern Canada and most of the 
United States.  It is also found in the warmer parts of 
Europe. 
 
Key to identification:  This grass is quickly identified 
by running a hand through it.  The sharp leaves can 
cut flesh and tear weaker clothing.  They are abrasive 
and sandpapery to the touch.  Seeds resemble rice 
and are not easily confused with other native grasses.  
The spikelets hang in a single row creating a 1-sided 
appearance to each panicle branch.   Rice cutgrass 
can easily be confused with two other species of 
Leersia  commonly found in North America.  Consult 
botanical keys for proper ID. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Rice cutgrass is 
occasional to very abundant.  Once stands are 
located, seed is easily stripped by hand.  Retention of 
seed is fair at best.  Seed shatters (drops) readily at 
maturity. 
 
Adaptation:  Rice cutgrass can be found in a variety 
of wet, sunny, and partially shaded sites.  However, it 
is most common near streams,  ponds, or beaver areas, 
and in ditches, canals, or  freshwater marshes.  This

species thrives best in nutrient rich mud and slow 
moving or stagnant water.  Seedlings may not survive 
submergence for more than 2 to 3 days, while mature 
plants easily tolerate seasonal to permanent flooding.  
Reportedly, this grass can grow in standing water up 
to 0.5 (15 cm), 1 ft (30 cm) or 3 ft (1 meter) deep.  
It can be found in other habitats where soils are 
saturated at or near the surface year round or 
continuously moist in summ er.  It occasionally co-
exists with reed canarygrass ( Phalaris arundinacea) 
on wetter sites, but is much less broadly adapted.  
Soils may range from acid to alkaline [pH (3) 5.1 to 
8.8] sands, silts, loams, or clays.  For natural 
regeneration, rice cutgrass needs bare mud and an 
open vegetative structure created by seasonal 
inundation and regular disturbance. 
 
Establishment 
Rice cutgrass 
seed possesses 
physiological 
dormancy 
requiring a 180 
to 270 day 
period of cool, 
moist 
stratification 
(moist chilling).  
Gentle 
scarification 
(abrasion of the 
seed coat after 
hull removal) 
may improve germination as well.  Late summer or 
early fall seeding is recommended.  Seeds will 
germinate the following spring.  There are 
approximately 360,000 seeds/lb (+/- 20%).  A 
seeding rate of 1 lb/acre of pure live seeds will result 
in 8 live seeds per square foot.  Rarely sown alone 
due to cost, it typically comprises 1 to 20% of a seed 
mix. Rhizomes, rootstock, and container plants are 
also used for establishment.  A spacing of 1 to 3 feet  
(30-90 cm) will achieve uniform ground coverage in  
1 to 3 years respectively.  Rhizomes should be 
planted 2 to 5 inches (5-12 cm) deep.   
 
Management  
Plants develop relatively slowly in spring, becoming 
most productive during the summer.  The seed 
matures in late August or September and the plants 
go dormant soon after (October-November).  Stand 
maintenance or proliferation requires adequate soil 
fertility, regular flooding, and soil disturbance every 
two to three years to creat e open areas.  For wildlife 
enhancement, this species is well suited to moist soil 
management techniques (slow summer de-watering,  soil disking, etc.) applied to certain wetlands and 
shallow water impoundments.  In some cases, 
disturbance and regeneration have been promoted by 
grazing cattle. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Rice cutgrass has a narrow ecological adaptation and 
may not persist well.  However, it is also a weed in 
some situations, including commercial cranberry 
beds (bogs) in the Pacific Northwest and Northeast.  
It is sometimes considered a weed in the Southeast as 
well.  This species can form dense colonies to the 
potential exclusion of other native marsh grasses and 
herbs.  However, under undisturbed conditions it is 
regularly replaced by other species.  The abrasive 
leaves may cause skin injury. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
 Line drawing reprinted with permission, 
Univ. of Wash. Press 
Seed sources can be hard to locate for Oregon, 
Washington, and California. Container plants and 
rootstock are somewhat more common.  It is readily 
available in the Midwestern states from seed 
producers and nurseries. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris and Amy Bartow , USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 21mar2006 jsp, 16sept2008 dcd; 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.