Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HENBIT 
DEADNETTLE 
Lamium amplexicaule  L. 
Plant Symbol = LAAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Nacogdoches (TX) 
Technical Office 
  
Alternate Names 
Henbit, dead-nettle 
 
Uses 
Henbit provides valuable erosion control in many 
cropland fields of the southern U.S., though it is also 
treated as a weed  throughout the U.S. 
 
Status 
This plant is considered to have invasive 
characteristics and be weedy by several sources.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 © William S. Justice Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Mint Family (Lamiaceae).  Unlike many of its 
relatives, henbit does not have a strong or distinctive 
odor.  This introduced native of Europe and the 
Mediterranean, is a cool season annual/biennial that 
reaches a height of 6 to 15 inches.  The plant has two 
types of leaves.  The lower leaves have petioles and 
are not associated with the flowers, while the upper 
leaves are sessile (not st emmed) and located just 
below the flower clusters.   Both leaf types are similar 
in shape, being somewhat rounded, incised, and 
opposite.  Under a hand lens, the flower bracts are 
very hairy.  The zygomorphic flowers are small, 
usually purple, and to th e novice would appear to 
resemble a very small orchid.  The stems are square.  
It is very common in yards, parks, cropland fields, 
and roadsides.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:  
Lee Davis, USDA NRCS Technical Office #2, 
Nacagdoches, Texas. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lee Davis, USDA NRCS Technical Office #2, 
Nacagdoches, Texas. 
 
Edited: 28sep05 jsp; 060802 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.