Plant Fact Sheet
BIG DEERVETCH 
Lotus crassifolius (Benth.) Greene  
Plant Symbol = LOCR 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center  
 
Big deervetch in flower, © G. D. Carr, 2006.  
Alternate Names 
Alternative c ommon names:   buck lotus , broad leaved 
lotus, thick -leaved lotus, thickleaf trefoil, thickleaf bird's -
foot trefoil, Otay Mountain lotus  ( = L.  crassifolius  var. 
otayensis )  
Alternative s cientific names: Hosackia crassifolia ; Lotus 
aboriginus  (= Lotus crassifolius var . subglaber ) 
Uses  
Wildlife/livestock forage:  The seed and foliage of big 
deervetch are eaten by elk,  black -tailed deer,  quail and 
other game birds, nongame birds and small mammals.  
Plants are palatable to livestock and withstand grazing 
with the help  of their perennial roots and rhizomes.  
Crude protein content is  generally high (8 –18%), 
especially on grazed clear -cut  test plots.      Pollinators
: The flowers attract hummingbirds, 
butterflies, honeybees and native bees, and can be 
incorporated into hedgerow or pollinator plantings.  The 
plant also serves as a larval food source for  butterflies 
such as  the silver spotted skip per. 
Restoration/e rosion control : Big deervetch is an early 
colonizer  of disturbed areas, and because it is a 
rhizomatous legume it stabilizes soil while adding 
essential nitrogen and organic carbon  to depleted soils.   
Plants often volunteer on bare road  cuts, and can be 
direct -seeded or established from root cuttings onto 
disturbed sites such as old roadbeds, road  cuts, clear-cuts, 
fire -damaged land, stream  banks and pastures for erosion 
control cover and critical area plantings.  
Status  
The  Otay Mountain  variety of big deervetch  is  ranked 1B  
by the California Native Plant Society (Plants Rare, 
Threatened, or Endangered in California and Elsewhere)  
because  its occurrence is limited to a few highly restricted 
populations  in California .  Variety  crassifolius  is common 
and widespread.   Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
Description  and Adapt ation 
Fabaceae (Pea family): Big deervetch is a robust , native,  
herbaceous , perennial legume.   Plants are winter dormant, 
even in mild growing climes.  They can easily regenerate 
from lateral roots and rhizomes, as well as deep taproots 
that may later beco me exposed near the soil surface 
following disturbance.   Plants are sprawling to erect , 1–5 
feet tall, and stems have a ho llow base.  Compound leaves 
have  7 –23  leaflets that are about 1 inch long, elliptic to 
egg -shaped , generally  1 –2.5  times  longer than  wide, 
bright green on the upper surface and pale r below.  
Flowers  are arranged in umbels of 7 –20  small  (about ½ 
inch) , yellow -green,  pea-like flowers  that become dark 
red or purple -blotched with  age .  A tubular, lobed calyx  
half encloses the petals and giv es the inflorescences a 
pink to deep red color.   Fruits are  oblong  ( 1.4 –2.8 inches 
long  by 0.1 –0.2 inch wide ) and hairless ,  with several dark 
brown  seeds per pod.   Bloom period extends from May to 
August depending on latitude and elevation, with seeds 
gene rally ripening late June to September.   There are two 
varieties of big deervetch:  var.  otayensis  is covered in 
long, soft, wavy hairs ,  while  var.  crassifolius  is  hairless or 
has straight, stiff, sharp hairs that lay flat against the stem.   
There was formerly another recognized variety of big 
deervetch, var. subglabe r, but this is now generally