Plant Fact Sheet
MANYSTEM WILDRYE 
Leymus multicaulis (Kar. & Kir.) 
Tzvelev  
Plant Symbol = LEMU11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California & Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Montana  
 
Leymus multicaulis , Susan R. Winslow, Bridger PMC  
 
Alternate Names 
Many -stem lyme grass , Elymus multicaulis  
 
Uses  
Manystem wildrye is primarily used for reclamation of 
wet, saline soils.  It can be used  effectively  on saline -
affected, irrigated cropland  and  pastureland , and on lands 
where the water table is within 3 ft of the soil surface.  It 
is also used for reclamation of saline seep discharge areas 
on dry cropland, where water tables are ty pically deeper 
than 3  ft and annual precipitation may range from 12 to 
18 inches .    
 
Manystem wildrye  is  also  recommended for use as forage, 
soil  stabilization  for prevention of wind and water 
erosion , and in  wildlife cover plantings.  It is moderately 
palatable to all livestoc k, especially in the early spring 
before it becomes coarse.    
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (
e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetl and indicator values). 
 
Description  and Adaptation 
Manystem wildrye is an introduced, perennial, cool -
season, sod -forming grass.  Plants spread by underground 
stems  and by seed , sometimes forming distinct clumps, 
and flowering culms reach 19 to 32 inches t all.  Leaf 
blades are grayish green, stiff and flat early in the growth 
season, becoming rolled later in the year.   There are 
approximately  150,000 to 175 ,000 seeds/lb.   
 
In its  native  range in  Eurasia, manystem wildrye is found 
in alkaline meadows and sa line soils, and as a weed in 
fields, roads ides, and around human habitations .  In the 
intermountain West, it  is adapted to wet, saline meadows, 
where rainfall e xceeds 9 to 14 inches  or where wet, 
saline -alkaline , sub -irrigate d sites exist .  Manystem 
wildrye does well on moderately -coarse/sandy to poorly -
drained soils, and ranges from upl ands and slopes to 
bottomlands .  It tolerates neutral to strongly alkaline  soils 
( pH  6.6 to 9.0)  and  soils classified as strongly saline  
(greater than 16 dS/m).   Winter hardiness and frost 
tolerance are good, though variable a mong seed lots, and 
it is moderately shade tolerant .  
 
‘Shoshone’ manystem wildrye has been widely 
introduced throughout the west ern US, but its exact 
distribution is currently unknown.  For  updated 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page  for this 
species on the PLANTS w eb site. 
 
Establishment  
Fall  dormant  plantings are recommended for northern 
regions  to overcome  seed dormancy .  Spring- planted seed 
must be mechanically scarified to break seed coat 
imposed dorman cy.   Seedlings have poor vigor, develop 
slowly, and compete poorly with weeds and other forage 
grasses  in the first year of establishment.  It is thus  very 
important to minimize weed competition with properly 
prepared seedbeds  and  weed management prior to 
seeding .  For range and pasture seedings, seed s should be 
drilled into a well -disked  seedbed in late fall just prior to 
freeze up a t a depth of 0 to ¼ inch and a rate of 6 to 9 
pure live seed (PLS) lbs/ acre (for full -rate, monotypic 
seedings) .  Alternately  seed s can be broadcast at a r ate of 
10 to 20 PLS lbs/acre .  
 
Vegetative planting of rhizomes (‘sprigging’) in mid -
September to November is recommended for  
establish ment on sites  typically  saturated or under 
standing water in the spring or early summer, or where 
rapid cover is needed.  Stand establishment from sprigs is