Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ELEGANT LUPINE 
Lupinus elegans Kunth 
Plant Symbol = LUEL4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Mexican lupine 
 
Uses 
This legume has shown considerable promise as a 
winter cover crop.  It produces good to excellent 
ground cover in young irrigated citrus groves, and is 
an excellent producer of honey nectar. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Lupinus elegans  Kunth, elegant lupine, grows  to a 
height of 4 feet and is 3 feet wide.  Growth is from a 
central stem which branches frequently.  The 
blooming period lasts for several weeks, commencing 
about mid-January and continuing to late March.  
Overall seed production is good, but the amount 
available for harvest at any one time is rather limited 
as the seed pods shatter readily upon reaching 
maturity.  The seed produced is small, hard, persists 
in the soil, and volunteers  readily in the autumn  
months. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Elegant lupine is adapted to fine and medium 
textured soils with moderate fertility and a pH of 6 to 
7.  The species has some drought tolerance, but 
prefers a minimum of 35 inches of annual 
precipitation to grow. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Plow and/or disk the soil thoroughly and follow by 
firmly packing the soil while it is still moist.  Fertilize  at the recommended rate at or prior to seeding.  
Twenty-five pounds of seed per acre are required for 
broadcast seedings, while 12 to 15 pounds per acre 
should be used for row planting.  Row planting 
results in more satisfactory inoculation and more 
rapid early growth.  Inoculation is required regardless 
of planting method.  Pack the soil firmly over either 
broadcast or row planted seed. 
 
Management
 
This lupine can withstand moderate drought, but will 
grow considerably better if supplemental irrigation 
can be provided during drought periods.  Seed 
harvesting occurs from mid-March to mid-April 
depending upon location, soil, weather and plant 
conditions.  The seed is harvested while much of the 
plant is still green.  The crop is mowed when the 
optimum amount of nearly mature seed is present and 
is allowed to dry on the ground.  When the leaves, 
pods and stalks are nearly  dry, the material is run 
through a conventional seed harvesting combine. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious  insect pests of the plant; 
however, several insects will attack the seed both on 
the plant and in storage. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Armex (Mexico) is an info rmal release.  Seed is 
available at most commercial seed sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call

202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.