Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BICOLOR 
LESPEDEZA  
Lespedeza bicolor  Turcz. 
Plant Symbol = LEBI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Uses 
Bicolor lespedeza was intr oduced primarily to 
provide legume food and cover to popular game 
animals.  Target wildlife  have included ringneck 
pheasants, bobwhite quail, cottontail rabbits, and 
whitetailed deer.  Honeybees are also attracted to 
their pinkish to purple flowers which bloom in late 
summer when few other plants valuable to 
beekeepers are blooming.  The masses of late 
summer blooms also make it a valuable landscaping 
plant for borders and hedges.  
 
Bicolor lespedeza is best used as field borders and 
along woodlands, on spoilbanks resulting from 
ditching and in small odd areas devoted to wildlife 
habitat improvement.  The value of this shrub 
lespedeza for wildlife improves when planted in 
conjunction with rows of switchgrass ( Panicum 
virgatum ). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Bicolor lespedeza is a perennial semi-woody legume 
native to Japan.  Allowed to grow naturally, it can 
reach a height of 8 to 10 feet with 1/2 inch diameter 
stems.  If cut back, stems will grow 4 to 6 feet tall.  
The abundant trifoliate oval leaves are usually 1.5 
inches long and 1 inch wide.  The pink to purple 
colored flowers of ‘Natob’ appear first in late June to 
early July and continue for 4-6 weeks.   The 
outstanding quality of ‘Natob’ is that the seed 
matures at least a month earlier than common 
bicolor lespedeza.   Bees and insects are necessary to 
adequately pollinate lespedezas.  The small, black, 
bean-like, seeds are singlely produced in pods which 
open when mature.  Seed maturity occurs from late 
September to early October.  Some plants hold seed 
into the winter but most seeds fall by January.  
Approximately 300 to 500 pounds of seed is 
produced per acre.  There are about 72,000 seeds per 
pound. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bicolor lespedeza performs well on droughty, well 
drained, or somewhat poorly drained soils of variable 
texture.  This species does  not tolerate poorly drained 
sites.  For seed to fully mature, a growing season no 
less than 160 days long is required.  ‘Natob’ is more 
winter-hardy than other bi color and shrub lespedezas 
grown in the Northeast. 
 
Establishment 
‘Natob’ plantings can be established with 1 year old 
field-grown seedlings, but  direct seeding is the 
preferred method.  For seedings to be effective, good 
site preparation is necessary.  In mid spring a weed 
free, firm, seedbed must be well worked for good 
seed establishment.  To insure first year germination, 
the seed should be first scarified by abrasion or acid.

Prior to sowing, the seed must be inoculated with the 
proper rhizobial bacteria.  Seeding should occur from 
the date of last expected frost to no later than June 1.  
If established with broadcasting techniques, 8 to 10 
pounds of seed per acre should be used on well-
worked soils; if drilled into rows, 6 to 8 lbs./ac. will 
be acceptable rates.  When co-planting switchgrass 
with bicolor lespedeza, ad d 5 to 7 pounds of grass 
seed to the rates listed above.  Seed should be sown 
1/2 to 1 inch deep depending on soil conditions.  Use 
an adequate mulch such as straw or wood fiber mulch 
to hold seed in place on high ly erodible sites and help 
retain moisture on droughty sites. 
 
Use normal tree planting procedures to establish 
seedlings at 2 to 3 feet in row spacing with 3 to 4 feet 
row spacing.  This method is usually more expensive 
than seeding, but  a good stand can be attained more 
quickly. 
 
Management  
Before or at the time of seeding, 300 to 500 pounds 
of 0-12-12 or 0-20-20 fertilizer can be applied to the 
planting area. Use 100-200 lbs./ac. of 0-20-20 
annually in the spring to maintain a good stand. The 
site’s pH should be corrected to 6.5, if it is below 5.5.  
Seedlings do not compete  well with over-topping 
weed growth.  Control is best attained by allowing 
weeds grow to a height from 18 to 24 inches tall.  
Then, mow the weeds to a height equal to that of the 
lespedeza seedlings. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Natob’ (China) is a cultivar of bicolor lespedeza 
developed and released to the commercial market. It 
was released cooperativel y with the USDA-ARS and 
the Maryland Agricultural Experiment Station in 
1952.  Other cultivars are commercially available as 
wildlife food sources. 
 
Bicolor lespedezas is distributed throughout the East.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or  warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this 
and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.