Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITEWHORL LUPINE  
Lupinus densiflorus Benth. 
var.  aureus  (Kellogg) Munz 
Plant Symbol = LUDEA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
    Brother Alfred Brousseau ( Lupinus desiflorus)       Courtesy of St. Mary’s College of California 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Whitewhorl lupine is useful for soil 
renovation and stabilization. 
 
Beautification : This plant is an excellent ornamental 
for parks and homes. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Lupinus densiflorus  Benth. var. aureus (Kellogg) 
Munz, whitewhorl lupine, is an annual herb growing 
from 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 feet tall, with brilliant white to 
yellow flowers. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Like other lupines, whitewhorl lupines are well-
adapted to open, sunny locations, and will tolerate 
moderate amounts of water.  Their symbiotic  relationship with rhizobium, a root bacterium, 
enables them to fix nitrogen in the soil, enabling the 
plants to survive in nutrient-depleted or infertile soils, 
including alkaline clays and rocky outcrops. 
 
Whitewhorl lupine is distributed throughout 
California.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
The herb provides abundant quantities of seed in 
conspicuous pods; these may be gathered when ripe, 
then shelled, dried, and stored until planting time.  
Most seeds will germinate without pretreatment, 
although germination will be enhanced by soaking 
the seeds in boiling hot water just before planting.  
Treat seeds prior to planting with the proper legume 
inoculant.  Sow seed by broadcasting in winter or 
early spring.  Whitewhorl lupine is subject to mildew 
and root rot and requires good drainage, otherwise it 
is not particular about the soil.  It grows best in cool 
locations and accepts moderate amounts of water 
during early growth, but not direct overhead 
sprinkling (semi-dry conditions are best).  The plant 
can also be grown from basal cuttings which are 
taken and planted out in the spring. 
 
Management
 
Remove faded flowers unless self-sown seedlings are 
desired; otherwise, little or no subsequent care should 
be required. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious insect  pests at the present time; 
however, the plant is subject to mildew and root rot. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Gedling’ golden lupine is  a cultivar with brilliant 
golden-yellow flowers.  It was developed from a 
widespread California native spring wildflower, 
whose pale yellow flowers are not as showy as those 
of the ‘Gedling’ cultivar.  Seeds are available at most 
commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.