Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLATPEA 
Lathyrus sylvestris  L. 
Plant Symbol = LASY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Flatpea is a long-lived eros ion control plant that can 
grow on severely disturbed soil under acid conditions 
and begin a soil improvement process.  It requires 
little input once established.  Flatpea will inhibit the 
ability of other plants to invade the stand after it 
acheives full cover, and can be used to control woody 
plant encroachment of utility rights-of-way.  Flatpea 
has also received extensive interest as a forage due to 
the high protein content, however the presence of 
high concentrations of diaminobutyric acid (DABA) 
has rendered this use unlikely.  DABA is toxic to 
non-ruminent livestock, and also to ruminants if fed 
in quantity before the rumen is acclimated to it.  
Birds will utilize the seed and are not affected by 
DABA. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable  vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Flatpea climbs through the use of tendrils and can 
attain heights of 5-7 feet if support is available.  
When no support is nearby, the plant has a height of 
18-30 inches.  In either case, a well-established stand 
forms a dense mat of vegetation.  The stems and 
petioles are winged with leaf-like appendages.  The 
leaf consists of two long, narrow leaflets with parallel 
veins and bears the tendril from juncture of the 
leaflets.  The flowers are deep pink, and produce 2-
inch long seed pods that contain the hard round seed.  
Both the seed and the pod are black or dark gray at 
maturity.  Flatpea closely resembles sweetpea and 
perennial pea. 
 USDA NRCS 
National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Flatpea is adapted throughout the Northeast to soils 
that are moderately well drained or drier.  It may also 
grow well on some sloping soils that are somewhat 
poorly drained. It is drought tolerant once 
established, and will grow on soils with a fines 
content as low as 15 percent (passing a 200 mesh 
seive).  Low fertility and acid soils can successfully 
grow flatpea, and it will tolerate moderate shade 
better than will crownvetch. 
 
Flatpea is distributed prim arily in the northwest and 
scattered throughout the east ern United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Flatpea will not establish successfully unless the seed 
is incorporated into the soil. Broadcast and 
hydroseeding will not work unless subsequent 
erosion covers the seed, or a heavy mulch is applied.  
The best way to incorporate  flatpea seed on disturbed 
sites is to track it in with a bulldozer.  Inoculated 
flatpea seed must be spring planted, or dormant 
planted in mid-fall.  A drill can also used to plant the 
seed 1-1 1/2 inches deep.  Flatpea is always planted 
with a grass companion (typically tall fescue) to 
provide quick cover during the 2-3 year 
establishment period.  With good agronomics on a

good site, flatpea will cover the soil in 2 years.  With 
poor methodology it may never be successful. 
 
Lime is needed if the soil is below a pH of 5.0, and 
moderate levels of phosphorus and potash are 
beneficial.  Coat the seed with the specific inoculant 
immediately prior to planting.  Plant flatpea at 20 
pounds per acre with 15 pounds of tall fescue.  More 
seed will not make up for lack of incorporation as 
outlined above. 
 
Management  
None is required.  Mow the stand no more than once 
per year, after full bloom, and no sooner than the 
third year after planting.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Lathco’ (western WA) is the only cultivar, and is 
available in the seed trade. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.