Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DWARF WAX MYRTLE 
Myrica pusilla  Raf. 
Plant Symbol = MYPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
  
Alternate Names 
Myrica cerifera, southern bayberry 
 
Uses 
Wildlife:  The fruits of the wax myrtles ( Myrica 
pusilla ) provide a good source of food for wild birds.  
It is believed that the waxy coating may help prevent 
the fruit from drying out in arid climates and may 
help to keep water-borne fruits afloat in wetter ones.  
The branches can also provide good nesting and 
perching habitat for birds. 
 
Restoration:  Dwarf wax myrtle is a good plant to use 
for native area restoration on sandy coastal and 
woodland sites.  Its ability to fix nitrogen in the soil 
and spread by stolons makes it particularly desirable.  
It is a good plant to use in dune stabilization and 
restoration.  On clayey  sites, common wax myrtle 
may be a better choice.   
 
Ornamental :  Dwarf wax myrtle also has ornamental 
value.  Its evergreen habit and aromatic leaves make 
it an interesting landscape plant.  In addition, wax  from the fruit of the wax myrtles can be used to make 
wax for candles.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
 USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC
Dwarf wax myrtle is a small, evergreen, shrub that 
grows in colonies.  A member of the wax myrtle or 
bayberry (Myricaceae) family, it can grow to 6 feet in 
height, and is stoloniferous.   Dwarf wax myrtle is 
dioecious, having male and female flowers on 
separate plants.  They bloom in March and April in 
Texas, but April to June in cooler climates.   
 
Members of the wax myrtle family have resinous 
dots on their leaves and the leaves are aromatic.  In 
addition, they have nodules on their roots that help 
fix nitrogen in the soil.  Plants in this family produce 
fruits with a waxy coating. 
 
Adaptation 
Dwarf wax myrtle can be found from Delaware to 
Florida, and west to Texas and Arkansas.  In Texas, it 
is found in the eastern portion of the state from the 
piney woods of northeastern Texas, to the oak 
woodlands of southern and southeastern Texas.  
Dwarf wax myrtle prefers sa ndy coastal soils and will 
tolerate wet or dry conditions. Nokes (1986) notes 
that it can adapt to heavier soils, and has been grown 
successfully in Dallas.  Dwarf wax myrtle has 
moderate salinity tolerance.     
 
A close relative of dwarf wax myrtle is common wax 
myrtle (Myrica cerifera ).  Common wax myrtle 
grows from 10-30 feet tall, is not stoloniferous, and is 
the only evergreen wax myrtle with wedge shaped 
leaves.  It is usually found  in clay soils near streams, 
lakes, and other waterways, as well as in boggy 
grasslands and wet wooded areas.   
 
It appears that some of the literature combines 
Myrica pusilla  and Myrica cerifera  under the species 
cerifera.  Be sure to carefully read information to 
determine which species is actually being discussed.  
We found only three plant manual authors that 
actually made the distinction: Correll and Johnston 
(1996), Nokes (1986), and Petrides (1986).

Known Distribution 
Consult the PLANTS database for this species 
current distribution. 
 
Establishment 
Dwarf wax myrtle is best reproduced from seed.  
Germination is best if the waxy seed coat is removed 
prior to seeding or stratification (Nokes, 1986).  The 
wax can be removed by hand rubbing (USDA-NRCS 
& USDI-NPS, 1993) or by soaking the seeds in a 
mixture of one teaspoon of lye to one gallon of water 
(Nokes, 1986).  However, it is best to leave the wax 
on until you are ready to use the seed as it increases 
storage viability (USDA-NRCS & USDI-NPS, 1993). 
 
The seeds of the wax myrtle have a dormant embryo 
and require a period of cold, moist stratification.  
This can be accomplished by sowing outdoors in 
cooler weather or stratifying in moist peat for 60-90 
days at 34º to 41º F (Nokes, 1986).  At the Center, the 
seeds took as much as thre e months to germinate, so 
be patient. 
 
A germination study conducted at the Center in the 
fall of 1999 yielded an average germination of 40% 
after 90 days.  Conditions in the chamber were 12 
hours of dark at 10º C and 12 hours of light at 20º C.  
Seeds were hand rubbed to remove the wax prior to 
being placed in the chamber.  No other treatments 
were used.  Seeds began germinating in about a 
month, and germination continued through the end of 
the study.     
 
There are approximately 84,000 seeds per pound.  
Late fall or early winter seeding and a seeding rate of 
3 grams per square foot are recommended. 
 
Nokes (1986) notes that the wax myrtles can be 
propagated from soft and semi-hardwood cuttings 
treated with a rooting hormone.  We did not have 
good success with this meth od at the Plant Materials 
Center, and therefore do not recommend it.   
 
Transplants can be made bare-root in the wintertime, 
or balled and burlap plants can be transplanted in the 
warmer months if the location is shady and the soil is 
kept moist.  At the Kika de la Garza Center, small 
plants have been successfully transplanted from 
cone-tainers in early sp ring.  Use of a rooting 
hormone is recommended with bare-root plantings. 
The use of plastic plant shelters is beneficial to 
protect young plants from heavy browsing, reduce 
plant competition, and create a friendlier 
microclimate until the young plants can get 
established.   
 
Management 
Dwarf wax myrtle requires little management once 
established.  At the Plant Materials Center, dwarf 
wax myrtle is neither irrigated nor fertilized.  
Stutzenbaker (1999) reports wax myrtle to be 
durable, able to withstand periodic burning, flooding, 
drought, and heavy grazing by livestock.  For 
ornamental purposes, Nokes (1986) recommends 
pruning dead limbs in the spring to produce bushy 
growth.   
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher , Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 Edited: 1Oct2002 SDM; 06dec05 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.