Plant Fact Sheet
PURPLE BERGAMOT  
Monarda media Willd. 
Plant Symbol = MOME 
 
Contributed by: Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD 
 Used with  permission of Loghmiller, Campbell & Lynn, The Lady Bird 
Johnson Wildflower Center  
 
Alternate Names 
Purple bee balm and Horsemint  
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanical:   
Monarda species  w ere  used by a number of Native 
American tribes to cur e skin eruptions, reduce fevers  and 
treat colds.    
 
Landscaping and wildlife:   
Purple Bergamot is an adaptable, easy to grow wildflower 
for moist, sunny to light shade locations.  It is a moderate 
spreader which will form a substantial colony.  It is a 
native and can be part of a good wildlife seed mixture 
where native grasses and wi ldflowers are seeded together.  
The common name bee balm resulted from the attraction 
of bees by the fragrance.  Many kinds of  b ees, butter flies 
(especially Fritillaries) and hummingbirds use the curved 
tubular flowers  for nectar.   The seeds are eaten by 
g oldfinches and other seed eating birds.  It is deer 
resistant and ideal for rain gardens  and other plantings in 
moist areas (such as wood edges).  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current  status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).
 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Purple Bergamot is perennial  wildflower that grows 2 –  3 
feet tall.  It is a member of the mint family, and  has 
square stems.  The leaves have a strong mint fragrance 
when crushed.  Its leaves are oblong and pointed 
(lanceolate) and placed opposite one another on the stems, 
and the stems are topped by a cluster of reddish purple 
tubular flowers that bloom in sum mer.  The small leaves 
at the base of each flower (bracts) are also purple or 
purplish.  Purple Bergamot spreads through rhizomes 
(horizontal underground stems that produce new plants).  
Purple Bergamot can be found growing in  swampy 
thickets , stream beds and ditches.    
   
 Purple Bergamot distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For  updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
General : Purple Bergamot can be started by seeds, 
softwood cuttings or by dividing the clumps in the spring.  
Collect seed heads in fall  and spread them over a clean, 
dry surface indoors to  dry for several days.  Then  place 
the seed heads in a paper bag and shake  them.  The  seeds 
will fall  out of the seed  heads and  into the bag.  Then  run 
the seeds and associated chaff through a sieve.  Store the 
seeds in a dry sealed and labeled container or reseal able 
storage  bag with wet sand or peat moss at 38 -  40 degrees 
F for 3  months.   
 
Propagation by seeds : Seeds sown  in flats during January 
and stored in a greenhouse are expected to germinate in 1  
to  2 weeks.  The soil mix can be 1/3  sand and 2/3  
commercial plug mix.  Apply a starter fertilizer solution