Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CUTOVER MUHLY 
Muhlenbergia capillaris 
(Lam.) Trin. var.  trichopodes 
(Ell.) Vasey  
Plant Symbol = MUCAT  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Names 
Muhlenbergia expansa 
 
Uses 
New growth of cutover muhly is fair forage.  Old 
growth, which is partly green during winter, furnishes 
fair forage, but livestock should be fed a protein 
supplement with it. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Cutover muhly is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranges from 1 to 3 feet.  Leaf  blade is 12 to 14 inches 
long; narrow; wiry, tough, twists slightly at maturity 
and margins fold or roll inward.  The leaf sheath is 
rounded, mostly basal and  curls into fibrous mass at 
maturity.  The ligule has a white, papery membrane 
1/8 to 1/4 inch long.  The seedhead is open and 
delicate with a purple panicle 14 to 20 inches long.  
The spikelets are 1/4 inch long, with short awns on 
glumes.   
 
A.S. Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Generally this grass makes up a small part of the 
plant community.  Burning and grazing controls it.  It 
responds to proper grazing use and a grazing 
deferment of at least 60 days during growing season. 
 
Establishment 
This plant makes major growth from April through 
September.  A mixture of young, mature, and dead 
growth in a single clump is usual.  Little, if any, 
growth is made during cool season.  Summer growth, 
however, remains green during fall and winter.  Seed 
stalks are produced in late August and September and 
frequently persist through winter and early spring.  It 
is adapted to level to very gently sloping poorly 
drained strongly acid sands with fine-textured 
subsoil. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.