Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BURCLOVER 
Medicago polymorpha  L. 
Plant Symbol = MEPO3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 © Larry Allain USGS NWRC
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Uses 
Livestock: All classes of livestock except horses and 
mules will eat burclover readily, especially when the 
plant is maturing.  Mature stands are highly nutritious 
and, when abundant, may serve as a finishing feed for 
lambs.  Where growth is lush, the herbage has been 
known to cause bloat in livestock, particularly those 
unaccustomed to grazing it.  Heavy use of the pods is 
most noticeable after the spiny burs have been 
softened by fall rains.  While summer grazing 
burclover, sheep often accumulate numerous burs in 
the wool, lessening the value of the clip. 
 
Cropland: Burclover is commonly used as a cover 
crop in orchards.  Its rapid, dense growth 
characteristics and its ability as a legume to fix 
nitrogen and thus increase the available soil nitrogen 
supply add to its value for such use.  Burclover is 
particularly useful in orchards and vineyards as a 
reseeding annual used in association with strip cover 
management.  It can be mowed to control excessive 
growth, which will not hinder its ability to produce a 
seed crop for the next year.  After seed maturity it 
can be mowed or disked. 
 
Wildlife : Quail and deer make extensive use of the 
dry burs. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant is considered noxious in Arizona.  This 
plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions 
or habitats and may displ ace desirable vegetation if 
not properly managed. Pleas e consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web 
site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Medicago polymorpha L., burclover, is a shallow-
rooted annual legume.  The characteristic growth 
habit of burclover is one of numerous prostrate stems 
branching from the crown and spreading outward 6 to 
30 inches.  Where thick stands develop stems may 
become erect, obtaining height s of 18 to 24 inches in 
more favorable years.  The leaves are subglabrous 
and clover-like in appearance,  with leaflets normally 
wedge-shaped and toothed toward the top.  The 
inflorescence is usually quite limited, presenting only 
a few small, yellow, pea-like flowers.  The several-
seeded fruit is a flattened, coiled  pod, commonly up 
to 1/4 inch in width and fringed with a double row of 
conspicuous, hooked spines.  Well developed plants 
may produce more than 1,000  pods.  The seed is 
rather large for a legume of this type, usually 
developing to over 3/32 inch in length.  
 
Although often considered an indigenous California 
plant, burclover was introduced from southern 
Europe.  Burclover has become extensively 
naturalized in the United States from cultivation as a 
hay or cover crop.  It is one of the  more widely 
recognized  Medicago species, especially west of the 
Sierra Nevada and Cascad e Mountains, where it is 
most abundant. 
 
Adaptation 
Burclover may occur in pure stands, but most often it 
is associated with other wint er annuals, such as soft

chess, wild oats, and filaree species.  As a winter 
annual, burclover germinates in autumn following the 
first rains of the season and matures early in the 
summer.  It is particularly adapted to mild, moist 
winters and hot, dry summers.  Optimal annual 
rainfall for burclover is 10 to 25 inches. 
Although burclover will succeed in many soil types, 
heavy loams are most suitable and valleys and low 
foothills are generally the preferred sites of natural 
plant development.  This species inhabits all 
exposures and grows well under light conditions 
varying from full sunlight to heavy shade.  It is 
tolerant of slightly alkaline conditions and is less acid 
tolerant than subterranean clover.  Favorable growth 
is usually restricted to a soil pH range of 4.7 to 8.0.  
Flowering period for burclover commonly begins in 
February.  On very moist soils, the plants are later 
maturing than on well-drained lands. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Burclover does poorly on soils of low fertility.  In 
establishing stands, except on very fertile soils, the 
use of fertilizer is routinely recommended.  Growth is 
especially poor on droughty , sulfur deficient, granite 
soils and fertilization with sulfur and phosphorous is 
required. 
 
Seedings of burclover are made in late summer or 
early fall.  Later seeding provides little time for fall 
and winter growth and plants are more susceptible to 
cold temperatures an d frost-heaving. The 
recommended seeding rate is 9 pounds per acre.  In 
dry areas, one irrigation period just before seeding is 
ordinarily required.  Earlier seeding or unusually dry 
falls may necessitate a second irrigation to keep 
seedlings from being lost to drought. 
 
Naturalized stands of burclover usually have 
adequate seed inoculation.  For added success in 
developing new stands, inoculation of the seed with 
commercial inoculate is recommended.  Scarification 
of the seed may also be necessary to ensure proper 
establishment. 
 
Management  
Where burclover is adapted on rangeland, seeding is 
usually not necessary as the seed is already present.  
Production can be enhanced with cultivation, 
fertilization and proper grazing management.  
Existing stands in orchards and vineyards will 
continue to re-seed indefinitely under proper  management.  Wait for seed to mature before spring 
tillage.  Don't apply herbicide to strips intended for 
cover crop.  Use phosphorous and sulfur to encourage 
burclover in mixed grass-clover stands. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are specifically recommended.  Other 
species of burclover include 
Medicago rigidula (L.) 
All. and  Medicago hispida  Gaertn.  Seeds are 
available at commercial seed stores in the west. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.