Plant Fact Sheet
OSAGE ORANGE 
Maclura pomifera (Rafin.)       
C.K. Schneider  
Plant Symbol = MAPO  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas  
.  
Figure 1.  Fruit and leaf of Osage orange plant from the PLANTS 
Database website. Photo  by Jeff McMillian
 
Alternate Names  
Hedge appl e, horse-apple, hedge, bodark, Bois d’A rc 
yellow  wood, mock -orange, and bow -wood.  
Uses  
Osage orange has a long and interesting history of use by 
both Native Americans and early pioneers. Its wood was 
once in demand for making hubs and wheel rims for horse 
drawn wagons, mine support timbers, posts and many 
other uses w here decay resistance was important. Osage 
orange wa s first cultivated in the south in the early 
1800’s. It was brought north by Professor Jonathan 
Turner, a biology teacher at Illinois College, and 
promoted as a living fence by John Wright, editor of The 
Prairie Farmer . By 1847 Turner was convinced that 
Os age orange was the best fencing material available. He 
described it as “horse high, bull strong and pig tight” and 
it functioned as a “hedge” fence long  before the invention 
of barbed wire. By the 1850’s Osage orange hedges made 
the fencing of entire farms  possible.  The French found the 
Osage Indians making bows from the wood and called it 
Bois d’A rc (meaning wood of the bow). R ecently, Osage 
orange has been studied for the chemical properties it 
contains that may be of economic importance. Oil 
extracted fr om the seed s has been tested for its potential  as biodiesel. The isoflavone pomiferin has been studied 
for its antioxidant activity. Osage orange has also 
had 
proteolytic enzymes recently discovered in its fruit.  
Status  
Osage orange is a pioneering species  forever  invading 
exposed mineral soils, particularly over grazed pastures 
and abandoned crop fields. It can be a locally dominant 
tree species in those situations. Please consult the   
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for thi s plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).   
Weediness  
Osage orange has the potential to invade areas abused by 
poor management and the over grazing of pasture and 
range land. This plant may become weedy or invasive  
in  some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status a nd use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
 
 
Figure 2. Osage orange  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
General: Osage orange belongs to the Moraceae, or 
mulberry family. The name Maclura pomifera comes 
from William Maclure (1763  – 1840) an early American 
geologi st; and pomifera which means “fruit -bearing” for