Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DEERGRASS 
Muhlenbergia rigens (Benth.) 
A.S. Hitchc.  
Plant Symbol = MURI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
     J.S. Peterson      USDA NRCS NPDC      @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
In California, dense patches of deergrass provide 
cover during the fawning period of mule deer 
(Odocoileus hemionus ) in mountain meadows and 
grassland openings.  The younger palatable tufts are 
grazed by deer, horses, an d cattle and can remain 
palatable if continually grazed.  It is particularly 
sought for forage by animals when first resprouting 
after a burn.  Older tufts ar e poor feed for livestock.  
The seeds provide food for songbirds and probably 
other birds as well.  In sunny openings where 
deergrass occurs, it forms a larval food plant for one 
of the Satyrid butterflies, the California ringlet  
(Coenonympha california)  and for the umber skipper 
(Poanes melane).   Massive numbers of ladybugs 
overwinter in deergrass clumps.  Deergrass is a 
valuable streambank stabilizer, as it has an extensive 
root system, and if grown in dense enough colonies, 
it can be an effective weed suppresser.  In California, 
Pacific Gas and Electric  is experimenting with 
growing it in dense colonies under powerline 
corridors.  Its long, slender culms (stems) and tall 
tufts make it an attractive plant for the garden.  
 
Deergrass is a significant species to central and 
southern California Native Americans who utilize the 
flower stalks in the foundations of coiled baskets.  
Frequently, thousands of flow er stalks are needed for 
completion of each basket.  Culms are gathered in 
late spring while still green, or summer or early fall 
when golden brown depending upon the tribe, 
individual family preference, and elevation of the 
deergrass site. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Muhlenbergia rigens  (Benth.) A.S. Hitchc., 
deergrass, is a perennial bunchgrass reaching heights 
of 5 feet when in bloom.  It is part of the largest 
genus of warm season grasses in North America.  
The bunchgrass is found in dense, large clumps, but 
can occur as a continuous  cover in areas that are 
subjected to light or frequent ground fires.  The 
culms are slender, narrow, an d spike-like, 3 to 4 feet 
in length and less than 1/2 inch wide.  The numerous, 
small spikelets each have one flower.  The ligule 
(where the leaf blade meets the stem) is firm and 
blunt, 1/8 inch long.  The leaves are 1/16 to 5/16 inch 
wide.  The seeds are small, requiring about 2.5 
million to make one pound.  The dense, basal foliage 
is tufted and these large tuft s, up to 6 feet across, are 
a distinguishing feature of  the grass, along with the 
whip-like flower stalks. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is found on sandy or gravely well-drained soils in 
scattered colonies in dry  or damp places below 7,000 
feet elevation from Shasta County in northern 
California south, extending into New Mexico, Texas, 
and Mexico.  Deergrass can withstand periodic 
flooding, but it cannot tolerate poorly-drained soils.  
 
The major plant communities it inhabits include 
valley grasslands, streamsides, and meadows.  
Additionally, deergrass is shade-intolerant and occurs 
in grassland openings within chaparral, mixed conifer 
forests, and oak woodland plant communities, 
maintained with human-set or lightning fires.  On 
most soil types, these grassland areas quickly revert

to the surrounding dominant vegetation type without 
human or natural disturbance. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Broadcast seeding: In California and the Southwest, 
deergrass can be broadcast seeded in the late spring 
or summer during the months of May, June, July, and 
August, with irrigation. The seeds are tiny and should 
be broadcast on top of the ground, and then run over 
with a ring roller or a culti-packer to compress the 
seeds slightly below the soil  surface.  For best results, 
sow at least 4 pounds of  PLS (pure live seed) per 
acre, which amounts to 50 seeds per square foot.  
Deergrass is slow-growing and germination rates can 
vary from 2 weeks up to 2 months.  Fertilization of 
deergrass is not recommended, as it usually gives 
weeds a competitive edge.  Site preparation is 
extremely important for good establishment of 
deergrass.  Both repetitive tillage and burning are 
recommended to drastically curtail weed competition.  
Repetitive tillage involves loosening the soil, 
irrigating, and cultivating the area with a disc harrow, 
following with a ring roller to kill the flush of annual 
weeds.  This is done severa l times prior to seeding to 
reduce the weed seedbank.  Burning involves setting 
fire to all residual dry matter prior to seeding.  
 
Container planting: Container planting is a more 
effective and less time consuming way of 
establishing deergrass, but it is more costly than 
seeding on a large scale.  Deergrass seed can be sown 
into flats, seedling plug trays, or reforestation tubes 
in May.  Plants can be planted out from containers in 
the fall of the same year in soil that has been 
moistened with the first rains, using standard planting 
procedures.  Plants can also be sown in the fall in 
flats or containers and planted out the next summer or 
fall in the designated area.  Plants should be spaced at 
a minimum width of 24 inches.  Irrigating is not 
necessary if it is a normal rainfall year.  Site 
preparation is the same as for the section under 
broadcasting seed.  Larger bunchgrasses can also be 
divided in winter or early spring and transplanted.  A 
good stand of deergrass can be established in 1½ 
years by container planting.  It is thought that 
container planting with grown plugs is more effective 
in establishing deergrass than by seed. 
 
Management  
Once established, deergrass is quite drought-tolerant.  
To maintain its vigor and reduce accumulated dead 
material, deergrass can be  mowed or burned every  several years.  Burning or mowing should be in the 
fall, after it has gone to seed.  Many tribes 
historically and probably prehistorically enhanced 
deergrass populations through firing deergrass stands 
in the fall in California every 2 to 5 years.  Fires set 
by Native Americans increased flower stalk yields, 
recycled nutrients, cleared away detritus, and 
promoted seedling production in the midst of reduced 
competition from other plants.  According to Native 
American elders, these fires maintained the 
bunchgrass in greater numbers than would have 
occurred under natural conditions.   Knowledge of 
past indigenous fire management of deergrass has 
important implications for mountain meadow habitat 
management for wildlife and maintenance of 
grassland openings within shrublands, woodlands, 
and forests for preservation of indigenous cultural 
traditions.  Some areas could be managed with the 
dual objectives of indigenous harvesting of flower 
stalks and grazing after culm harvest. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are several fungi that infect the leaves of 
deergrass, causing debilitation, but usually not death.  
These include tar spot 
(Phyllachora epicampis) , two 
rusts  (Puccinia schedonnardi  and Uromyces 
epicampis) , and stripe smut  (Ustilago striiformis) .  
Fire eliminates these pathogens. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Deergrass plant materials are available from 
commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.