Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BAYBERRY 
Morella pensylvanica  (Mirbel) 
Kartesz  
Plant Symbol = MOPE6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Alternate Names 
Myrica pensylvanica Mirbel 
 
Uses 
Colonies of this salt spray tolerant shrub provide 
excellent secondary stabili zation and cover to the 
back dune areas of the mid-Atlantic coastline.  
Bayberry is used effectively in hedges, wildlife 
borders, and on road banks.  Because some leaves 
remain on the plant throughout most of the winter 
months, it provides year-round shelter for game and 
non-game animals alike.  The berries provide a key 
energy source for swallows migrating south along the 
mid-Atlantic coast.  These fruit are retained on the 
plant well into winter above any accumulated snow, 
making them readily available for bobwhite quail, 
ruffed grouse, ring-necked pheasant and numerous 
songbirds to consume. 
 
The highly scented fruit of bayberry was a source of 
wax for early settlers in America.  This scent is still 
used in candle making.  The aromatic fruit laden 
branches, bare of leaves, have often been utilized for 
residential decoration in fall and winter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
 
Description 
Bayberry is an upright shrub, which is typically 5 to 8 
feet in height, except on sand dunes and poor quality 
sites.  The species has male and female plants.  
Flowers occur in early spring and are not showy.  
Female plants produce numerous small, blue-grey, 
waxy round fruit in the fall.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bayberry is a native of the eastern coastal zone.  
Although adapted to a variety of soil conditions, it 
performs best on light textured soils.  It naturally 
spreads to bare soil areas of sandy soils, but not into 
sod or cultivated sites.  As one travels south in 
bayberry’s native range (south of Delaware) its 
dominance is given up to another species, wax myrtle 
(Myrica  cerifera ).  This species is similar in 
appearance, but has smaller fruit and narrower 
elongated leaves. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center  Beltsville,MD
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Due to bayberry’s intolerance to competing 
vegetation, other vegetative cover must be removed 
or controlled prior to planting.  One or two year old 
nursery grown bare-root or containerized seedling 
stock should be used for all purposes.  Mulching 
around newly established seedlings aids in moisture 
retention and weed control.  To assure seed 
production, both male and female plants must be 
established in close proximity to one another.  
Unfortunately seedling sex can not be determined 
before maturity, so several seedlings should be 
planted in the same area.  Plant one or two rows for 
borders and hedges, at two to four foot spacings.  For 
roadside plantings, establish at three foot spacings.  
Fertilization on most sites is not necessary, and often 
will promote non-target species. 
 
Seedlings are easily produced on raised beds in fall,  
planted once the soil temperature has gone below 40 
degrees F.  Using a maximum of 4 grams of pure live

seed (PLS) per square foot of bed, will produce 
adequate numbers of quality seedlings. 
 
Management 
Bayberry is a natural selection for conservation 
plantings and for landscaping on coastal sands.  
Though not a legume, it does "fix" nitrogen and is an 
important constituent for revegetation efforts.  In 
conservation plantings, this shrub does best where it 
is allowed to spread naturally by root suckers and 
where sand is accumulated.  The nitrogen that 
becomes available over time will encourage other 
vegetation- generally a good thing unless invasive 
species show up.  Shade from taller vegetation will  
not be tolerated by bayberry and the stand will be 
reduced. 
 
In landscape plantings, bayberry should be allowed to 
grow naturally with minimal pruning.  Attempts to 
confine it or shape it will usually reduce its vigor and 
may eventually lead to problems.   Disease and 
insects are not usually severe pests, especially where 
grown with other back dune vegetation. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Only one cultivar of bayberry has been developed: 
‘Wildwood’ (NJ and NC).  This cultivar was 
developed and released by the Cape May PMC in 
1992.  It is the product of open crossing of four 
native selections of the mid-Atlantic region.  
Foundation seed and breeders stock plants can be 
obtained by nurseries from the Cape May PMC, in 
Cape May Court House, NJ.  Planting stock of 
‘Wildwood’ and common bayberry can be obtained 
through numerous native plant nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson  (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York  
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.