Plant Fact Sheet
HAIRAWN MUHLY  
Muhlenbergia capillaris (Lam.) 
Trin. 
Plant Symbol = M UCA2 
 
Contributed by:  USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
Photo by Shawn Belt USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names  
Purple muhly grass Pink muhly 
Hair grass Gulf muhly 
Long-awn hairgrass Muhly grass 
Hairy-awn muhly  
 
Uses 
Conservation:  Hairawn muhly  is a hardy and drought -
tolerant native ornamental grass that can be used for land 
reclamation.   It is also useful as a fine fuel for understory 
burn management programs.  
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  Hairawn muhly produces 
striking pink and purple blooms in the fall.  It requires 
little maintenance and is excellent for meadow gardens 
and as a general garden plant.  Hairawn muhly is known 
to attract beneficial insects such as ladybug beetles 
( Coccinella s pp.).  The clumping habit of hairawn muhly 
makes it exce llent for use as wildlife cover.   
  Status
 
Hairawn muhly is listed as an endangered species in 
Connecticut, Indiana, Maryland, and New Jersey; as 
extirpated in Pennsylvania; and as presumed extirpated in 
Ohio.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g ., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  and Adaptation 
Hairawn muhly  is a native, perennial, warm -season grass 
that grows from 1 –3 feet tall with a 2 –3 foot spread.  The 
stems are un -branched and have an upright habit.  The 
wiry, thin leaves are 18 –36 inches long, simple (not made 
up of multiple leaflets), and alternate (p rogressing singly 
up the stem).  The leaves are green throughout the 
summer and turn copper in the fall.  The purplish -red or 
pink flowers are grouped together in a long, diffuse, airy, 
grouping of flowers which mature from the bottom up.  
The  cluster of f lowers is arranged on a stem that is about 
18 inches long and 10 inches wide and rises above the 
leaves.  The seed stalks are 2 –5 feet tall.  Flowers give 
way to oblong tan or brown seed less than half an inch 
long.  Hairawn muhly clumps but does not sprea d through 
above or underground stems ( stolons or rhizomes). 
 
 Hairawn Muhly distribution from USDA, NRCS PLANTS database  
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment  
Seeds  should  be collected from plants in late  fall  and air -
dried for five to ten days.  Collect seeds during the 
warmest and driest time of day  using a comb to avoid 
disturbing the appearance of the plant.  For greenhouse