Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SOUTHERN CRAB APPLE  
Malus angustifolia  Michx. 
Plant Symbol = MAAN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
narrow-leaf crab apple 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Fruits are eaten by whitetail deer, 
bobwhites, grouse, pheasants, rabbits, squirrels, 
opossums, raccoons, skunks, foxes and many small 
birds. Its fruit is occasionally used for jelly, preserves 
and cider. 
 
Timber : Its hard, heavy wood makes excellent tool 
handle, levers, and small wooden ware articles.   
 
Recreation and Beautification: Typically a weed tree 
but quite attractive in a native setting. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Malus angustifolia  Michx., Southern crab apple is 
commonly found from southern Virginia south to  northern Florida, west to Louisiana, and north to 
Arkansas.  Southern crabapple is a shrub or small 
tree, 20 to 30 feet in height, with a short trunk 8 to 10 
inches in diameter
; with rigid, spreading branches 
forming a broad, rounded, open crown.  Leaves are 
elliptical or oblong, blunt at tip, wavy sawtoothed, 
hairy when young; dull green above, paler 
underneath.  Bark is gray or brown; furrowed into 
narrow scaly ridges.  Fruit ¾-1” in diameter, like 
small apples; yellow-green, sour with long stalk. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Southern crabapple grows best in well drained, moist 
and acid soils (pH 5.0 – 6.5) of valleys and lower 
slopes, stream banks, borders of woodlands, fence 
rows, and old fields in the southeast, often forming 
thickets. 
 
Southern crab apple is distributed throughout the 
Southeast.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment © William S. Justice 
Smithsonian  Institution 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Southern crabapple is mainly propagated by grafting 
using a whip graft, budding or from softwood cutting. 
 
Management  
Southern crabapple should be planted in full sun to 
enhance development of flowers and fruit.  It 
generally requires little pruning.  Pruning is generally 
done to remove sucker growth, open up the center of 
the plant to light and air, to cut undesirable branches 
and shape the tree. If planted with redcedars 
(Juniperus virginiana , Juniperus scopulorum ), keep a 
minimum distance of 500 ft to prevent spread of 
cedar apple rust. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Like most crabapples,  Southern crabapple is 
susceptible to fireblight, cedar apple rust, apple scab, 
canker, scale, borers and aphids. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Southern crabapple is rarely  available in nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program

Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.