Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LINDHEIMER’S MUHLY  
Muhlenbergia lindheimeri  A.S. 
Hitchc. 
Plant Symbol = MULI 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
Lindheimer muhly 
 
Uses 
Cattle graze the leaves of Lindheimer’s muhly that 
remain green during the winter.  Horses sometimes 
choose this grass.  It is an indicator of fair range 
condition. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANT
S Web site and your State 
epartment of Natural Resources for this plant’s   such as, state noxious status and 
 6 to s.  
nches long, often purplish with numerous 
ranches usually less than 2-1/2 inches long, and 
istribution : For current distribution, please consult 
e page for this species on the 
 
palatable associated grasses 
vor Lindheimer muhly.  It can be decreased by 
 June and July, if terrain permits use 
se 
s formed in the summer persist for 
several months.  It is adapted to highly calcareous,   
ultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and  in)  
. Yarlett,  & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
00 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
89, 
D
current status,
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Lindheimer’s muhly is  a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 3 to 6 feet.  The leaf blade is
30 inches long, firm, and usually folded.  The leaf 
sheath is mostly basal and overlapping.  The ligule is 
long, slender, white, pointed, and has a papery 
membrane that is somewhat hidden in folded blade
The seedhead is a narrow, somewhat loose panicle 8 
to 24 i
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
b
crowded with spikelets which lie close to the main 
stem. 
 
D
the Plant Profil
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
This grass is seldom, if ever, abundant enough to be a 
key management species.  Because it is tough and
wiry, it is seldom overgrazed.  Proper grazing used 
and management of more 
fa
close mowing in
of mowing equipment. 
 
Establishment 
It grows from early spring until the fall.  Large, den
bunches have some green leaves throughout the 
winter.  Seedhead
somewhat mesic sites on hillsides and in draws where
one finds seeps. 
 
C
area of orig
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L
1
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 3
Washington, DC.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv;  sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 20
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis o
f 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
bilities t 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disa
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contac
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
e 
ghts, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  venue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
02-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Offic
of Civil Ri
Independence A
2
Service.