Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CRABAPPLES 
(APPLES) 
Malus species 
Plant Symbol = MALUS  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Crabapples are used primar ily in landscape plantings, 
in shelterbelts, and for wildlife benefits. The fruit is 
eaten by songbirds and upland game, and can be used 
for making jellies and spiced apples. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Crabapples ( Malus species) include about 25 species 
of deciduous or rarely half-evergreen trees or shrubs 
native to the temperate regions of North America, 
Europe, and Asia.  They vary from a large shrub-like 
plant, 6 to 8 feet, to a medium tree, 15 to 35 feet.  
The branches are slender and upright.  Flowers are 
showy and vary in color from white to pink to deep 
red.  Blooms appear from mid April to early June 
depending on location.  The apples produced are 
either red or yellow and vary in size from 1/4 inch 
diameter up to 3/4 inch. 
 
Malus mandshurica  (Maxim.) Kom., Siberian 
crabapple, is a tall, spreading species, 25 to 35 feet in 
height, best suited to large, open areas.  Profuse, 
fragrant flowers appear in May.  The fruit, which can 
range in color from red to yellow, ripens from August 
to November.  This species is often used in beach 
gardens which offer some protection from salt and 
wind. 
 
Malus coronaria  (L.) P. Mill., sweet crab, grows 
upright to as a shrub 15 to 25 feet tall, with pink 
flowers which appear in mid-March.  The large fruit 
is used as a main wildlife food. 
 
Malus floribunda Sieb. ex Van Houtte, Japanese 
flowering crab, reaches a mature height of 20 to 25 
feet and blooms heavily in May.  The blooms are 
deep pink, fading to white.  The red and yellow fruit 
stays on the branches into the winter, providing a 
food source for wildlife. 
 
Malus sargeniti  Rehd., Sargent crab, is a bushy, 
densely branched shrub, usually twice as wide as it is 
tall. Its white flowers bloom profusely in mid May 
and are followed by deep red fruit, which remains on 
the branches until December.   In addition to the 
general uses listed above, Sargent crab can be 
effectively used as a pruned hedge. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD
 
Malus sieboldii (Regel) Rehd., toringa crab, ranges in 
size from a shrub to a small tree.  Its flowers are 
white and single, and its reddish-yellow fruit hangs in 
clusters from the branches. 
 
Adaptation 
Crabapples can be grown on medium to heavy soils 
that are somewhat poorly to well drained.  The pH 
should be 5.5 or higher.  Full sun is preferred for best 
performance, but they will tolerate light shade. 
 
Crabapples is distributed throughout the majority of 
the United States.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Crabapples, like other trees and shrubs should not be 
planted into living sod.  The site should be prepared a 
year ahead so that early spring plantings can be made 
into weed free locations that  are two feet larger in 
radius than the seedlings.  Nursery seedlings of the 
species discussed above should  be planted as early in

the spring as possible.  Grafted varieties are usually 
purchased as container plants.  When planted, the 
graft must be above ground.  Do not fertilize during 
the establishment year.  Prune off all side branches 
that are not desired for pe rmanent limbs, and provide 
protection from rabbits and deer in high population 
areas. 
 
In hedgerows, space the plants 10 feet apart for 
‘Roselow’ and 15-20 feet apart for ‘Midwest’.  Plant 
at least 10 feet away from buildings.  Mulching with 
hay, wood shavings, grass clippings, etc. will help 
maintain moisture and control weeds. 
 
Management  
Weeds must be controlled for the first 2 years if 
plants are to survive.  The  application of fertilizer is 
not  recommended at the  time of establishment.  The 
size and shape of the tree can be managed by 
pruning.  Prune all branches that form sharp angles 
with the trunk, and remove all side branches except 
those desired for permanent limbs.  Once crabapples 
become well established, little care is required. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Weeds and grass, if left to grow around young plants 
can stifle their growth.  Rabbits may damage or kill 
young plants.  If the rabbit population is high, some 
protection is recommended.  Diseases include 
fireblight, apple scab, frogeye leaf spot, and black 
rot.  Insects include fall webworm cankerworms, and 
apple maggot.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are many ornamental cultivars of crabapple 
available from commercial nurseries and garden 
centers.  Most are horticultural selections intended 
for urban and suburban landscapes, and many of 
these are grafted onto select rootstocks.  The variety 
should be selected based on the intended use.  If the 
use is primarily for wildlife food, seedlings of the 
species can be purchased at a fraction of the cost of 
grafted varieties which are recommended for 
ornamental plantings.  The seed propagated 
conservation selections exhibit some variability.  
Some of the cultivars selected for conservation use 
include: 
 
‘Midwest’ Siberian crab (Asi a) is 25-35 feet tall, and 
usually spreads at least that wide. It needs 
considerable space for full development. ‘Midwest’ 
has white flowers with a pink cast, and is hardy 
everywhere in the Northeast. 
 
‘Roselow’ sargent crab (Japan) is a bushy, densely 
branched shrub that is often twice as wide as the 8 
foot height. White flowers produce deep red fruit. 
‘Roselow’ can be pruned as a hedge. Avoid planting 
this cultivar in wetter soils. It is not hardy in the 
northern counties of NY, VT, NH, and ME. 
 
Common toringa crab is variable in size but generally 
is a small tree. It has white flowers and reddish 
yellow fruit that is borne in clusters. It is not hardy in 
NY, VT, NH, ME, and northwestern MA.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.