Plant Fact Sheet
POWDERPUFF 
Mimosa strigillosa  
Torr. and A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = MIST2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center   
 
Photo courtesy: USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center   
  
Alternate Names  
Some alternate names include powderpuff,  herbaceous 
mimosa and sunshine mimosa.  
Uses  
Powderpuff is utilized by both domestic livestock and 
wildlife.  It serves as a food source for cattle, goats  sheep 
and deer.  Powderpuff is also an important plant for 
pollinator habitat.  Bees utilize powderpuff as a pollen 
source while little sulphur butterfly c aterpillars (Pyristia 
lisa ) feed on the foliage.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Powderpuff is a native, warm season , perennial  legume 
which may  r each up  to eight inches in height . Unlike 
other  Mimosa  species, powderpuff does not have small 
prickles  along its stems . The plant produces seed and 
spreads by stems which root to  the ground along their  length
. The leaves are alternately arranged  along the stem 
and are  bipinnate.  The leaflets are sensitive to contact, 
folding up quickly after being disturbed . The plant 
produces a showy pink bloom about one inch long during 
the spring and sum mer. The flowers develop into small, 
flattened, oblong se ed pods which turn brown when 
mature.  
The plant can be found on various soils, especially sandy 
loam . Preferred  areas are prairies, grasslands, meadows, 
forest openings , and roadsides.
 Powderpuff is found 
throughout  the southeastern United State s. For  updated  
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page  for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
 
Powderpuff  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Establishment 
A soil analysis should be conducted prior to planting to 
determine if soil amendments of phos phorus and 
potassium are needed .  The optimum pH range is 6.2 to 
7.1.  Soils with a p H less than 4.1  are unsuitable and must 
be amended to increase pH.  
 
Seedbed preparation should begin in advance of planting. 
Planting can be completed in  spring or early fall. Prepare 
a clean, weed free seedbed using tillage or herbicide 
application.  Soil amendments maybe added while 
preparing the seed bed to help incorporate them in the 
soil.  Prior to planting, the soil should be firm, not fluffy 
or powdery.  Scarify  and inoculate seed  with strophostyles 
spec 1 inoculant before planting. Mechanically s carifying, 
nicking or roughing the seed coat , results in better 
germination  than chemical  scarification or  heat 
treatments.   Powderpuff, if inoculated, will  fix its own