Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ALFALFA 
Medicago sativa L.  
Plant Symbol = MESA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Uses 
Crops: Alfalfa is harvested as hay which is processed 
or fed directly to livestock, or for seed production.  It 
is also used in pellets as forage supplements. 
 
Livestock : This plant is grown in combination with 
grasses in improved pastures.  It is grazed by all types 
of domestic livestock.  Caution should be taken when 
using alfalfa for grazing due to its high bloat hazard. 
 
Wildlife : Alfalfa is an excellent food for antelope, 
deer, elk, Canada goose, and sage and sharp tail 
grouse.  It is fair food for sandhill crane, mallard, 
Hungarian partridge, and pheasant. 
 
In addition to providing high quality hay, grazing, 
and wildlife forage and protection, alfalfa is an 
important source of leaf meal used for fortifying baby 
food and other special diet foods prepared for human 
use.  Large quantities of dehydrated alfalfa are also 
used in manufacturing con centrated feeds for poultry 
and livestock. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Medicago sativa L., alfalfa, is a long-lived perennial 
1egume.  Flowers vary in color  from purple to yellow 
and are borne in loose clusters.  Pods of alfalfa range 
from the sickle type to those that are twisted into 
spirals.  Each pod contains several small 
kidney-shaped seeds.  Alfalfa’s stems are erect and 
grow from a woody crown to about 2 to 3 feet tall.  
New growth occurs from buds in the crown.  The 
plant has a tap root which may penetrate deep into 
the soil.  Leaves are alternately arranged on the stem 
and are normally trifoliate. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center Beltsville, MD
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Alfalfa grows best on deep, well-drained, friable 
soils.  Lands subject to frequent overflows or high 
water tables are unfavorable for alfalfa.  The pH of 
the soil should be 6.5 or above. 
 
Alfalfa is distributed throughout the entire United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A seedbed must be smooth, firm, free of weeds and 
trash, and contain adequate moisture for germination 
and emergence.  Land grading must be sufficient to 
ensure good surface draining .  Alfalfa should not be 
seeded as a first crop on newly leveled land where fill 
may settle and cause poor surface drainage. 
 
Five pounds of scarified, properly inoculated pure 
live seed (PLS) per acre evenly drilled ¼-inch deep 
on adapted, properly prep ared sites will produce 
adequate stands.  A combination drill and packer is 
desirable.

Cultipacking soil before and after seeding is helpful 
to establishing a stand.  Seeding depths should be no 
greater than ¼ inch on finer textured soils and no 
greater than ½ inch on sandy soils  Spring seedings 
can be made 30 days before the average date of last 
killing frost.  Other dates of seeding may be made 
during the late summer.  
 
Management  
In general, graze or cut for hay when alfalfa is in 
early bloom.  Graze or cut to about a 2-inch height.  
Successive grazings and cuttings for hay should 
occur at ¼ bloom stage or after a 5 to 6 week 
recovery period.  Alfalfa can best withstand grazing 
if rotated frequently or grazed in small strips.  The 
last cutting of alfalfa should be made 3 to 4 weeks 
before the first killing frost date. 
 
Alfalfa may cause livestock to bloat.  Care should be 
used in managing such grazing to reduce the 
possibility of this hazard. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Alfalfa is susceptible to  the spotted or pea aphid, 
alfalfa weevil, stem nematode, bacterial wilt, snout 
beetle, and several leaf spots. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Alfalfa is the oldest crop grown for forage and there 
are many cultivars available on the open market.  
More than 440 publicly and privately developed 
cultivars were approved for certified seed production 
in the U.S. between 1962  and 1992.  For a specific 
state or region of the U.S., use cultivars that are 
adapted and have been tested  for local performance.  
Cultivars are readily available from commercial seed 
vendors. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.