Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
THREE-FLOWER MELIC  
Melica nitens  (Scribn.) Nutt. 
ex Piper  
Plant Symbol = MENI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
threeflower melicgrass 
 
Uses 
Restoration:  Three-flower melic ( Melica nitens) can 
be a good, native, cool-season grass for restoration of 
riparian or wooded pastures in central Texas.  It does 
not appear to be suited to south Texas conditions 
where it will survive, but does not thrive or produce 
seed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Three-flower melic is a native, cool-season, perennial 
bunchgrass.  It can grow two to three feet in height.   Three-flower melic is a member of the Festuceae 
tribe of the grass family
 (Poaceae).  Gould (1975) 
notes that the common name three-flower melic is 
inappropriate for most Texas accessions because the 
plants’ spikelets commonly have only two perfect 
florets. 
 
Adaptation 
Three-flower Melic is found from Pennsylvania to 
Iowa and Kansas, and south to Virginia, Arkansas, 
Oklahoma, and Texas.  In Texas, it is most often 
found in the Edwards Plateau and the North Central 
regions, but can also be found west to the Trans-
Pecos and East to the western portion of East Texas.  
It is usually found in open woods, on moist canyon 
slopes, in canyon bottoms, on rocky grasslands, as 
well as along stream banks and along roadsides.  
Three-flower melic tends to prefer partial shade, and 
calcareous or sandy loam soils. 
 USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
 
Known Distribution 
Please consult the distribution map on PLANTS for 
this species. 
 
Establishment 
Three-flower melic can be grown from seed.  It has 
small, hard, shiny, dark br own seeds that are easy to 
work with. Germination testing at Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center in the fall of 1998 yielded 
germination percentages ranging from 51% to 70% 
for different accessions.  Sixteen hours of darkness at 
15ºC and eight hours of light at 30ºC appeared to 
produce the best germination.  No treatments were 
applied to seeds used for this study. 
 
Seed should be planted at  approximately a ¼ inch 
depth.  A seeding rate of four pounds of pure live 
seed (PLS) per acre is re commended.  In planting 
mixtures, reduce the rate according to the amount of 
three-flower melic in the mixture.  There are 
approximately 235,700 melic seeds per pound. 
 
 Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by 
either tillage or herbicide.  Prior to planting, the site 
should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Planting should be scheduled for late summer or 
early fall.  Planting is best  done with a seed drill.  
Broadcast seeding may be used, but some type of 
additional soil coverage will be beneficial to ensure 
good seed to soil contact.   Soil analysis should be

performed prior to planting to determine the 
necessary fertilizer applications. 
 
Management 
Although three-flower melic is a cool-season grass, it 
put on growth throughout the summer at a field site 
in South Central Texas.  It may be better classified as 
a year- round forage grass for riparian-savannah 
pastures in the Texas Hill Country.  A planting of 
three-flower melic in Bandera, Texas yielded up to 
140 pounds of seed per acre. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher , Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 Edited: 1Oct2002 SDM; 06dec05 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.