Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACKGUM 
Nyssa sylvatica  Marsh 
Plant Symbol = NYSY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
sourgum, pepperidge, tupelo, tupelo-gum 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Reestablishes well in erosion prone 
areas like burned over fo rest, abandoned fields, 
rolling hills and cold mountain swamps.  
 
Wildlife : Black bears, foxes, wood ducks, wild 
turkeys, robins, woodpeckers, mockingbirds, brown 
thrashers, thrushes, flicke rs, and starlings frequently 
eat the fruit, while white-tailed deer and beavers 
browse the twigs, foliage and young sprouts. 
Additionally, provides cavity and nesting sites for a 
variety of birds and mammals and a good honey tree. 
 
Timber : Its wood is used for light, nonsplitting 
woodwork such as in docks and wharves; veneer, 
containers, crossties and pallets. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Excellent ornamental 
plant for its straight bole, shapely crown and 
attractive autumn foliage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Nyssa sylvatica  Marsh., blackgum, grows from 
Maine west to New York, extreme southern Ontario, 
central Michigan, Illinois,  central Missouri, and south 
to central Florida. It is a medium- to large-sized tree, 
frequently 60 to 80 ft high and 3 to 4 ft in diameter; it 
typically has dense foliage with a conical crown on a 
straight trunk.  The simple, alternate leaves are 
leathery, and densely clustered at the branchlets.  The 
small greenish white flowers are borne singly or in 
clusters.  The bark is reddish brown and broken into 
deep irregular ridges and diamond-shaped plates.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is adapted to a wide variety of sites, from the creek 
bottoms of the southern Coastal Plain to altitudes of 
3,000 feet in North Carolina.  It grows best on well-
drained, light-textured soils on the low ridges of 
second bottoms and on the high flats of silty 
alluvium.  It will tolerate brief spring flooding on 
alluvial sites and is common on the relatively dry 
upper and middle slopes in the Appalachian 
Mountains. On the drier uplands, it grows best on the 
loams and clay loams. It is well adapted to fire. Older 
trees have thick bark and relatively high moisture 
content.  Although aboveground portions of young 
trees are top-killed by fire, it typically survives by 
sprouting from the root crown or caudex. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991. 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Blackgum is distributed throughout the East and 
lower Midwest.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Blackgum is usually found with a mix of other 
species including black cherry ( Prunus serotina), 
dogwood ( Cornus florida ), hickory (Carya spp.), oak 
( Quercus  spp.), eastern hophornbeam ( Ostrya 
virginiana ), and yaupon ( Ilex vomitoria), it is shade 
tolerant and seldom grows as dominant tree but it 
usually grows in the intermediate crown class on 
most sites.  It responds favorably to release from 
overtopping vegetation.  Seedlings grow slowly 
under a fully stocked stand.  At the time of 
disturbance large numbers of new seedlings can 
become established.

Smaller blackgum stumps sprout readily and larger 
stumps sprout and develop root suckers.  Layering 
can be used to produce stocks.   
 
Seed production is highly variable, disseminated 
primarily by gravity and birds, others generally fall to 
the ground and remain dormant in the litter or are 
carried by water.  Seed overwinters on cool, damp 
soil and germinates the following spring. It requires 
nearly full sunlight for optimum early growth.  The 
plant tolerates competition and can exist on 
unfavorable sites. Pre-chilled seeds must be sown in 
spring.  Seeds are drilled at the rate of 15 per ft of 
row and covered with ½ - 1 inch of soil.  A mulch of 
sawdust is often used.  Beds must be kept moist. 
 
It sprouts from the stump following disturbance. 
Smaller sour gum stumps sprout readily while larger 
stumps sprout occasionally.  Sprouts arise from 
suppressed buds and are concentrated near the top of 
the stump.  Stump sprouts can produce seeds at 2 
years of age. 
 
Management 
Seedling establishment is best accomplished by 
shelterwood method.  Regeneration can also be 
accomplished by clear-cutting if  prior to a good seed 
fall or if advanced regeneration already exist.  Due to 
the high palatability of seedlings and sprouts, 
blackgum can be protected by controlling deer 
populations.  It often competes with loblolly and 
shortleaf pine for water and light, reducing its growth 
and development.  Basal tree injections with 
herbicide is effective cont rol method for crown kill.  
Intermediate trees respond favorably to release from 
overhead vegetation; seedlings respond to reduction 
in canopy cover with relatively rapid height growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Tupelo leaf miner ( Antispila nyssaefolia ) and forest 
tent caterpillar ( Malacosoma disstria ) attack 
blackgum causing growth loss and occasional 
mortality. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political  beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means 
for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.