Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD TOBACCO 
Nicotiana rustica L. 
Plant Symbol = NIRU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Aztec tobacco, Native tobacco, Zuni tobacco, 
Mapacho 
 
Uses 
Cultural Wild tobacco is a highly sacred plant in 
American Indian tribal  culture.  Although specific 
tribal uses may vary, it is integral to many 
ceremonies involving prayer, protection, reverence, 
and healing.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Wild tobacco is an annual  forb that grows to 5 feet 
tall but commonly shorter in areas north of its natural  range.  Leaves are alternate, entire, ovate to 
lanceolate, and up to 12 inches near the base but 
reduced gradually toward the top.  Both the stem and 
leaves are pubescent.  Pale yellow, trumpet-shaped 
flowers are approximately 1 inch long and borne in 
terminal panicles or racemes.  The flowers also exude 
a rather unpleasant odor.  The numerous, tiny, 
scarcely flattened, dark seeds form in capsules.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Wild tobacco is native to the southwestern United 
States, Mexico and parts of South America.  Given 
proper care, this species can be grown throughout the 
continental United States. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
If starting indoors seed can be planted as much as 10 
weeks prior to last expect
ed spring frost.  Surface 
sow seed approximately ½ inch apart on firmed soil 
in a 2 to 3 inch deep tray.  Press seed to soil but do 
not cover more than 1/16 inch.  Keep soil moist and 
warm.  Most seed will germinate within 20 days.  
Seedlings can be transplanted to individual pots when 
the second set of leaves appears (approximately 2 
inches tall).  Transplant outdoors in a sunny location 
at 18-inch spacings into rich, well-drained soil after 
any chance of frost.  Harden  plants by placing pots in 
a shady outdoors area for 3 or 4 days prior to 
transplanting. 
Tony Bush 
Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan 
 
If seeding directly outdoors plant 4 or 5 seeds every 
18 inches after the last exp ected frost.  Thin to one 
when plants reach 4 to 6 inches.  So as not to damage 
the roots of the desired plants, clip unwanted plants at 
ground level rather than pulling them. 
 
Management  
Wild tobacco can be periodically fed with a dilute 
liquid or small amount of dry fertilizer.  Manure can 
be added to the soil mix in addition to or in lieu of 
fertilizer.  Irrigate if conditions become droughty but 
wild tobacco is susceptible to disease problems when 
the soil is keep too moist.  Pruning flowers can 
stimulate leaf growth.  Harvest the leaves before frost 
and dry in bundles to retain moisture as they cure.

Prepared By/Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush, Agronomist, Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.