Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWAMP TUPELO 
Nyssa biflora Walt. 
Plant Symbol = NYBI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
Nyssa sylvatica Marsh. var. biflora (Walt.) Sarg., 
blackgum, swamp blackgum 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : Its foliage and twigs are widely browsed by 
white-tailed deer.  Fruits are highly nutritional and 
eaten by a variety of birds and small mammals.  
Additionally, provides cavity and nesting sites for a 
wide variety of birds and mammals.  Its flowers are a 
source of nectar for bees  kept by commercial honey 
producers. 
 
Timber : Used mainly for lumber, veneer, paper pulp, 
and to some extent railroad ties.  It is also used for 
flooring, rollers in glass factories, blocks, gunstocks, 
and pistol grips. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Excellent ornamental 
plant for its straight bole, shapely crown and 
attractive autumn foliage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Nyssa biflora  (Walt.), swamp tupelo, is limited to 
Coastal Plain swamps and estuaries from Maryland 
and southeastern Virginia south to southern Florida.  
It grows on the east side of the Mississippi River to 
western and southern Tennessee. A moderately large 
tree, it can grow to over 100 feet in height and 3 to 4 
feet in diameter; it has a narrow, oblong crown and 
spreading root system which commonly produces 
vigorous sprouts. Bark is light brown, deeply 
furrowed with scaly longitudinal ridges.  Leaves are 
alternate, simple, dark green and shiny above, paler 
and often hairy below. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Swamp tupelo grows well on a variety of wet 
bottomland soils including organic mucks, heavy 
clays, and wet sands.  Best  growth is achieved on 
sites where the soil is continuously saturated with 
very shallow moving water such as banks of swamps, 
ponds, and estuaries of the  Coastal Plain, and in low 
coves and seepages which remain wet year-round. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Swamp tupelo is distributed throughout the 
Southeast.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Stump sprouting is common following logging.  It is 
classed as intolerant to shade and will not develop 
unless released. 
 
Swamp tupelo is a prolific seed producer.  Seed 
viability averages 60 percent, increasing as the 
season progresses.  Seeds are disseminated primarily 
by gravity and birds, others generally fall to the 
ground and remain dormant in the litter or are carried 
by water.   
Seed overwinters on cool, damp soil and germinates 
the following spring.  It requires nearly full sunlight 
for optimum early growth.  Seedlings tolerate more 
competition but are much less adaptable than black 
tupelo.  Prechilled seeds must be sown in spring.  
Seeds are drilled at the rate of 15 per foot of row and 
covered with ½ - 1 inch of soil.  A mulch of pine 
needles is recommended.  Beds must be kept moist. 
 
It sprouts from the stump following disturbance. 
Sprouts arise from suppressed buds and are

concentrated near the top of the stump.  Stump 
sprouts can produce seeds at 2 years of age. 
 
Management 
Seedling establishment is best accomplished by 
shelterwood method.  Regeneration can also be 
accomplished by clear-cutting if  prior to a good seed 
fall or if advanced regeneration already exist.  Due to 
the high palatability of seedlings and sprouts, swamp 
tupelo must be protected by controlling deer 
populations.  It often competes with loblolly and 
shortleaf pine for water and light, reducing its growth 
and development.  Basal tree injections with 
approved herbicides are eff ective control methods for 
crown kill. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The forest tent caterpillar ( Malacosoma disstria) 
defoliates swamp tupelo causing growth loss and 
mortality. Tupelo lesion caused by  Fusarium solani 
results in swelling and roughened bark.   Fomes spp., 
Polyporus spp ., Daedalea ambigua , Hydnum 
erinaceum , Lentinus tigrinus , and Pleurotus ostreatus 
fungi cause heartrot.  It is highly susceptible to 
sapsucker and easily damaged by salt spray and 
sulfate-enriched water. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are recommended at this time.  Seeds are 
extracted from ripe fruits picked from the ground, 
from standing or felled trees. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program  Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.