Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FALSE GARLIC 
Nothoscordum bivalve  (L.) 
Britt. 
Plant Symbol = NOBI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Nacagdoches (TX) 
Technical Office 
 
Alternate Names 
Crowpoison, Allium bivalve, crow-poison 
 
Uses 
It is grazed by livestock, but seldom represents a 
significant percentage of diet due to low productivity. 
 
Status 
This is considered rare or threatened in two Midwest 
states in 2005.  Please c onsult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current stat us (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Lily Family (Liliaceae).  False garlic is a cool season, 
native perennial herb and is one of the first plants in 
Texas to emerge and flower during the spring of the 
year.  The leaves are very narrow (6 to 16 inches 
long), while the flower stem is round.  False garlic 
typically is from 5-22 inches in height.  Flowers are 
white with a yellow base on the inside, about 1 inch 
in diameter, and have 6 pe rianth parts (petals and 
sepals).  This species has two bracts that are located 
at the base of the inflorescence.  This “odorless” 
species is similar to most other plants in the lily  family in that it has a bulb.  In the Great Plains, it 
flowers from April to May. 
 
It is very common in yards, parks, roadsides and 
pastures.  Seldom is it found in cropland fields, due 
to plowing.  False garlic does not tolerate ponded or 
saturated soils, nor is it commonly found in harsh dry 
environments.  Associated 
plants in Texas are henbit 
( Lamium  amplexicaule ), chickweed ( Stellaria 
media), buttercups ( Ranunculus spp.) and bedstraws 
(Galium  spp.). 
 © Jane Villa-Lobos Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Other similar plants are native onions or garlics 
(Allium  spp.), which have a distinctive odor.  Similar 
plants that do not have a distinctive odor are some 
species of  Narcissus (daffodils) and star-of-
Bethlehem ( Ornithogalum umbellatum ).  Neither of 
these have the distinctive two bracts at the base of the 
inflorescence. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None known.  Contact your local NRCS office for 
seed sources of this species. 
 
Prepared By:  
Lee Davis, USDA NRCS Technical Office #2, 
Nacagdoches, Texas. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lee Davis, USDA NRCS Technical Office #2, 
Nacagdoches, Texas. 
 Edited: 28sep05 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.