Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TEXAS 
TUSSOCKGRASS 
Nassella leucotricha  (Trin. & 
Rupr.) Pohl. 
Plant Symbol = NALE3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
Texas wintergrass, Stipa leucotricha 
 
Uses 
All livestock graze Texas tuss ockgrass.  It is a good 
forage, primarily because it is green and succulent 
during the winter when most other grasses are 
dormant.  Its foliage will disintegrate rapidly at the 
end of the growing season, which will make it a poor 
grass for soil protection. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Texas tussockgrass is a 
native, cool-season, short-lived, perennial bunch 
grass.  The height ranges from 2 to 3 feet.  The leaf  blade is long and narrow.  The leaf sheath is longer 
than the internodes.  The basal sheaths enclose a 
nearly awnless self-pollinated seed called a 
cleistogene.  The seedhead is an open panicle.  The 
spikelets are 1-seeded and 
the lemma has an awn 6 to 
10 inches long, rather stout, light colored, and twisted 
like a rope in lower part. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
© Larry Allain USGS NWRC @ plants.usda.gov 
This grass is best managed for winter grazing.  To 
prevent seed from injuring sheep and contaminating 
wool, remove the sheep for 2 to 3 weeks until seed 
ripen and fall to the ground.  For maximum 
production, no more than 50  percent of current year's 
growth by weight should be removed by grazing.  
Periodic grazing deferments during growing season 
allow plants to remain vigorous and produce a seed 
crop. 
 
Establishment 
Texas tussockgrass has the most rapid growth in 
early fall before the cold weather.  It will continue to 
stay green as it grows throughout the winter and 
spring until June.  It often becomes dormant during 
the hot summer.  It reproduces from seed.  New 
plants are also established from cleistogenes (seed 
produced in the axil of the lower sheath and stem).  
Awns on the seed twist and untwist as moisture 
changes.  This characteris tic and the needlelike end 
that holds the seed assist  in planting the seed.  The 
seed also becomes attached to the hair and wool of 
grazing animals, which help distribute them.  It 
grows best on deep loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.