Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STIFF GOLDENROD 
Oligoneuron rigidum (L.) 
Small var.  rigidum 
Plant Symbol = OLRIR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Eleanor Saulys (Oligoneuron rigidum) Connecticut Botanical Society Wildflowers 
 
Alternate Names 
Solidago rigida L., rigid goldenrod 
 
Uses 
Stiff goldenrod can be used for roadside plantings, 
wildlife food and habitat,  and wildflower gardens 
because of its attractive brig ht yellow flowers, and as 
a small component of seeding mixtures for prairie 
restoration.
 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Stiff goldenrod is a native perennial recognized by its 
broad, flat-topped inflorescence (cluster of flowers).  
The plant is a member of the Asteraceae, or aster 
family. It attains a height of over one meter.  It 
flowers during the fall.  The goldenrod flowers are 
like miniature asters and are all yellow.  They are 
arranged in an inflorescence which is about 15 cm 
across and flat across the top.  The leaves of 
goldenrod are stiff, rough textured and are alternately 
arranged on the stem.  The leaves on the lower part of 
the plant are oblong and have short petioles.  The 
upper leaves are lance-shaped  and stalkless; there are 
also longer basal leav es that overwinter. 
 
Stiff goldenrod is more palatable than other members 
of the goldenrod group but is still infrequently 
grazed.  It behaves in a prairie as an invader, i.e. it 
tends to come into pastures in greater amount when 
the prairie has been weakened by grazing. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Goldenrod grows in prairies and dry woods from 
Massachusetts to Saskatchewan, south to Texas 
and Georgia. 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing.  Firm the seedbed by cultipacking.  The 
seedbed should be firm enough to allow the seed to 
be planted ¼ inch deep.  A seeder with a legume box 
works well in the seeding operation, although other 
types of seeders or drills may be used.  Stiff 
goldenrod is easily propagated from seed.  Seed sown 
in spring will produce transplants in one season.  For 
permanent plantings, use transplants in fall or spring.  
Plants are largely cross-pollinated. 
 
Fertilizer:  Apply no fertilizer during the 
establishment year unless soil test indicates a severe 
deficiency of potassium and/or phosphorus.  Use no 
nitrogen during the establishment year as this can 
encourage weed competition. 
 
Seeding Rates:   Adequate seeding rates for stiff 
goldenrod should be about ¼ pound of pure live seed

(PLS) in a mixture.  One pound (PLS) per acre is 
sufficient for seed production plantings.  There are 
approximately 770,000 clean seeds in one pound of 
stiff goldenrod. 
 
Seeding Dates:  Sow unstratified seed in the fall, 
November to March, stratified seed in the spring, 
April to May. 
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing at a height that 
will not affect the goldenr od seedlings. For grassy 
weed control use Poast herbicide and follow label 
recommendations, as herbicide weed control will 
encourage a good stand.   Note:  This herbicide 
product may not be registered on this forb species 
in your state.  NRCS does not endorse the use of 
any product.  The staff was aware of only this one 
product at the time of pu blication.  There may be 
others available.  Refer to product label for 
specific application information. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Northern Iowa Germplasm stiff goldenrod is a 
composite from northern Iowa released by the 
Elsberry, MO Plant Materials Center in 1998.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Jimmy Henry , Manager 
Elsberry Plant Materials Center 
Elsberry, Missouri 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.