Plant Fact Sheet
INDIAN PLUM 
Oemleria cerasiformis (Torr. & A. 
Gray ex Hook. & Arn.) Lando n 
Plant Symbol = OECE 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis , Oregon Plant 
Materials Center  
 
 
Photo by Pete Gonzalves  
 
Alternate Names   
Oemleria cerasiformis  is named for Augustus Gottlieb 
Oemler (1773- 1852), a German-American pharmacist and 
naturalist.  Previous scientific names include Nuttallia  
cerasiformis  Torr. & A. Gray ex Hook. & Arn. and 
Osmaronia  cerasiformis  (Torr. & A. Gray ex Hook. & 
Arn.) Greene.  Osoberry is a frequently used common 
name while Oregon plum, Indian peach, and bird cherry 
are also synonyms.  
   
Uses   
Often the first deciduous native shrub to flower in late 
winter, Indian plum is an important early season nectar 
source for hummingbirds, moths and butterflies, native 
bees and other pollinator species.  Indian plum is popular 
for Pacific Northwest restoration projects due to its ease 
of propagation, rapid growth, and wide tolerances for 
various s hade and moisture regimes.  The fibrous roots 
resist erosion.  Clones that root more readily can be 
employed in restoration projects as live stakes or as 
rooted cuttings.  With adequate sunlight, it bears 
numerous late winter/early spring flowers from a yo ung age but root sprouting may limit its landscape use to 
larger settings.  Various small mammals plus foxes, 
coyotes, deer, bears, and many bird species consume the 
‘plums’ and disperse the seed.  For livestock, this species 
is considered unpalatable.  In
dian plum fruit is edible for 
humans but is often bitter, even when fully ripe.  Native 
Americans ate the fruit fresh, dried, or cooked.  The bark 
was used as a tuberculosis remedy and a mild laxative.  
Strips of bark were used to bind harpoon tips.  
   
Sta tus   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
   
Description   
Indian plum is a fast growing but relatively short- lived 
perennial deciduous shrub or small tree of 6 to 16 feet.  It 
is the only species of its genera and the only member of 
the Prunoid subfamily of Rosaceae that is usually 
dioecious (separate male and fe male plants) or produces 
more than one fruit per female flower.  Indian plum is 
native and common at lower elevations from extreme 
southwest British Columbia to Oregon’s Willamette 
Valley and surrounding foothills.  Continuing south, it 
becomes less common  in the California Coast Ranges to 
Santa Barbara County and western slopes of the Sierra 
Nevada Mountains to Tulare County California.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.     
   
Fragrant 1 /2 inch greenish white flowers usually appear 
by late winter in loose hanging clusters of 10 to 20 
flowers each.  Leaves also emerge early taking advantage 
of sunlight before overstory trees produce leaves and 
shade.  Indian plum leaves are alternate, lance -shaped and 
2 to 5 in. long, with smooth edges that are rolled under 
somewhat.  The leaves are pale green, paler below and 
give off a cucumber -like odor when crushed.  They begin 
turning yellow in mid summer.  Twigs are smooth and 
purplish brown with noti ceable orange pores (lenticels).  
Partitions inside the pith (center of the stem) create small 
chambers that are visible when the twig is split 
lengthwise.  The bark has a bitter taste.  The 1/2 inch fruit 
of Indian plum, numbering up to 5 per flower, star t out 
tan to pale orange, transition through pink to reddish 
purple, then ripens bluish black with a thin waxy coat.  
The seed is a stone, or pit, that contains cyanoglucosides 
(the bitter, toxic compounds also found in almonds).