Plant Fact Sheet
NARROWLEAF 
EVENING  PRIMROSE  
Oenothera fruticosa  L.  
Plant Symbol = OEFR  
 
Contributed by: USDA -NRCS, Norman A. Berg  National 
Plant Materials  Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
 
Jeff McMillian @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database   
Alternat ive Names  
Common Alternate Name
:  Common Sundrops  
Uses  
Conservation;  Narrowleaf evening  primrose is a 
beautiful, native perennial and colonizing wildflower  
which can be used for meadows, native plant landscaping 
and to attract a multitude of wildlife.  It is a good 
component of a pollinator seed mixture with shorter 
statur e native grasses and wildflowers together.  It grows 
easily in sunny, well drained, moderately fertile locations.  
It can tolerate very dry (xeric) conditions, however 
readily spreads and may become weedy in some 
situations.     
 
Wildlife : The flowers are p ollinated by bees, skippers and 
butterflie s.  A sweat bee ( Lasioglossum oenotherae) is a 
specialist pollinator of many different species of 
narrowleaf evening primrose.  These insects suck nectar 
from the flowers and some bees also collect pollen for 
their  larvae.  There are several insects that feed on 
evening primrose including pearly wood nymph ( Eudryas 
unio), primrose moth (Schinia florida) and some 
momphid moths ( Mompha spp.).  Hummingbirds visit the 
flowers for nectar and to eat insects.  The seeds ar e eaten to a minor degree 
by the eastern goldfinch,  mourning 
d ove and the foliage is sometimes  eaten by white -tailed 
deer.    
 
Ethnobotanical:   The Iroquois, Cherokee and Ojibwa 
Indians use this plant for a multitude of different uses.  It 
is used for weight loss, upset stomach, hemorrhoids and 
to treat bruises.  The seeds contain compounds which 
show promise treating breast cancer.  English visit ors to 
this continent took the seeds back to England with them 
and the plant has become naturalized in northern Europe.  
Status  
This plant is listed as of special concern in Connecticut.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natur al Resources for this plant’s current 
status .   
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Exten sion Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  P lease consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
Narrowleaf evening primrose is a 16  –  36  inch tall, 
perennial  wildflower.  The stems are slender , reddish and 
hairy.  The lance sh aped leaves are 2 – 3 inches long and 
progress singly (alternate) up the stem.  The saucer 
shaped, four petaled, canary yellow flowers are 1 –  2 
inches across and mildly fragrant.  Contrary to its 
common name (evening primrose), the flowers open in 
the mor ning and last a few days.  Flowering occurs from 
the tops of its stems during the summer.  The seed capsule 
is shaped like a club at the top and tapers to a slender 
stalk, helping to distinguish this species from others.  The 
over wintering reddish -purple  rosette is evergreen in the 
Mid -Atlantic and south eastern United States.  It can be 
found in meadows, fields, open woods and disturbed sites.

Narrowleaf Evening-Primrose distribution from USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Database  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
In native areas this plant acts as a primary colonizer, 
quickly germinating in disturbed soils and tends to be 
found in poor environments such as dunes and roadsides.  
Af ter colonization it is often out competed by other 
species of plants   
Narrowleaf evening -primrose prefers full sun locations 
with well drained soils, which is extremely important 
during winter to prevent damage .  This plant spreads and 
will  perform best in a well ventilated situation .  It is c old 
tolerant in zones 4 –  8 of the U.S. National   
Arboretum’s Plant Hardiness Zone Map .   
 
Propagation by Seeds : Seed may be sown in the spring 
or fall and will germinate in one to three weeks at 70 
degr ees Fahrenheit.   
Propagation by Cuttings/Division :  Cuttings can be 
easily rooted from tip cuttings taken in spring  or late 
summer.  Due to its fibrous root system, established 
plants can be easily divided in the early fall or spring.    
Pests and Potentia l Problems 
This plant is susceptible to leaf spots and rust, neither of 
which is a very serious problem.    Environmental Concerns
 
Narrowleaf evening -primrose may be an aggressive 
growing plant in certain locations, tripling is size every 
season.     
Contro l 
A non -selective systemic herbicide containing glyphosate 
will effectively control  the plant.  Please contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always re ad label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products m ay be equally effective.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials   
The cultivar ` Fyrveken’ (‘Fireworks’ ) is  about 18 inches 
tall with red stems and buds that open to bright yellow 
flowers.  ‘Lady Brookborough’ has more but smaller 
flowers.  ‘Yellow  River’ has many medium sized flowers 
and mahogany leaves in the autumn.  ‘Hoheslicht ’ 
(‘Highlight’) is only about 12 inches tall with yellow 
flowers.  Oenothera fruticosa subsp. g lauca 
‘Sonnenwende’ (‘Solstice’) is 18 –  24 inches tall has pink 
buds with la rge yellow flowers.    
The plant may have originated in Mexico and Central 
America from which it spread to North and South 
America.  Some species are now naturalized in Europe 
and Asia.      
Prepared By   
Shawn Belt, USDA -NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant  Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
Citation  
Belt, S. 2012 .  Plant Fact Sheet for Narrowleaf Evening  
Primrose (Oenothera fruticosa) . USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 20705.  
Published September  2012  
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS  Web site <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
 
USDA IS  AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER