Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAINFOIN 
Onobrychis viciifolia  Scop. 
Plant Symbol = ONVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Copyright Richard Old WTU Burke Herbarium  
 
Alternate Names 
Hedysarum onobrychis L., Onobrychis sativa Lam., 
Onobrychis viciaefolia Scop., holy grass 
 
Uses 
Sainfoin is nonbloating, and it is a preferred forage 
for cattle, sheep, deer and elk.  They will concentrate 
their feeding on sainfoin even when other forages are 
readily available.  Honey bees readily visit the pink 
flowers and sainfoin honey is of excellent quality.  
Sainfoin seed pods shatter in early fall and the 
nutritious seed is consumed by birds and rodents.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sainfoin is an introduced perennial legume with 
many tall hollow stems, 60-80 cm or more.  Its leaves 
are compound with 5-l4 pairs of oval-shaped leaflets 
and a single leaflet at the tip.  Sainfoin has conelike 
clusters fragrant, pinkish- red flowers on the end of 
long stalks. Seed pods are flat and contain a single 
dark olive green, brown, or black seed, 4-6 mm.  
There are 18,000 seeds/pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sainfoin is adapted to areas of the inland Pacific 
Northwest that receive at least 12 inches of annual 
precipitation.  It is also adapted to much of the 
Northern Rocky Mountains, Northern Great Plains, 
and Northern Great Basin.  Sainfoin was introduced 
to North America from Eurasia.  Sainfoin grows well 
on a variety of well-drained soils and performs better 
than alfalfa on cold soils.  
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
Establishment 
Sainfoin seed is quite large but must not be seeded 
deeper than ¾ inch.  The seed takes up moisture 
rapidly and germinates quickly.  Seed must be 
inoculated with the appropriate rhizobium and 
planted into a firm, well- packed seedbed.  Seed 
should be planted in the spring for best emergence. 
 
Management  
It should not be planted ne xt to shelterbelts because 
the trees and shrubs will suffer from indiscriminate 
browsing and other damage by deer and elk.  
Unconsumed seed will readily germinate on a moist 
soil surface so adequate residue should left on the 
field to maintain moist co nditions at the soil surface 
and promote natural recruitment.  Allowing the plants 
to periodically make seed will increase stand 
longevity. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Sainfoin is subject to crown rot and the stands may 
not persist more than 5-6 years in areas subject to 
heavy infection.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Eski’ was developed for pasture usage and does not 
regrow well after the first clipping/grazing.  
‘Melrose’ was developed in Canada and has better 
regrowth.  ‘Remont’ is an older variety and has 
largely been replaced by ‘Melrose’. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Mark Stannard, Team Leader/Plant Science 
Specialist, Pullman Plant Ma terials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.