Plant Fact Sheet
LEWIS MOCKORANGE  
Philadelphus lewisii Pursh  
Plant symbol = PHLE4   
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
  
© 1995 Saint  Mary's College of California.  Used with permission.   
 
Alternate names  
Gordon’s mockorange or Philadelphus gordoni anus is 
now classified as the same species.  There are at least 8 
subspecies and varieties.  Other common names include 
syringa, Indian arrowwood, and wild mockorange. Lewis’ 
mock orange and mock- orange are alternative spellings.   
   
Uses   
Lewis mockorange  is useful for streambank stabilization, 
including soil bioengineering practices such as live 
staking and live fascines, restoration of riparian areas and 
moist ravines, and erosion control on hillsides and drier 
rocky slopes.  The species provides good food and cover 
for wildlife. It is moderately important winter browse and 
thermal cover for elk and deer.  Quail and squirrels 
consume the seeds.  The flowers are a source of nectar for 
hummingbirds as well as food for certain butterflies, bees, 
and other pol linators.  Livestock generally make light use 
of this plant and palatability is considered low, with 
exceptions.  Sprouts and new shoots are very palatable. 
Native Americans used the wood for arrow shafts, combs, 
bows, cradles, and other products. Bruised leaves and 
flowers formed a soapy lather.  Lewis mockorange is 
cultivated for ornamental  purposes and hedgerows in part 
because of its large, showy, fragrant blooms.   
   
Description   
Lewis mockorange is an erect to spreading deciduous 
shrub in the Hydrangea  family that grows 4 to 12 ft (1.2-
3.6 m) tall and 3 to 9 ft (1.0- 2.7 m) wide.  The leaves are  oblong to broadly lance shaped, opposite, simple, and 1 to 
3 in. (2.5
-8 cm) long with smooth to sparsely toothed 
margins. This species blooms from May to July 
de pending on location. The scented flowers are white 
with four petals, solitary or born terminally in clusters of 
3 to 15, and 1 to 1.5 in. (2- 4 cm) wide. The fruit is a 
small, light brown, 4 -celled capsule and the bark is light 
brown- grey and shredded or sc aly.   
   
Status   
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status, such as state noxious and wetland indicator values.  
   
Adaptation   
Lewis mockorange  does best in full sun to moderate 
shade on moist, well drained soils that are coarse to 
medium (rich, loamy) textured. While preferring open 
woods and stream sides, it can also be found on 
moderately dry rocky slopes and bluffs. Its soil pH range 
is 5.4 t o 8.0 and its annual precipitation range is 14 to 69 
in. (36 -175 cm). Eastern and northern exposures are 
favored by this species.  Classified as fire resistant, it will 
resprout from root crowns after burning and regenerate 
from the seed bank that builds u p in the soil.   
   
Distribution -Lewis mockorange occurs naturally from 
southern British Columbia south to northern California 
and east to Alberta and western Montana. The elevation 
range is sea- level to 8000 ft (2400 m) in the mountains.  
Habitat includes riparian zones, wooded ravines, forest 
edges, dry hillsides, chaparral, and fir and pine 
communities. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.