Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
PURPLE 
PASSIONFLOWER  
Passiflora incarnata L. 
Plant Symbol = PAIN6  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Booneville Plant Materials 
Center, Booneville, Arkansas 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Wild passion flower, maypop, apricot vine, old field 
apricot, Holy-Trinity flower, molly-pop, passion vine, pop-
apple, granadilla, maycock,  maracoc, maracock, white 
sarsaparilla. 
 
Uses 
Horticultural : One of the uses of the purple passionflower 
is ornamental in nature.  This is because of their showy 
blooms and their climbing ability over fences, arbors, or up 
walls.  
Ethnobotany : Native Americans used the poultice root for 
boils, cuts, earaches and infl ammation.  Dried leaves 
boiled with water were also used to treat insomnia.    
Wildlife : Purple passionflower attracts butterflies and 
young tendrils are eaten by wild  turkey.  Deer resistance is 
moderate. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or e ndangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
The purple passion-flower is a native, herbaceous vine, 25 
foot long, which climbs with axillary tendrils or sprawls 
along the ground.  In rare cases, they can be white. 
Intricate, three-inch lavend er flowers are short-stalked  from leaf axils.  The petals and sepals subtend a fringe of 
wavy or crimped, hair-like segments.  The pistil and 
stamens are also showy.  Th
ree-lobed, deciduous leaves 
are dark-green above and wh itish below.  The plants 
bloom from June to September.  The pulpy fruit or 
“maypop” develops in two to three months after flowering 
and may be harvested from July to October.  It will be 
yellowish in color and it is about the size of a large oval 
hen’s egg.   
 
Establishment 
The purple passionflower requires direct sunlight for at 
least half of the day and pr efers fertile, well-drained soil 
although it will grow in heavier clay soils.  Plants may be 
propagated from seed or by cuttings.  Seeds should be 
collected in the fall after the fruit has begun to shrivel.  
Mature seeds are brown in color with no traces of white.  
Wash the gelatinous covering from the seeds if they are to 
be stored for any length of time.  It is best to plant the seed 
directly into an outdoor seedbed.  Cuttings should be taken 
in the early spring.  Remove th e lower leaves from a 15 to 
20 cm cutting before placing it in the rooting medium.  
Removing the suckers that develop around the established 
plants provides materials for propagating by division.  
With a shovel, separate and remove the suckers and roots.  
Transplant the divisions and water them immediately. 
 
Control/Management  
Purple passionflowers may become invasive in some 
regions or habitats. To control the spread of purple 
passionflower, remove the suckers regularly.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Debbie Orick , USDA NRCS Booneville Plant Materials 
Center, Booneville, Arkansas 
 
Edited: August 15, 2008 DLO; 080821 jsp 
 
For more information about this a nd other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the  PLANTS 
Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in 
all its programs and activities on the bas is of race, color, national origin, 
sex, religion, age, disability, political  beliefs, sexual orientation, and 
marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) 
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for 
communication of program informati on (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and 
TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of 
Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitte n Building, 14th and Independence 
venue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or 
TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service