Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SEASHORE 
PASPALUM  
Panicum vaginatum Sw.  
Plant Symbol = PAVA 
 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
 
USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Siltgrass, Sheathed Paspalum, Salt Jointgrass, 
Seaside Millet, Sand Knotgrass, and Saltwater Couch 
 
Uses 
Forage: 
Seashore paspalum is used as forage in some areas.  
It resists over grazing due to its low growth habit, but 
as with most forage grasses, proper management is 
essential to maintain vigorous, healthy stands.  It is 
recommended that no more  than 50% of the annual 
biomass be removed via grazing or cutting.  It is 
typically grazed in the summer and early fall, and has 
moderate palatability.   
 
Wildlife: 
Due to its low growth form, turf formation, and low 
palatability among browse animals, seashore 
paspalum is not a highly significant wildlife plant.  
Geese and other herbivores will graze tender shoots, 
and it provides some cover for small vertebrates and 
invertebrates.   
  
Landscaping:  Seashore paspalum forms dense sod if mowed to a 
one inch height and makes an attractive turf grass.  It 
will withstand traffic well, and has been successfully 
used on golf courses.  Some varieties have a two 
toned appearance to their leaf surfaces which create 
an attractive striped effect when mowed.  Because of 
its salt tolerance, this species can be used 
successfully in areas with salin
e soils or groundwater.    
  
Conservation: 
Seashore paspalum makes an excellent shoreline 
protector.  It spreads rapidly, forming dense stands 
that anchor soil particles and dissipate wave energy.  
It is easy to establish, and can withstand moderately 
high salinity and brief inundation.  It can also uptake 
heavy metals, and is a candidate as a buffer or filter 
strip plant for Phytoremediation of such substances.        
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) 
 
Description and Adaptation 
 
Description 
Seashore paspalum is a native, low growing, warm 
season, perennial grass that reaches approximately 20 
inches in height.  It is highly stoloniferous and 
rhizomatous, similar to bermudagrass,  Cynodon 
dactylon , and will tack down at the nodes forming a 
dense turf.  Seed heads are similar to other 
paspalums, and typically form  a fork with 2 racemes.  
The leaves are fine, approximately 2mm in width, 
sharply pointed with large sheaths, a small, scale-like 
ligule, and have a deep blue-green color.  
 
Adaptation 
Seashore paspalum favors medium to fine textured 
soils with a pH between 6 and 8.  It will not tolerate 
shade, drought, or freezing .  It prefers moist to 
saturated sites and can withstand brief inundations. 
Prolonged flooding is detrimental.  It is salt tolerant, 
with some varieties able to tolerate irrigation from 
sea water. 
 
Distribution 
Seashore paspalum is distributed across the 
southeastern seaboard from Texas to North Carolina.  
It is commonly associated with brackish and 
freshwater wetlands along the gulf and Atlantic

coasts.     
 
Establishment 
Seashore paspalum produces seed, but they are rarely 
viable.  It is established vegetatively using sod, 
containerized material, st olons, and rhizomes.  
Planting material may be harvested and planted in the 
same manner as bermudagrass.  Rhizomes and sprigs 
root and grow easily within 7-14 days.  When using 
sprigs, use at least two nodes per sprig to insure 
establishment, and keep moist until a strong root 
system develops.  Young plants should be fertilized 
with a balanced fertilizer.  Containerized material is 
best planted in the winter and early spring.    
 
Management 
Seashore paspalum responds well to nitrogen 
fertilization up to 8 lbs/1000 ft
2 per year.  However, 
nitrogen levels greater than 4 lbs/1000 ft2 per year 
promotes succulent growth, which encourages 
scalping when closely mowed as a turf grass.  
Nitrogen rates greater than 4 lbs/1000 ft
2 should only 
be used if cutting is done high, such as for hay 
production.  Scalping promotes disease, creates plant 
stress, and lowers productivity.  Lower levels of 
nitrogen inhibit this and provide ample growth.  
Excellent results are obtained with split applications 
of ½ - 1 lb of nitrogen per 1000 ft
2 throughout the 
growing season.  This is much lower than the fertility 
requirements of bermudagrasses.  Seashore paspalum 
can out compete bermudagrass under such 
conditions.  Due to its salinity tolerance, salt water 
may be used as inexpensive irrigation and a selective 
herbicide to maintain stands of seashore paspalum.        
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
When maintained properly, seashore paspalum has 
very few disease and insect problems.  It is 
susceptible to damage from mole crickets, sod 
webworms, spittlebugs, wh ite grubs, billbugs, 
cutworms, and fall army worms, but usually has no 
problems with chinch bugs.  It is also susceptible to 
fusarium blight and Helminthosporium disease.  
Proper mowing heights, irrigation, and fertilization 
will minimize any effects from pests.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
None, though seashore paspalum is sometimes an 
invader on golf courses in some areas of the world.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Commercial varieties and improved material 
includes: ‘Sea Isle 1’ from the University of Georgia, 
collected in Argentina; ‘Sea Way’ and ‘Salam’ 
produced in Florida; Brazoria, a Germplasm release  from the Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center in 
Galliano, Louisiana; ‘Tropic Shore’ from the 
Hoolehua Plant Materials Center in Hawaii; 
‘Adalyd’, one of the oldest varieties;  and ‘AP-10’  
 
Prepared By:  
R. Alan Shadow
, Soil Conservationist, USDA NRCS 
East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, 
Texas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
R. Alan Shadow , Soil Conservationist, USDA NRCS 
East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, 
Texas 
 
Edited: 080724 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conversation
 
Service.