Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN 
COTTONWOOD  
Populus deltoides Bartr. ex 
Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = PODE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Robert Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995 Northeast Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Uses 
Timber: The wood of eastern cottonwood is light, 
soft, and weak.  It is not durable, warps badly in 
drying, and is difficult to season.  It is used 
principally for containers, interior parts of furniture, 
corestock in plywood, and high-grade pulp. 
 
Erosion control : It is planted on strip mine spoils for 
erosion control and wood production.  Male, non-
hybrid adapted clones make good selections for 
windbreaks in multi-row installations.  
 
Recreation : Due to its rapid growth rate, it is 
frequently used for providing quick shade around 
recreational developments, campsites and picnic 
areas. 
 
Landscape and beautification : This species is 
occasionally planted as an ornamental shade tree, 
however caution should be used because the tree 
grows large and is susceptible to wind and ice 
damage. 
 
Wildlife : Seedlings and young trees are browsed by 
rabbits, deer, and domestic stock.  Beavers use 
saplings and poles for food and dam construction. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Populus deltoides  Bartr. ex Marsh., eastern 
cottonwood, is a fast-growi ng tree which reaches 80 
to l00 feet in height and 3 to 4 feet in diameter.  It is a 
relatively short-lived tree, seldom surviving for more 
than 80 years. 
 
The leaves are broadly triangular, ovate in outline, 3 
to 5 inches long and nearly as wide.  They are dark 
green, lustrous above, and paler and smooth beneath.  
The marginal teeth are  somewhat hooked, being 
larger toward the leaf ba se and smaller toward the 
pointed tip. 
 
Twigs are rather stout, round, and distinctly enlarged 
at the nodes.  The conical, pointed buds are smooth, 
glossy, and olive-brown to reddish-brown in color.  
The bark of younger trees is rather smooth and 
greenish-gray.  On older trunks it becomes ashy-gray 
and is roughened by long, deep, longitudinal and 
interconnecting furrows. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Cottonwood makes its best growth on moist, well-
drained, fine sandy loams or silt loams.  Coarse sands 
and heavy clay soils are not satisfactory.  It has been 
found to be relatively tolera nt of drier sites as shown 
by survival and growth of trees planted on strip mine 
spoil.  Cottonwood is resistant to flood damage and 
usually tolerates a soil pH range of 4.5 to 8.0. 
 
Eastern cottonwood is distributed throughout the East 
and Midwest.  For a curren t distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Natural regeneration of cottonwood is usually by 
seed.  Propagation by cuttings is the usual method of 
vegetative reproduction.  The best planting stock is 
unrooted cuttings from 1 to 3 year old seedlings.

Cuttings are planted while dormant with sufficient 
cultivation to reduce competition. 
 
Management 
If this tree is planted for intensive culture 
management care must be taken to reduce completion 
from weed and other unwanted vegetation.  On wide 
spacing, disking between the rows can be used to 
control vegetation.  Care must also be taken to avoid 
over grazing by deer and other animals.  Around 
buildings the plant may prove to be a nuisance.  The 
silky-haired seeds of the female plants can clog 
gutters and the shallow root system may interfere 
with sewer lines. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Eastern cottonwood can be seriously damaged by 
wood boring insects that attacks the main stem, 
branches and root system.  Many leaf feeding insects 
can also reduce the growth and vigor of young trees.  
Leaf rust, leaf spot, and cankers reduce tree vigor and 
growth and in severe cas es cause tree mortality. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Siouxland’ cottonwood, is highly resistant to leaf 
rust and similar leaf attacking fungi. ‘Siouxland’ is a 
male plant, and therefore,  does not produce the silky-
haired "cotton" which many people consider a 
nuisance.  Since there is no seed, the plant must be 
grown from cuttings. 
 
Populus robusta, which is most likely a cross 
between  Populus nigra  and Populus angulata , is very 
similar to ‘Siouxland’ in appearance except that it is 
narrower and branches more widely.  The foliage is 
also resistant to rust fungi.   Populus robusta is a frost 
hardy, rapid grower.  Other selections include 
‘Noreaster’, ‘Mighty Mo’, ‘Platte’, ‘Ohio Red’, 
‘Lydick’, ‘Schictel’, ‘Spike’(cross between  Populus 
deltoides  and Populus nigra, from the New York 
Plant Materials Center, original material from the 
Netherlands) and ‘Walker’.  These selections show 
various levels or resistance from leaf rust and canker 
infestations.  
 Rooted cuttings and seedlings of ‘Siouxland’ and 
Populus robusta  can be purchased from many 
hardwood nurseries.  Other selections are more 
difficult to obtain, but worth the effort. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.