Plant Fact Sheet
BLACK  
CHOKECHERRY   
Prunus  virginiana  L. var. 
melanocarpa  (A. Nelson) Sarg.  
Plant Symbol = PRVIM  
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental    
Plant Center  
 Contributed by:  Heather Plumb  
Alternate Names   
Chokecherry, common chokecherry.   
   
Uses   
Black chokecherry is a valuable plant for providing not 
just food, but shelter, cover, and nesting habitat for 
wildlife. Its fruit is readily sought out by bear, birds, 
rabbits, rodents, and small mammals. The young 
immature plants are desirable to deer, elk, moose, bear, 
bighorn sheep, and pronghorn during the spring as well as 
winter months. During the spring months, while in bloom, 
black chokecherry provides an excellent source of nectar 
for many pollinators such as ants, butterflies, honeybees, 
flies, a nd hummingbirds. Black chokecherry is used in 
urban landscaping enhancement plantings, range and 
mined land reclamation plantings, shelterbelts, and 
windbreaks. Its extensive root system is beneficial in 
reducing and controlling soil erosion in rangelands and 
mine land reclamation. In most windbreaks, chokecherry 
is a good shrub to be used in the outside rows.  Its dense 
growth makes it ideal for reducing wind near the ground 
surface. Native American tribes used black chokecherry 
for many medicinal uses.
 Th e chokecherry fruit was used 
for canker sores, sore throats, sore eyes, and diarrhea. The 
bark of the plant was used for diarrhea as well. Roots 
from chokecherry were dried, chewed, and placed in  wounds to prevent further bleeding. The stems were 
boiled to
 make a strong tea to treat high fevers.    
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status.   
   
Description and Adaptation  
Black chokecherry is a native colonizing, horizontal 
branching, rhizomatous, perennial shrub and/or small tree.  
Its main stem system may be single or may have multiple 
stems branching at the base.  Twigs are slender with 
prominent red to white lenticels; the bark is greenish at 
first and later becomes reddish -brown. As the shrub 
matures the bark becomes grey to black. The root system 
consists of shallow rhizomes which contribute to its 
sprouting and rapid colonization.  Leaves are alternate, 
simple, glabro us and elliptic ranging from 2 –  4 inches 
long and 1  -  2 inches wide with serrate margins. At the 
apex of the leaf petiole, two glands 1 –  2 centimeters long 
are visible. The flowers are showy white aromatic 
racemes with five petals. The corolla is one -hal f inch in 
diameter. Mature fruit, approximately one -third inch in 
diameter, are fleshy drupes that are dark red to black and 
possess an acidulous taste. The fleshy outer layer of the 
fruit is nontoxic. However, poisoning and death have 
occurred in children  who have consumed large amounts 
of berries without removing the stones/seed. The stone 
possesses high levels of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) or 
prussic acid. Seed should be collected in mid -August to 
mid -September.   
   
Black chokecherry is a large vigorous shrub , with mature 
plants reaching an average height of 12 feet and about 
13.5 feet wide.  Black chokecherry begins flowering in 
May and the fruit is ripe in mid to late August. It can be 
found throughout Canada, south to Georgia, west to New 
Mexico, and Califo rnia at elevations ranging from 500 –  
10,000 feet. In Colorado it can be found at elevations of 
4500  – 9000 feet.
 This species can be found along 
streambanks, drainages, gullies, sheltered hill slopes, and 
canyon bottoms. It is well adapted to soil types t hat range 
from Entisols to Mollisols that have soil textures ranging 
from sandy loams to clays. It can tolerate moderately 
acidic (pH 3.5), moderately basic (pH 7.6) and weakly 
saline soils. However, it cannot tolerate soils that are 
poorly drained or suff er from prolonged flooding periods.  
It is well suited in sites that receive 12 to 30 inches of 
precipitation annually.