Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BITTER PANICUM 
Panicum amarum Ell. 
Plant Symbol = PAAM2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
bitter panicgrass 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: The principal use for bitter panicum 
is in coastal dune erosion control and it may have a 
role in stabilizing other dry, sterile areas such as 
roadsides and minespoils. 
 
Livestock : Bitter panicum is consumed by cattle, 
sheep, and goats. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Panicum amarum  Ell., bitter panicum, is a perennial, 
U.S. native, warm season grass growing to a height 
of 7 feet with a growth habit ranging from erect to 
prostrate.  The leaves are 1/4 to 1/2 inch wide, 7 to 20 
inches long, smooth without hair, and bluish in color.  
A robust grass, it spreads sl owly from short, strong 
rhizomes to form open clumps.  Small quantities of  poor quality seed are produced on compact clusters 6 
to 12 inches long and 2 to 4 inches wide. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bitter panicum is adapted to very dry sterile sites.  It 
can withstand periods of extended drought and is 
somewhat winter hardy. 
 
Bitter panicum is distributed throughout the East and 
lower Midwest.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Generally, no site preparation is required when 
planting bitter panicum. 
 Freshly dug bareroot shoots 
(tillers) and rooted or unrooted stem cuttings can be 
used to establish plantings. Plant potted plants and 
bare root plants in staggered rows 2 to 3 feet apart 
with plants 2 feet apart in each row.  Place plants 8 to 
10 inches deep or deeper in moist soil.  Bury 
unrooted stems end to end in trenches 4 to 6 inches 
deep and 2 to 3 feet apart leaving the top 6 to 10 
inches of the stem exposed.   Plant unrooted cuttings 3 
to a hole in staggered rows 2 to 3 feet apart with 
holes 2 feet apart in each row. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center Beltsville, MD
 
Bitter panicum can be established in the fall with 
cuttings, in late winter or early spring with potted 
plants, or in late spring (beginning of rainy season) 
with young tillers. 
 
Management  
During establishment, restrict traffic and livestock 
grazing.  All sites should be allowed to establish the 
first year, prior to any grazing.  Once grazing is 
started do not graze lower than 4 to 6 inches.  Apply 
fertilizer according to soil test recommendations.  
Application of fertilizer may be split. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of bitter panicum. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Northpa’ (NC) and ‘Southpa’ (FL).  Planting 
materials are available from commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program

Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.