Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLUEBUNCH 
WHEATGRASS 
Pseudoroegneria spicata  
(Pursh) A. Love  
Plant Symbol = PSSP6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife : Bluebunch wheatgrass is 
palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is 
a preferred feed for cattle, horses, sheep, elk, deer 
and antelope at various tim es during the year.  In 
spring the protein levels can be as high as 20 percent 
and decrease to about 4 percent protein as the grass 
matures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 
percent throughout the active growth period.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Bluebunch wheatgrass 
is very drought resistant, stands are persistent, and it 
is adapted to stabilization of disturbed soils.  It is 
very compatible with slower  developing natives such 
as thickspike and western wheatgrasses, and 
needlegrass species.  It do es not compete well with 
aggressive introduced grasses.  Its drought tolerance, 
extensive root systems, and good seedling vigor 
make this species ideal for reclamation in areas 
receiving 10 to 20 inches  annual precipitation.  This 
grass can be used in urban areas where irrigation 
water is limited and to stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, 
and roadsides as a mix component. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bluebunch wheatgrass  Pseudoroegneria spicata  
(Pursh) A. Love (formerly  Agropyron spicatum) is a 
perennial bunchgrass common to the northern Great 
Plains and the Intermountain regions of the western 
United States.  It is a long-lived cool season native 
grass with an extensive root system with strong 
tillers.  Bluebunch wheatgrass spreads by seed, 
except in high rainfall zones where some short 
rhizomes may occur. 
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass is highly variable and grows 
to 1.5 to 4 feet tall and seed  spikes are 3 to 8 inches 
long.  The auricles (ear-shaped appendages where 
leaf blade and sheath meet) are pointed and semi-
clasping to nearly lacking.  Leaves are lax, flat to 
inrolled, 4-6 mm wide and green to blue in color.  
Leaf sheaths are generally smooth and hairless.  
Reproductive stems are erect, slender, sometimes 
wiry with a wavy floral stal k.  Seeds have a bristle or 
awn, except on the beardle ss type where the awn is 
lacking. 
USDA NRCS Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bluebunch wheatgrass does best on medium to coarse 
textured soils and can be found on heavy to medium 
to coarse textured soils over 10 inches deep including 
fairly sandy sites.  It can be seeded on clayey sites.  It 
can be found on thin, rock y sites and on very steep 
slopes. It will tolerate weakly saline conditions.  It 
cannot grow on very acidic sites.  It is cold tolerant, 
is moderately shade tolerant,  and very tolerant of fire.  
It is intolerant of high water tables, poor drainage, 
and periods of extended inundation. 
 
On native sites bluebunch wheatgrass is most 
abundant in the 8 to 20 inch annual precipitation 
zones.  Seeded varieties do best with 12 to 20 inches 
of precipitation and will tolerate up to 35 inches on 
very well drained soils.  The elevation range is from 
500 feet above sea level to 10,000 feet.  It is a major 
component of many native plant communities and 
generally occupies 20 to 60 percent of the overall 
composition by weight. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.

Establishment 
This species should be seeded with a drill at a depth 
of 1/2 inch or less on medium textured soils, 1/4 inch 
on fine textured soils and 3/4 inch or less on coarse 
textured soils.  Single species seeding rates 
recommended for this grass are 6 to 8 pounds Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) or 19 to 25 PLS per square foot.  If 
used as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of 
mix desired.  For mined lands and other harsh critical 
areas, the seeding rate should be increased to 40 to 50 
PLS per square foot.  Seedlings are weaker than 
crested wheatgrass and a clean firm weed free 
seedbed is required for establishment (cheatgrass 
competition can cause stand failure). 
 
Seed in very early spring on heavy to medium 
textured soils and in late fall on medium to light 
textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid 
September) seeding is not recommended unless 
irrigation is available.  Dormant fall seedings will 
prechill seed and reduce seed dormancy.  
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly for a 
native grass and stands should be given 3 years to 
ensure establishment.  It is compatible with other 
species and should be used in seeding mixtures.  It 
should not be seeded with strongly competitive 
introduced species. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment. Application of 2,4-D should not be 
made until plants have reached the four to six leaf 
stage. Mow weeds at or prior to their bloom stage. 
New stands may also be damaged by grasshoppers 
and other insects and pesticides may be needed. 
 
Management 
Stands should not be grazed  until they have firmly 
established (usually two gr owing seasons) and started 
to flower.  Six inches of new growth should be 
attained in spring before grazing is allowed in 
established stands.  The growing tip of bluebunch 
wheatgrass is fairly high and stands can easily be 
overgrazed.  Spring grazing should occur no more 
than one out of three years and no more than 40 
percent utilization should occur during rapid growth.  
Heavy early spring grazing  is especially damaging 
and grazing should be delayed  
until flowers are halfway emerging from the 
protecting leaf.  No more than 60 percent utilization 
should occur after seed ripens.  
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass can be used for hay 
production and will make nutritious feed, but is more 
suited to pasture/rangeland use.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Bluebunch wheatgrass is long-lived, spreads 
primarily via seed distri bution, but can spread 
vegetatively in precipitation zones above 18 inches 
annual rainfall.  It is  not considered "weedy" or 
invasive, but can spread into adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions.  Most seedings do not spread from 
original plantings.  It is a cross pollinating species 
and is known to cross with other ecotypes of 
bluebunch wheatgrass, quackgrass, thickspike 
wheatgrass and bottlebrush squirreltail.  These 
crosses broaden the gene pool and do not generally 
dominate a site or crowd out the native ecotypes and 
in many cases are sterile.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Goldar' ( P. spicata  ssp. spicata ) (WA) was released 
by Idaho-Utah AES, ARS and the Aberdeen, ID Plant 
Materials Center in 1989 for rangeland re-
establishment of native plant communities, vegetative 
firebreaks, critical area stab ilization, and reclamation 
purposes. Certified seed is available and breeder seed 
is maintained by Aberdeen PMC. 
 
'Whitmar' ( P. spicata ssp . inermis) (WA) beardless 
wheatgrass is the awnless form of bluebunch 
wheatgrass and was released in 1946 by Idaho-
Oregon-Washington AES and Aberdeen, ID-
Corvallis, OR-Pullman, WA Plant Materials Centers 
for rangeland re-establishment of native plant 
communities and reclamation.  Certified seed is 
available and breeder seed is maintained by Pullman 
PMC. 
 
Foundation and registered seed is available through 
the appropriate state Crop  Improvement Association 
or commercial sources to  grow certified seed. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
Boise, Idaho  Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.