Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LONGLEAF PINE 
Pinus palustris P. Mill.  
Plant Symbol = PIPA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
      J.S. Peterson       USDA NRCS NPDC       @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
longstraw pine, southern yellow pine, Georgia pine 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Longleaf pine is a highly 
recommended species for reforestation of dry, 
infertile, deep sands in the southeastern U.S.  It is has 
limited potential for rehabilitation of mine spoils. 
 
Wildlife : Birds and small mammals eat the large 
seeds, ants feed on germinating seeds, and razorback 
hogs eat the roots of seedlings.  This species provides 
excellent habitat for bobwhite quail, white-tailed 
deer, wild turkey, and fo x squirrel.  Old-growth 
stands provide nesting habitat for the red-cockaded 
woodpecker. 
 
Timber : The wood is often clear, straight, and with 
few defects and used for timber and ship building. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Longleaf pine needles 
are used for mulch.  Resin is used in the naval stores 
industry for gum turpentine and rosin production. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pinus palustris  P. Mill., longleaf pine, is found in the 
Atlantic and Gulf coastal plains from southeastern 
Virginia to central Florida and west to eastern Texas, 
and in the Piedmont region and Valley and Ridge 
province of Georgia and Alabama.  Longleaf pine is a 
long-lived, native, evergreen conifer with scaly bark.  
Needles are in bundles of  3; they are shiny, dark 
green, and 8 to 15 inches long.  Cones are 6 to 8 
inches long.  Mature trees attain a height of 100 to 
120 feet and 2½ feet in di ameter.  Its seeds are the 
largest of all southern pines.  It has extensive lateral 
roots and a taproot that grows 8 to 12 feet long. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Longleaf pine grows best in a warm, wet, temperate 
climate with an annual preci pitation range of 43 to 69 
inches.  Although the species occurs in a wide variety 
of upland and flatwood sites, it is common on sandy, 
infertile, well-drained soils, mostly below 660 feet 
elevation. 
 
Longleaf pine is distributed throughout the Southeast.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Longleaf pine stands are successfully established by 
either seeding or vegetative reproduction.  Seeds 
(including dormant seeds if prechilled) can be sown 
in the fall or spring, pressed into the soil at densities 
from 15 to 75 seedlings per square foot.  Seeds 
germinate 1 to 2 weeks following seedfall.  
Germination requires mineral soil.  The seed’s large 
size and persistent wing prevent it from penetrating 
through the litter.  Seedlings are stemless after one 
growing season and this lasts from 2 to many years.  
During this grass-stage, the seedling develops an 
extensive root system, and the root collar increases in 
diameter.  When the root collar diameter approaches 
1 inch in diameter, height growth begins.  A field-
grown seedling grows 10 feet in 3 years once height 
growth is initiated.  Branch production is delayed 
until the seedling reaches 10 to 16 feet in height.

Vegetative propagation is usually done by grafting.  
If grass-stage seedlings are top-killed, they can sprout 
from the root collar. Once height growth begins, 
sprouting ability decreases rapidly. 
 
Heavy grazing can reduce tree density, significantly 
reducing establishment and causing crop failure. 
 
Management  
Longleaf pine is intolerant to both shade and 
competition.  With frequent fire, uneven-aged pure 
stands form park-like sa vannahs.  Because longleaf 
pine regenerates in openings created by dead trees, 
small clusters of trees of the same age are dispersed 
throughout the stand.  In the absence of frequent fire, 
the species is replaced by hardwoods and other 
southern pines; this hastens the decline of mature 
longleaf pine.  Lightning ignited fires are pivotal to 
perpetuation of longleaf pine on a site indefinitely.  
Excessive grazing reduces young tree density. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The main disease of longleaf pine is brown-spot 
needle blight ( Scirrhia acicola ).  Other diseases 
include pitch canker, annosus root rot, and cone rust.  
Insects that attack longleaf pine include black 
turpentine beetle, bark b eetles, and seed bugs. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are currently recommended.  Seeds and 
seedlings are commercially available from woody 
plant seed companies.  The number of seeds per 
pound ranges from 3,000 to 7,000. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln Moore, Forest Biologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.