Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SANDBERG 
BLUEGRASS  
Poa secunda J. Presl 
Plant Symbol = POSE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
big bluegrass; Poa ampla, Poa canbyi , Poa confuse , 
Poa gracillima , Poa sandbergii , Poa scabrella, Poa 
nevadensis , Poa laevigata,  Poa juncifolia, Poa 
incurve; some of these synonyms, such as  Poa 
nevadensis  are sometimes recogn ized at the species 
level in some states. 
 
Uses 
Livestock : Early spring grazing by cattle or sheep is 
one of the primary uses of Sandberg bluegrass 
seedings.  In adapted areas, there is no other grass 
that provides an equal volume of early spring forage.  
It makes good spring calving or lambing pasture. 
 
Wildlife : Upland game birds, especially pheasants, 
choose fields of Sandberg bluegrass for nesting sites 
because Sandberg bluegrass has more early spring 
growth than other dryland grasses and the basal 
leaves provide good shade. 
 
Woodland : Sandberg bluegrass has been successfully 
used for reseeding burned-over forest lands in pine 
forests of the West.  It has a remarkable ability to 
produce roots which effectively suppress weed 
growth. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1992 
Western Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Sandberg bluegrass is  one of the native bluegrasses 
and is an important component of the sagebrush 
grassland vegetation in the western United States.  It 
is a medium-sized cool season bunchgrass with 
numerous fine basal leaves 8 to 16 inches long.  
These leaves are a smooth, deep blue green and are 
folded with keel-shaped tips typical of bluegrasses.  
This long-lived perennial reaches 2 to 4 feet in 
height.  Its inflorescence is a narrow panicle up to 8 
inches long.  It has a strong fibrous root system but 
will occasionally develop shor t rhizomes.  The flower 
spikelets do not have a web of hairs at the base, 
unlike Kentucky bluegrass, which does. 
 
Sandberg bluegrass begins growth early in spring, 
before crested wheatgrass, and matures in early 
summer unless moisture is sufficient to keep it green 
all summer.  In this respect it is the most persistent of 
all the cool season grasses. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This native bluegrass thrives on a variety of soils 
from moderately coarse sands to fine clays.  It will 
tolerate coarse sands and dense clays, but will not 
grow under saline conditions and can tolerate weakly 
acid or alkaline soils.  Well-drained mountain loams 
are a good place to look for Sandberg bluegrass 
stands. 
 
Although it grows in moist conditions (15 to 20 inch 
precipitation zone) it will not tolerate early spring 
flooding, high water tables, or poor drainage.  It does

best with cool winter moisture above 7,000 feet.  It 
has excellent cold tolerance but does not do as well 
as other cool season grasses during drought.  Its 
tolerance to shade and grazing is moderate but its 
ability to withstand burning is very low except when 
dormant. 
 
Sandberg bluegrass is distributed throughout the 
West.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Seed of Sandberg bluegrass should be drilled at 1/4 to 
3/4 inches deep depending upon soil type: 1/4 inch 
for fine, moist soils, 1/2 inch for medium textures, 
and 3/4 inch for coarse or dry soils.  On semiarid 
lands, 3 pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre is 
adequate.  Harsh or erosive sites require doubling of 
the seeding rate as does broadcast seeding. 
 
The seed should be planted 2 months prior to the 
most reliable precipitation: usually early spring, late 
summer or late fall depending upon the area.  When 
seeding in spring it is advisable to plant as soon as 
possible since high soil temperatures will put the 
seedlings into dormancy.  Prechilling will improve 
germination of the seed.  Seedling vigor is moderate 
to good for a bluegrass.  It does not respond 
significantly to irrigation and gives only moderate 
response to nitrogen applications.  It is weakly 
compatible to seeding with other cool season species.  
It can be seeded with other grasses, forbs, legumes, 
or shrubs.  Weed control may be needed. 
 
Management  
Sandberg bluegrass has good palatability to livestock 
in spring and fall and to deer in the spring.  It has 
excellent palatability to elk all year.  Cattle prefer 
Sandberg bluegrass in the spring and it should be 
grazed when it reaches eight inches in height.  
Livestock graze Sandberg bluegrass in the vegetative  
 
stage, but avoid it when headed.  Livestock should be 
removed while there is still enough moisture in the 
ground to allow regrowth before plants go dormant.  
Regrowth can be grazed after the plants turn green in 
the fall, but a 6-inch stubble should be left. 
 
Overgrazing and severe trampling are injurious to 
native stands of this grass and without proper 
protective grazing, a range will deteriorate rapidly.  
New seedlings are easily pulled up by grazing 
animals and, therefore, should not be grazed until the 
stands are more than 2 years old and are sufficiently 
well-rooted to withstand grazing.  Spring and fall  grazing are recommended.  When properly managed, 
Sandberg bluegrass will compete with cheatgrass. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The primary pests of Sandberg bluegrass are 
grasshoppers, jackrabbits, and rodents. Diseases 
include leaf and stem rusts and stem maggots. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Sherman’ (OR).  Seed can be obtained from most 
commercial seed stores. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this 
and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.