Plant Fact Sheet
WRIGHT PAVONIA 
Pavonia lasiopetala Scheele  
Plant Symbol = PALA13  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
 
USDA NRCS 2009  
 
Alternate Names 
Texas Swampmallow, Rose Mallow, Rockrose, Rose 
Pavonia  
 
Uses  
Wildlife :  Wright pavonia provides dense cover for birds 
and small mammals.  The flowers attract many species of 
pollinators as well as hummingbirds.  The foliage is 
browsed by deer and small animals.  The seed provides 
food to many different species of game birds and small 
mammals.  
 
Landscaping & Beautification:   Wright pavonia produces 
a beautiful pink to red flower that adds color to native 
gardens and la ndscaping. 
 
Livestock:   Wright pavonia is highly palatable to sheep, 
goats, and cattle.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Ple ase consult with your local  NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description  
Wright pavonia is a native, upright, shrubby, perennial, 
warm -season forb that can grow 2 -4 fee t tall.  The flowers 
are solitary on slender stems with five petals.  They have 
a rose -red to pink color and will bloom from June through 
the fall time of the year.  Its leaves are alternate with 
coarsely toothed or lobed margins.  The leaves grow from 
one  to two and a half inches long.  Seed can be easily 
collected from mature flowers.  
 
Adaptation  
Wright pavonia is found in Texas from the Edwards 
plateau south to the Rio Grande Plains and Trans -Pecos 
area.  It is adapted to a wide range of soil types, but 
performs best on sandy to medium textured soils that are 
well -drained.  
 
 
Wright pavonia distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
For updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
W right pavonia should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass
 drill or 
broadcast seedling.  When broadcast seeding, additional 
soil disturbance may be necessary to maximize seed -soil 
contact.  Seed is planted ¼ to ½ i nch deep at a rate of 7.0 
lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre to establish approximately