Plant Fact Sheet
REDSEED PLANTAIN 
Plantago rhodosperma   
Plant Symbol = PLRH 
Decne.  
 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas  
 
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Alternate Names 
     Tallow we ed, Redseed Indianwheat   
Uses  
Wildlife : Redseed plantain  is  a cool season forage 
recommended for upland wildlife plantings and in range 
seeding mixes.  The seed is known to be consumed by 
game birds such as bobwhite quail and mourning doves, 
and the fol iage is eaten by bobwhite quail, Rio Grande 
wild turkeys, white -tailed deer, and cattle.  Redseed 
plantain has been shown to be an important component in 
the diets of both scaled and bobwhite quail in southwest 
Texas.  
 
Erosion:   Redseed plantain  also can b e used in many 
types of conservation plantings, such as stream -side 
buffers and filter strips.  
  Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species,  state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
R edseed plantain is a cool season, annual with a slender 
taproot .  Leaves are oblanceolate  to 35 cm. long and 5 cm. 
wide,  but usually much smaller .  The leaves are grayish-
gr een  in color , pubescent,  with margins that are entire to 
coarsely pectinate or salient -dentate.   
 
The  scapes  (inflorescences) are one to several, hirsute, 
and  shorter   than  to exceeding the leaves  in height.  The 
spikes  are up to 2 dm. long and 1 cm. thic k.  Each flower 
produces two seeds  that are bright red to reddish black  in 
color.  The seeds are 2 -3 mm. long ,  more than half as 
wide, nearly flat on both sides, and have a thin pale 
margin .  STN-496 G ermplasm contains 322,000 seeds per 
pound.   
 
Distributi on:  
Please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Establishment 
Plantains are  established from seed.   Germination tests 
conducted by the South Texas Natives Project (2006) 
found germinat ion rates ranging from a low of 40% to a 
high of 80%  and  rapid initiation of germination following 
the onset of favorable conditions (germination < 36 
hours).   Plantains  typically take 180 days from planting to 
seed maturity .  
For direct seeding, broadcas t or drill seed during 
September through December into a clean, weed free 
seedbed.  Seeds should be covered from ¼ to ½” depth to 
ensure good soil to seed contact.  The full seeding rate for 
redseed plantain is 10  PLS pounds per acre for a pure 
stand.  When  planting this as a component of a seed