Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
WHEATGRASS 
Pascopyrum smithii  (Rydb.) A. 
Love  
Plant Symbol = PASM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
Agropyron smithii Rydb. 
 
Uses 
Erosion control : Western wheatgrass is an excellent 
erosion control plant because of its spreading 
rhizomes.  It is widely used in seed mixtures for 
range seeding, revegetation of saline and alkaline 
areas, and in critical areas for erosion control in the 
central and northern Great Plains region.  This grass 
protected watershed dams in Kansas from damage 
when they were overtopped during a 14-inch rainfall 
event. 
 
Reclamation : Western wheatgrass is frequently used 
in the northern Great Plains for surface mine 
revegetation.  Because of its strong rhizomes and  adaptation to a variety of soils, it performs well as 
part of a reclamation mixture. 
 
Livestock
: Forage quality is high for pasture or range 
seedings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pascopyrum smithii  (Rydb.) A. Love, western 
wheatgrass, is  perhaps one of the best known and 
most commonly used native grasses.  It is a long-
lived, cool season species th at has coarse blue- green 
leaves with prominent veins.  Because of this bluish 
appearance it has sometimes been called bluestem 
wheatgrass or bluejoint.  It is a sod former with very 
strong, spreading rhizomes.  Stems arise singly or in 
clusters of a few and reach heights of 1 to 3 feet.  The 
sheaths are hairy and the pu rplish auricles typically 
clasp the stem.  The seed spike is erect and about 2 to 
6 inches long. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Western wheatgrass is adapted to fine and very fine 
soils and is replaced by thickspike wheatgrass on 
coarser soils.  Although it is able to grow on a wide 
variety of soils it prefers the heavier but well drained 
soils.  It requires moderate to high soil moisture 
content and is most common in the 10 to 14 inch 
annual precipitation zones.   Above 20 inches per year 
it behaves as an increaser on rangelands, below 20 
inches it is a decreaser.  Its elevational range is 1,000 
to 9,000 feet. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989. 
Midwestern Wetland Flora  
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Western wheatgrass tolerates saline and saline-sodic 
soils, poor drainage and moderately severe drought.  
It will tolerate spring flooding, high water tables, and 
considerable silt deposition.  It is very cold hardy and 
can grow in partial shade.   It is grazing resistant and 
can survive fires if in th e dormant stage; recovery 
from fire, however, is slow. 
 
Western wheatgrass grows in association with many 
species, the more common being blue grama, 
buffalograss, needlegrasses, bluebunch wheatgrass, 
rough fescue, Idaho fescue, and prairie junegrass.  It 
begins growth about 2 to 3 weeks before blue grama

and does not mature until much later in the growing 
season. 
 
Western wheatgrass performs poorly in the East and 
is not recommended for any use in the region. 
 
Western wheatgrass is distributed throughout the 
west and midwest portions of the United States.  For 
a current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seed of western wheatgrass should be planted 1/2 to 
1 inch deep in fine to medium soil.  Seeding rates 
should be 5 to 15 pounds PLS per acre drilled or 20 
to 25 PLS per row foot.  If seed is broadcast or used 
on harsh sites, the rate should be doubled.  This 
species should be seeded in early spring, late fall or 
in the period of late summer, early fall.  It can be 
sodded. 
 
Seedling vigor is fair and stands may be slow to 
establish.  It has stronger rooting abilities than does 
thickspike wheatgrass but spreads more slowly and 
may take several years to become firmly established.  
Once established, it is very hardy and enduring.  It is 
moderately compatible with other species and is 
moderately aggressive. 
 
Management 
Western wheatgrass greens up in March or early 
April and matures in August.  If moisture is adequate, 
it will make fair summer or fall regrowth.  If nitrogen 
is applied it will compete with warm season grasses. 
 
Western wheatgrass is moderately palatable to elk 
and cattle all year although this quality diminishes in 
late summer.  It is palatable to deer only in spring.  It  
is preferred by cattle more than by sheep.  It can be 
grazed if 50 to 60 percent of the annual growth is 
allowed to remain (3 or 4 inch stubble).  Rest rotation 
of western wheatgrass is advi sed.  In areas where it is 
dense, it makes an excellent hay as well as pasture. 
 
Irrigation will improve western wheatgrass stands 
and aid establishment.  Weed control and fertilization 
will also help.  Pitting, chiseling, disking, and 
interseeding can be used to stimulate stands of 
western wheatgrass. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The primary pests to western wheatgrass are 
grasshoppers, ergot, and  stem and leaf rusts. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Ariba’ western wheatgrass was released for dry land 
hay production, grazing, and conservation seedings in 
the western part of the Central Plains and in the 
southwestern United States.  ‘Flintlock’ is a broad-
based cultivar.  It is recommended for conservation 
seeding, dry land hay production, and grazing in the 
Central Plains.  ‘Barton’ is a strongly rhizomatous, 
leafy ecotype, intermediate in growth between 
northern and southern types.  ‘Barton’ is relatively 
disease free and high in forage and seed production.  
‘Rosana’ is a northern type western wheatgrass.  
Plants are blue-green, leaf y, with moderately fine 
stems.  Rhizomes produce a tight sod.  ‘Rosana’ is 
recommended for reseeding depleted range lands and 
the reclamation of disturbed lands in the Northern 
Great Plains.  ‘Rodan’ northern type western 
wheatgrass is moderately rhizomatous and forms a 
dense blue-green sward.  Leaves are thinner and less 
heavily veined than othe r western wheatgrasses.  
Western wheatgrass seed is available at most farm 
seed stores. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.