Plant Fact Sheet

LONGTOM 

PASPALUM 
Paspalum lividum Trin. 
Plant Symbol = PALI7 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1950 Manual of the Grasses of the U.S. 
Alternate Names 
Paspalum denticulatum, longtom 
Uses 
Forage: Longtom paspalum (Paspalum lividum) is 
valuable as a native range plant to grazing animals. 
Hatch, Schuster, and Drawe (1999) note that longtom 
paspalum is one of the top four species in cattle diets 
on mid-successional rangelands along the central 
Texas Gulf Coast.   
Erosion: It can also be used as a ground cover for 
erosion control. 
Wildlife:  The seeds of longtom paspalum can 
provide food for birds. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Longtom paspalum is a native, warm-season, 
stoloniferous perennial.  It is a member of the 
Paniceae tribe of the grass family Poaceae.  It grows 
to 2-3 feet in height. Longtom paspalum is an 
apomitic species, which means it produces seed 
without fertilization. There is no known commercial 
variety of longtom paspalum. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Longtom paspalum is native along the Gulf of 
Mexico from  Florida and Alabama to Texas, through 
Eastern Mexico, south to Argentina, and in the 
Carribean Islands. In Texas, longtom paspalum can 
be found in the southeast region, and in the coastal 
part of the Rio Grande Plains.  It grows in low-lying 
areas, wet savannahs, in swamps, along streambanks, 
and in ditches.  Longtom paspalum prefers moist to 
semi-wet conditions and tight clay loam soils.  It 
appears to be sensitve to frost.   
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
Establishment 
Longtom paspalum can be grown from seed, from 
cuttings, or from vegetative clumps.  It appears to 
germinate best at temperatures between 20º-30º C. 
Germination tests done with longtom paspalum seed 
by the Texas Department of Agriculture Laboratory 
at Giddings, Texas yielded germination averages 
ranging from 15%-56% for different harvest years. 
Seed production and seed fertility of longtom 
paspalum appears to be highly dependent on the 
amount of moisture the plants receive during the 
growing season.  In drier years, seed production and 
seed fertility decrease sharply in non-irrigated plants.  
Even under good irrigation, seed yields have been 
low (2-5 lbs. per acre) at the Plant Materials Center.  
There are approximately 567,500 seeds/ pound of 
longtom paspaulm.   
Plant Materials Center staff has had the best success 
growing longtom paspalum from cuttings, with 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

approximately 90% survival. Its stolons make this 
grass well adapted to this method of reproduction.  
Larger vegetative clumps of longtom paspalum can 
also be moved to new sites.  Once established, the 
plants will spread themselves via many runners. 
Adequate irrigation must be provided for cuttings or 
clumps to be transplanted successfully. 
Management 
For seed production purposes, longtom paspalum 
must be irrigated when rainfall totals are low or else 
seed production, fill, and fertility will be greatly 
reduced. Regular fertilization of longtom paspalum 
is also necessary, as it appears to be sensitive to iron 
deficient soils. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
For Texas, this grass is best suited to southern coastal 
areas where mesic conditions dominate, and the 
chance of frost is low.  This grass prefers “wet feet” 
and is not exceedingly drought tolerant.  Under 
drought conditions, it does not compete well with 
bermuda grass. Weed control and iron deficiency can 
also be a problem. 
For additional assistance regarding the production 
and establishment of longtom paspalum, please 
contact the Plant Material Center at (361) 595-1313. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher, Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
Edited: 1Oct2003 SDM; 05Nov2003 jlk; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.