Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
REED 
CANARYGRASS  
Phalaris arundinacea  L. 
Plant Symbol = PHAR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: The extensive, rhizomatous root 
system and dense growth of reed canarygrass provide 
excellent erosion control, especially along stream 
banks, shorelines and wate rways.  Reed canarygrass 
invades wet areas so its use along ditches, canals and 
drains can create maintenance problems; it can also 
be troublesome in wetland habitats. 
 
Filter fields : Reed canarygrass is a heavy user of 
fertilizer and actively grows throughout a long 
season.  Because of this and its excellent adaptation 
to wet sites, it is well suited for use in seeding filter 
fields which collect wastew ater from food processing 
industries, livestock operations, and sewage treatment 
plants.  Cutting and removal of biomass is required 
for good nutrient uptake performance, but a 6 to 8  inch cut height is recommended for rapid regrowth 
under these conditions.  Any forage produced can be 
used for livestock feed. 
 
Forage
: Reed canarygrass is primarily adapted for 
permanent hay or pasture on sites too wet for good 
performance of other forage plants.  The forage 
should be grazed or mowed prior to heading as both 
quality and palatability decline rapidly after heading.  
A common mistake is to use reed canarygrass on wet 
sites where timely harvest is not possible.  
 
Wildlife : This grass provides excellent nesting and 
escape cover and the shattered seeds are readily eaten 
by many species of birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Description 
Phalaris arundinacea L., reed canarygrass, is a 
vigorous, productive, long-lived, perennial, sod- 
forming grass.  It is a wi despread species native to 
North America, Europe, and Asia.  The numerous 
broad, moderately harsh, erect leaves are dominantly 
basal.  The coarse, erect stems may reach a height of 
6 to 8 feet.  Seed is borne in an open panicle which 
ripens from the top down and shatters readily as it 
matures.  The seed has a s hort storage life, up to 5 
years, and should be checked for germination within 
6 months of its use.  Reed canarygrass has excellent 
frost tolerance and is well suited to wet soils that are 
poorly drained or subject to flooding.  It also has 
good drought tolerance.  Growth begins in early 
spring and continues through the growing season.  
Regrowth following mowing or grazing is rapid on 
fertile sites.  Forage quality is good prior to heading 
but then declines rapidly.

Adaptation and Distribution 
Reed canarygrass is adapted to soils too wet for 
bromegrass, fescue, and orchardgrass.  It is very cold 
tolerant and will withstand temperatures well below -
30 °F.  It is moderately drought tolerant but requires 
18 inches annual precipitation or irrigation for good 
performance.  It is adapted to a wide range of soil 
conditions but its major use is on poorly drained soils 
or those subject to inundation.  Once established, it 
will withstand continuous inundation for 60 to 70 
days.  It does well on soils that range from 
moderately acidic to weakly saline-alkaline.  It will 
tolerate saltier soils with frequent irrigation or natural 
flooding. 
 
Reed canarygrass is distributed throughout the west, 
north, and northeastern Un ited States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A  firm, moist, clean seedbed is needed for good 
emergence.  Old fields or meadows should be 
cropped to annual crops for  1 to 2 years to eliminate 
perennial weeds, grasses and sedges before seeding 
reed canarygrass.  The seed germinates readily but is 
somewhat slow to establish.  Seed in pure stands at a 
rate of 5 to 7 pounds per acre.  Seeding should be 
done in late fall or early spring.  Plant shallow, no 
deeper than 1/2 inch.  If necessary, irrigate to 
maintain surface moisture until plants are well 
established. 
 
Management  
New seedings should not  be grazed until fully 
established.  It is best to harvest for hay one to two 
times before grazing.  To maintain plant vigor and 
promote rapid regrowth, leave a stubble of 6 inches 
after mowing or grazing.  Start spring grazing after 
plants reach a height of 10  to 12 inches.  Harvest hay 
when the first seedheads appear.  Reed canarygrass 
will persist under close, frequent use but yield will be 
greatly reduced.  Its persistence under heavy use does 
make it well suited  for calving, lambing, holding 
areas or other special-use pastures. 
 
To maintain good yields an annual application of 
nitrogen will be required on most sites. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The leaf disease  Helminthosporium giganteum  
sometimes attacks reed  canarygrass and work in 
Pennsylvania led to the discovery of the disease 
tawny blotch ( Stagonospora foliicola ) on this plant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Improved cultivars and places of development are 
‘Castor’, ‘Grove’, ‘Rival’ (Canada) and ‘Ioreed’, 
‘Palaton’, ‘R.P. 200’, ‘Vantage’, ‘Venture’ (Iowa).  
‘Palaton’, ‘Rival’, and ‘Venture’ are low alkaloid-
containing cultivars and are greatly preferred for all 
uses in the Northeast.  Common types of reed 
canarygrass are available from most commercial 
sources. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.