Plant Fact Sheet
HOOKERS PLANTAIN 
Plantago hookeriana   
Plant Symbol = PLHO  
Fisch. & C.A. Mey. 
 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas  & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas  
  
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Alternate Names 
  Tallow weed, California  plantain     
Uses  
Wildlife : Hookers plantain  is  a cool season forage 
recommended for cool season upland wildlife plantings 
and in range seeding mixes. Hookers plantain seed is 
consumed by game birds such as bobwhite quail and 
mo urning doves, and the foliage is eaten by bobwhite 
quail, Rio Grande wild turkeys, white -tailed deer, and 
cattle . 
 
Erosion:   Hookers plantain  also can be used in many 
types of conservation plantings, such as stream -side 
buffers and filter strips.  
 
Status  
P lease consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  Description and Adaptation 
Hookers plantain
 is a short -stemmed, cool season annual 
with a slender taproot .  The leaves  are linear to narrowly 
oblanceolate,  with margins that are entire or with small 
scattered denticulations .  The leaves are up to 3 dm. long 
and 2 cm. wide, but  usually much smaller  and ar e 
glabrous to lanate .   
 
The  scapes  (inflorescences) are erect or ascending, and 
may  be  shorter than or exceed  the leaves  in height.  The 
scapes are  glabrate to pubescent  with  spikes to 12 cm. 
long and 8 mm. thick, rarely reduced to only 2 flowers .  
The  bracts  are broad at the base.  The corolla lobes are  up 
to 4 mm. long and  whitish with a brown spot at base of 
each or brown stripes the entire length of each .  Each 
flower produces two seeds , dull -brown, finely pitted, and 
about 3 mm. long and 1.3 mm wide .  STN -561 
G ermplasm contains 197,816 seeds per pound.    
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Plantains  are  established from seed.  Seeds should  be 
sown directly  into the se edbed.  Germi nation tests 
conducted by the South Texas Natives Project (2006) 
found germination rates ranging  from a low of 28% to a 
high of 94% and rapid initiation of  germination following 
the onset of favorable conditions (germination < 36 
hours).   Seed dormancy can  be as high as 90% but 
appears to be easily broken by field conditions.  Plantains  
typically take 180 days from planting to seed maturity .  
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
For direct seeding, broadcast or drill seed during 
September through December into a clean, weed free 
seedbed.  Seeds should be covered from ¼ to ½” depth to 
ensure good soil to seed contact.  The full seeding rate for 
Hookers plantain is  10  PLS pounds per acre for a pure 
stand.    When planting this as a component of a seed 
mixture, t he seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired 
percent of the mix.