Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TIMOTHY 
Phleum pratense  L. 
Plant Symbol = PHPR3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Livestock: Timothy is used for pasture (although 
other cool-season grasses are preferred) and silage, 
but mostly for hay.  It is palatable and nutritious.  It 
makes a first rate companion  grass for alfalfa, trefoil, 
or clover as it is the grass least competitive with 
legumes. 
 
Erosion control : Timothy can be used with legumes 
and/or other grasses in a mix for cover purposes, 
filter strips, waterways, and other critical area 
applications. 
 
Wildlife : Timothy is commonly found in wildlife 
mixtures for nesting, brood cover, and escape. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Phleum pratense  L., timothy, is a relatively short-
lived, cool-season perennial that grows in stools or 
clumps and has a shallow, compact, and fibrous root 
system.  It grows in erect culms 20 to 40 inches tall.  
Leaves vary in length from a few inches to a foot and 
are about 1/4 inch wide, narrowing gently toward the 
tip.  Heads are spike-like and dense, from 2 to 6 
inches in length.  Seed is very small and usually 
remains enclosed in the glumes.  There are 
approximately 1,230,000 seeds per pound.  Timothy 
is different from most other grasses in that 1 or 
occasionally 2 of the basal internodes of the stem 
swell into a bulb-like growth .  This characteristic is 
often used for identification of the plant during its 
early stages of growth. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Timothy is adapted to a cool and humid climate.  
Timothy thrives best on rich, moist bottomlands and 
on finer textured soils, such as clay loams.  It does 
not do well on coarser soils.  It prefers a pH of 5.5 to 
7.0.  Timothy will grow for a time on soils low in 
fertility, but it is better adapted to a high fertility soil.  
It is not well adapted to wet, flat land where water 
stands for any considerable time, though it can 
withstand somewhat poorly-drained soils.  Under 
limited moisture conditions, it makes a poor recovery 
and it does not tolerate drought or prolonged high 
temperatures. 
James R. Johnson 
USDA NRCS 1992 
Western Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Timothy is distributed throughout the entire United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Timothy is usually seeded in mixtures with legumes.  
This mixture may be drilled with a small grain.  If 
planted with a winter grai n, the timothy is seeded 
with it, and the legume is planted early the following 
spring.  Seeding depth of timothy should be 1/2 inch.  
A firm, weed-free seedbed is a key to a successful 
planting.  Common seeding rates are 8 to 10 pounds 
per acre when seeded alon e and 4 to 6 pounds per 
acre when seeded in mixtures. 
 
Management  
Timothy is highly responsive to fertilizers, which 
should be applied frequently in ample quantities.

Fertilizer, especially nitrogen, is important when 
legumes have almost disappeared from the hay or 
pasture mixture.  Timothy stands become weak under 
close and continuous grazing.  A fundamental reason 
for the decline of timothy under poor grazing 
practices is injury to the bulblets.  These bulblets 
form in the spring at the same time the stem 
elongates.  Food material  is stored in them, and they 
may be destroyed by trampling of grazing animals.  
Timothy can be initially gr azed before jointing and 
again between early head to full head.  Second and 
successive grazing should also occur before jointing 
and when basal sprouts appe ar at the soil surface.  
After the second grazing, plants usually do not joint; 
therefore, sprouts are pr imary guides.  Timothy 
should be cut for hay  or silage from early to full 
head.  Make successive harvests for hay and silage 
when basal sprouts appear at the soil surface.  Sterile 
seed-heads may be 15 to 20  inches up the stems when 
sprouts appear at the time of second cutting.  
Growing points stay below the ground line after a 
second cutting.  Graze or cut  to heights of 3 inches or 
more. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Stem rust is a disease that can cause loss of vigor and 
forage quality to timothy.  Rust-resistant varieties 
have been developed to control this disease.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Most of the timothy grown in the Northeast U.S. is 
unimproved common timothy.  Improved cultivars 
and places of development are: ‘Essex’ and ‘Cornell 
1777’ (New York); ‘Lorain’ and ‘Marietta’ (Ohio); 
‘Itasca’ (Minnesota); and ‘Clair’ (Kentucky).  
Canadian developments are ‘Climax’, ‘Drummond’, 
‘Medon’, and ‘Paton’.  Common timothy and most 
cultivars can be readily obtained from commercial 
sources. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush, USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.