Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NARROWLEAF PENSTEMON  
Penstemon angustifolius  Nutt. 
ex Pursh. 
Plant Symbol = PEAN4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant 
Materials Center & New Mexico State University Los 
Lunas Agricultural Science Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
broadbeard penstemon, taperleaf penstemon, 
broadbeard beardtongue 
 
Uses 
Erosion control:  Narrow leaf penstemon is a drought 
tolerant forb.  It is helpful in preventing wind erosion 
on sandy dunes, plains and grasslands where it 
establishes.   
 
Wildlife:   Narrow leaf penstemon provides a food 
source to small birds and mammals.  It is heavily 
used by hummingbirds and various insects during 
flowering. 
 
Urban:   Narrow leaf penstemon is a drought tolerant 
forb that also produces beautiful flowers in early 
spring.  This makes it an ideal plant for xeriscaping. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Penstemon angustifolius  Nutt. ex. Pursh., narrow leaf 
penstemon, is native to various western and plains 
states.  It is a stout, smooth, waxy, gray green 
perennial herb.  The plant grows from 8 to 24 inches 
with several stout, erect or somewhat curving stems.  
The flowers range from ½ to ¾ inch and are various 
shades of violet and pink.  Insect guidelines may or 
may not be present. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Narrow leaf penstemon is found throughout the 
western and Great Plains states.  It is adapted to 
sandy mesas and grasslands and is frequently found 
on dunes.  It does poorly and is short lived when 
planted in heavy soils. 
 
Narrow leaf penstemon is distributed throughout the 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
The seed of narrow leaf penstemon requires cold 
stratification for germination.  Approximately 85% of 
the seed are dormant.  Total germination averages 
above 90%.  Field plantings  of this seed should be 
done in the fall.  Seeding should be at approximately 
12 seed per foot.  With adequate winter moisture or 
supplemental irrigation, stands are generally good. USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials Center Los Lunas, New Mexico
 
Management  
After stand establishment, it is important to limit 
irrigation.  In normal years with 8-10 inches of 
precipitation, no irrigation is necessary.  Narrow leaf 
penstemon is extremely sensitive to root rot fungi and 
if overwatered the entire stand will be destroyed.   
 
Although not necessary, narrow leaf penstemon 
responds well to fertilization.  After establishment, it 
does not appear to be damaged by the use of pre-
emergent herbicides.  After harvest the plants soon 
become dormant and may then be mowed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
San Juan Germplasm narrowleaf penstemon (New 
Mexico) is a selected class (pre-varietal) release from

the Los Lunas Plant Materials Center and the New 
Mexico State University Agricultural Science Center 
in Los Lunas, New Mexico.  Seed may be obtained 
through the New Mexico Crop Improvement 
Association.  The plant is adapted to areas with 
annual precipitation of 6 to 10 inches, and has a 
variety of purposes.  It helps prevent erosion on the 
sandy dunes, plains, and grasslands where it 
establishes.  The beautiful flowers it produces in the 
early spring make it useful for xeriscaping.  The seed 
of narrowleaf penstemon provides a food source to 
small birds and mammals.  The flowers are 
particularly important in providing early forage for 
honeybees.  Hummingbirds and various insects also 
rely heavily on the flowers in the early spring.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dr. E. Ramona Garner, Agronomist 
USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials Center  
Los Lunas, New Mexico 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 29sep05 jsp; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.