Plant Fact Sheet     
 
VINE MESQUITE 
Panicum obtusum Kunth 
Plant symbol = PAOB  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
vine-mesquite, panic grass, vine mesquite grass 
 
Uses 
Grazing is the primary use of vine mesquite, but it 
has been cut for hay.  It is used to control erosion in 
waterways and small gullies.  Quail and doves eat the 
seed in the fall and early winter. 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values.  
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Vine mesquite is a native, 
warm-season, stoloniferous perennial.  The height  ranges from 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 feet.  The leaf blade is 
long; narrow, upright, and smooth.  The leaf sheath is 
mostly basal and one-half to three-fourths as long as 
the internodes.  The stolon is several feet long with 
long internodes, the nodes swollen and covered with 
hair.  The seedhead has a narrow panicle 1 to 4 
inches long with the spikelets large, nearly round, 
and brownish. 
 
Management 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
This grass is seldom abundant enough to be a key 
management species.  Generally, it is less palatable 
than most grasses associated
 with it therefore, it is 
seldom overgrazed.  When used for hay or erosion 
control, grazing should be deferred until after seed 
production. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in April or May.  It produces seedheads 
in July and August.  The seeds are slow to 
disseminate.  It reproduces from both stolons and 
seed.  It is often associat ed with other grasses, but 
grows in more or less pure stands.  It grows mostly in 
small depressions or along drainageways where water 
accumulates.  It grows best on sandy to sandy loam 
soils, but also grows on clay loams and gravelly 
loams. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.