Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DOUGLAS FIR 
Pseudotsuga menziesii  
(Mirbel) Franco  
Plant Symbol = PSME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
      J.S. Peterson        USDA NRCS NPDC        @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
Wood Products: This tree’s lumber is excellent for 
construction.  A variety of grades of veneer are 
manufactured which are generally used for 
construction.  Pulp is generally is used for Kraft 
paper.  Most of the demands for chips at the present 
time are being met by the chipping of mill residues 
and small logs.  Douglas-fir is excellent for poles and 
piling if treated.  The wood is suitable for fuel.  With 
treatment, Douglas-fir posts are quite durable. 
 
Christmas Trees: In the cultured and natural state, the 
Douglas-fir makes an excellent Christmas tree.  It 
responds well to all Christmas tree cultural practices. 
 
Wildlife : The seed of Douglas-fir is an important food 
for  chickadees, red crossbill, finches (house and 
purple), evening grosbeak, Douglas squirrel, 
Townsend chipmunk, deer, meadow mice, shrews, 
and many other birds and mammals. 
 
The needles are an important source of food of blue 
and spruce grouses.  Mounta in beaver, deer, elk, and 
rabbits eat foliage and twigs within their reach.   Bears may feed on new sapwood and inner bark in 
the spring and early summer. 
 
Erosion Control and Windbreaks
: Although it is 
seldom used, Douglas-fir is an excellent tree  for 
windbreaks on adapted soils.   It is also excellent for 
restoring eroded lands, watersheds, and strip-mined 
areas. 
 
Recreation :  It is an excellent tree for recreation 
purposes.  It is windfirm on all but the wet and very 
shallow soils and is generally quite free from the 
killing attacks of insects and disease in park 
conditions.  There is a good response to properly 
applied pruning, shearing, and thinning. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pseudotsuga menziesii , Douglas-fir, is one of the 
world's most important and valuable trees.  The 
needles persist up to 8 years and are scattered singly 
over the twigs.  Needle length ranges from 3/4 to 1 
inch and the width is appr oximately 1/16 inch.  The 
bark on young stands is dark gray-brown with resin 
blisters.  Later the bark becomes thick, reddish-
brown, and is divided by deep irregular fissures.  The 
cones are 3 to 4 inches long and are easily identified 
by the three pointed bracts (modified leaves) which 
are longer than the cone scales.  On the average a 
heavy seed crop can be expected every 5 to 7 years.  
During this period, there usually is at least 1 crop 
failure. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Douglas-fir needs excellent drainage.  In the higher 
elevations of the West that receive snow and in the 
lower foothills that have moderately cold winters and 
hot summers, Douglas-fir requires moderate summer 
watering, generally 1-4 times per month depending 
upon the absorption rate and water retention capacity 
of the soil.  It does best in full or part-shade  
 
Douglas-fir is adapted to a wide variety of soils in 
terms of texture, but reaches its best development on 
clay loams, silty clay loams, and silt loams which are 
deep, moist, and well drained.  Douglas-fir will not

thrive on poorly drained soils with impervious layers 
near the surface.  It is drought-tolerant and, with few 
exceptions, will naturally reforest droughty sites 
where precipitation averages 16 inches or more. 
 
Douglas-fir is distributed primarily throughout the 
West.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Seedlings ranging from 2 year old bareroot plants to 
materials that have been field-grown for 2 years and 
then in containers for 2 years are used for planting 
stock and are usually available from state or private 
nurseries.  There has been a general trend to use the 
larger planting stock to improve the chance of 
survival with competing vegetation.  Direct seeding 
can be successful.  Natural restocking is common on 
the lower sites; but on the higher sites competing 
vegetation often limits reforestation, and site 
preparation and brush control may be necessary. 
 
Management  
Thinning: Douglas-fir responds well to thinning at an 
early age or until the trees reach pole and small 
sawlog size.  The method of thinning becomes more 
important in the sawlog stands.  For the thinning 
response to be good and the danger from tipover and 
breakage low, care should be taken to leave the stand 
in a thrifty condition.  During most thinning 
operations, it is desirable to remove some dominant, 
codominant, intermediate, and suppressed trees.  Do 
not over-cut the trees in the dominant and 
codominant classes. 
 
Pruning : Trees prune well and heal over quickly if 
the stands are young and le ss than 10 inches in 
diameter. 
 
Harvest Cut : As a rule, the clear-cut method is used.  
However, the shelterwood method is beginning to be 
used in the southern and interior portions of its range.  
This applies especially to hot, dry slopes and 
droughty soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Several insects attack Dougl as-fir, but the Douglas-fir 
beetle is the most important.  Outbreaks usually occur 
in windthrown, fire-killed or felled timber.  Timber in 
any of the conditions listed should be removed as 
quickly as possible.  Periodic outbreaks of Douglas-
fir tussock moths may cause serious damage. 
 
Heart and root rot can be serious diseases in Douglas-
fir stands.  The recommended cultural practice for 
these rots is to remove dead and infected trees as 
soon as possible. 
 
Heavy populations of bear, deer, elk, rabbits, mice, 
and mountain beaver can be harmful to young stands.  
These animals can be managed to reduce the numbers 
to a sustained carrying capacity.  Nursery stock 
should be treated with repellent before it is planted.  
Dense stands of Douglas-fir provide little or no feed 
for deer and elk, but do provide excellent cover. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.