Plant Fact Sheet
BAHIAGRASS 
Paspalum notatum  Flüggé 
Plant Symbol = PANO2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Golden Meadow, Louisiana  
 
Johanna Pate  
USDA  NRCS Alexandria, Louisiana  
 
Alternate Names 
bahia grass, bahia,  
 
Uses  
Erosion control : Bahiagrass is used for the NRCS 
conservation practices Grassed Waterway and Critical 
Area Planting.  It is planted on critical areas such pond 
banks, levees, and gullies in agricultural fields.   
 
Turf : This grass is suitable for low -maintenance lawns 
and public areas, and is recommended for infertile soils 
and heavy traffic areas.  It is more shade tolerant than 
bermudagrass.   
 
Livestock: Bahiagrass,  with proper management, provides 
fair to good pastu re and hay, and can be used in woodland 
pasture systems (silvopasture).   Forage quality depends on 
soil fertility and grass stage of growth.
  Bahiagrass hay is 
leafy, but difficult to make because of bahiagrass’ 
prostrate growth habit.
 
 
Caution: Seed heads  of the cultivar ‘Argentine’ are often 
infected by ergot (Claviceps paspali).   Pregnant mares can 
experience abortion problems if they eat large quantities 
of infected seed heads .  Also, ingestion of infected seeds 
can produce toxic effects in cattle.  The  occurrence of 
toxic seed heads can be managed through mowing or by 
keeping pregnant horses confined.  
  Wildlife
: Bahiagrass can be grown with other species that 
are more beneficial for wildlife.  Deer, birds and small 
mammals will utilize the plant —especially the seeds—for 
food.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness   
This  plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture department 
regarding its status and use.  Weed information is also 
available from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on this species’ 
Plant Profile for further information.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Bahiagrass i s a deep-rooted perennial adapted to a wide 
range of soils.  It is low -growing and spreads with stolons 
and stout, scaly rhizomes.  Stolons are pressed firmly to 
the ground, have short internodes, and root freely from 
the nodes forming a dense sod.  Bahiag rass is a prolific 
seed -producing plant.  The flat, tough -textured leaves are 
usually hairless; with blades 1/8 -1/4 inch wide and 8- 20 
inches in length.  Leaves are flat, folded, and in -rolled, 
tapering to a fine point.  Stems usually reach 8 -30 inches 
tall.  The seed head usually consists of a dual racemes 
with each attached to the top of a slender stem.  
Occasionally there may be a third seed head present 
below the terminal ones.   
 
Bahiagrass is most productive on sandy soils with a pH of 
5.5 to 6.5.  It  is more productive on drought prone, sandy 
soils with relative low fertility than other forages.   
 
Distribution : Bahiagrass is a native to South America.  Its 
current range in Central and South America extends from 
Mexico to northern Argentina and the West  Indies.  It was 
introduced to the southeastern United States primarily for 
forage , and erosion control and has since become 
naturalized.  It is adapted from east Texas to the Carolinas 
to as far north as northern Arkansas.
  Please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.