Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLORIDA PASPALUM
Paspalum floridanum Michx. 
Plant Symbol = PAFL4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the No rthern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Paspalum difforme  Le Conte, Paspalum floridanum  
Michx. var.  glabratum Engelm. ex Vasey,  Paspalum 
giganteum  Baldw. ex Vasey,  Paspalum glabratum 
(Engelm. ex Vasey) C. Mohr  
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Young leaves are palatable and nutritious 
becoming less so as plant matures. 
 
Erosion Control : Paspalum is a versatile grass that 
readily grows on disturbed areas such as road ditches 
as well as on sandy or poorly drained sites.  The 
bluish color of some foliage gives this species 
ornamental characteristics as well. 
 
Wildlife : Quail, dove, and turkey all eat the large 
grain-like seeds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Paspalum floridanum  Michx., Florida paspalum, is a 
native warm-season (C
4) perennial bunch grass.  It is 
tall, ranging in height from 3 to 6 feet and spreads 
from short, thick rhizomes or seed.  Leaf sheaths and 
leaf blades range in color from dark green to a bluish, 
chalky cast with short coarse  hairs or hairless.  The 
leaf blades are firm, flat  or folded, approximately 
3/8” wide and 20” long, with a dense tuft of long 
hairs immediately above the ligule.  The seed heads 
have 2 to 5 branches with half-rounded smooth seeds 
that occur in pairs.  S eeds are crowded along the 
branches.  Florida paspalum sets seed in late summer 
that matures in late fall. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Florida paspalum’s native range is from Pennsylvania 
and Delaware south to Florida, west to Missouri, 
Oklahoma and Texas.  It is adapted to most eastern 
US soils and is commonly found growing in low, 
moist, grassy areas, and wood openings. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Florida paspalum can be seeded in a pure stand or in 
a mix of other species with a seeding depth of ¼” to 
¾”.  The smooth seed can be planted with most seed 
drills or broadcast seeded into a firm seedbed.  
Florida paspalum establishe s readily from seed with 
little to no stratification.  Seedling vigor is good and 
establishes well in the first growing season.  General 
seeding recommendations are 6 to 8 pounds PLS per 
acre for most applications.  Seeds are large and light 
with approximately 91,000 seeds/lb. 
 
Management  
Follow normal native warm-season grass 
establishment procedures when planting Florida 
paspalum.  Control weeds during the first growing 
season by mowing or spraying as often as necessary 
to prevent weeds from seeding out and to open up the

seedbed to light.  Florida paspalum establishes well 
even when mowed for weed control as low as a 
height of 4 to 6”.  While Florida paspalum has 
vigorous growth, it is not invasive to surrounding 
fields.  Established stands of Florida paspalum may 
be fertilized in accordance with soil tests as needed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are currently available. 
 
Prepared By:  
Gwen Meyer, formerly USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Jennifer Kujawski , Formerly USDA NRCS National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.