Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WESTERN 
CHOKECHERRY  
Prunus virginiana L. var. 
demissa  (Nutt.) Torr.  
Plant Symbol = PRVID  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Prunus demissa (Nutt.) Walp, Prunus virginiana  L. 
ssp.  demissa  (Nutt.) Taylor & MacBryde 
 
Uses 
Ornamental : This plant is well adapted for use 
around homes, office buildings, and recreational 
areas.  The form and dark green shiny foliage during 
spring and summer; the large number of showy 
flowers in the spring and  the dark purple, grape-like 
clusters of fruit in the fall makes this a desirable 
species for beautification. 
 
Crops : While not currently planted for this purpose, 
the fruit has a sweetish, astr ingent taste and is fit for 
human consumption.  The fruit makes excellent 
jellies and jams and is occasionally used for wine. 
 
Erosion control : It is a good erosion control plant 
because it can form thickets and spread by rhizomes. 
 
Livestock : It is poor to fair forage for cattle, sheep, 
and goats and useless for horses; however, the foliage 
is consumed when the range is over utilized or in 
livestock concentration areas such as near water, 
along driveways, and near bedding grounds.  One 
fourth of a pound of foliage is fatal to sheep and 1½ 
pounds will kill a 500 pound cow.  This must be 
eaten at a single feeding and is usually lethal if very 
little other forage is consumed.  The poisoning agent 
is hydrocyanic (prussic) acid.  Cattle will usually not 
eat much chokecherry when  a good supply of other 
forage species are available. 
 
Recreation : This plant makes good screening in 
campgrounds and picnic areas. 
 
Wildlife : Western chokecherry is  excellent to good 
forage for deer and elk.  The fruit is relished by bear, 
many species of songbirds, pheasants, and grouse. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Prunus virginiana  var. demissa  (Nutt.) Torr., western 
chokecherry, is also called bitter cherry and black 
chokecherry.  It is a shru b or small tree from 3 to 20 
feet tall and occasionally as tall as 30 feet in 
favorable sites.  The bark is smooth to scaly and dull 
red to gray.  Leaves are ovate to broadly elliptical, 
rounded at the base or slightly heart shaped, 1½ to 
3½ inches long, 1 to 2 inches wide, smooth or only 
slightly hairy, with finely toothed margins.  Flowers 
are white, showy, and clustered in 2 to 5 inch long 
racemes at the ends of leafy shoots.  Western 
chokecherry blooms from April to May. The fruit is 
round, ¼ to ½ inch in diameter, dark purple when 
ripe, and matures from September to October. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
It is found mostly at elevations of 6,000 to 10,000 
feet in snow drift areas and near springs or seeps or in 
stream bottoms where the average annual 
precipitation varies from 14 to 40 inches and the 
winters are cold.  Soil texture varies from clays to

sandy loams but this species prefers deep, fertile 
loam soils.  It is frequently found on shallow soils or 
deep to moderately deep soils with more than 35 
percent coarse fragments throughout the soil profile.  
It can be found as a small shrub on rocky talus 
slopes, shallow shale, and on very shallow rocky 
sites. 
 
Western choke cherry is distributed throughout the 
western and southwestern United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Sow seeds during the fall (or the spring with stratified 
seed) in drill rows 8 to 12 in ches apart. Cover or drill 
½ inch deep.  Sow 25 seeds per foot of drill row.  
Field plant with 1 year old bareroot stock on deep, 
well-drained soils in sunny locations.  Moist exposed 
mineral soil makes the best seedbed.  Dormancy may 
be overcome by stratification of seed in moist sand or 
peat at low temperature for 90 to 160 days.  
 
Management  
This species is better if not pruned or thinned.  
Irrigation will be needed on  areas that receive less 
than 14 inches of  precipitation annually.  This species 
will withstand grazing and remains vigorous when 50 
percent  of the total annual growth is grazed.  Care 
must be taken to prevent cattle from feeding on this 
plant once it has undergone stress due to drought or 
frost because of the toxic accumulation of 
hydrocyanic acid in the plant. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious insect  pests, however western 
chokecherry is susceptible to black knot fungus, 
fireblight, and several other diseases. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars are currently recommended.  Planting 
materials can be obtained from most commercial 
hardwood nurseries and seed sources in the west. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.