Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PENNSYLVANIA SMARTWEED  
Polygonum pensylvanicum  L. 
Plant Symbol = POPE2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
This plant is an excellent wildlife food plant, 
especially for waterfowl.   Twenty species of ducks, 
geese, bobwhites, mourning doves, ring-necked 
pheasants, and four species of rails, as well as 30 
nongame birds, eat the seed s.  Dense stands provide 
cover for young waterfowl, marsh birds, and 
wintering pheasants.  Plants and/or seeds are eaten by 
white-footed mice, muskra t, raccoons, and fox 
squirrels. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Knotweed Family (Polygonaceae).  Pennsylvania 
smartweed is an annual herb that has small, five-
parted pink or rose colored flowers on a short spike.  
It grows 2 to 4(6) feet high.  The flowering branches 
have stalked glands.  The stems have a reddish color 
and swollen nodes.  The alte rnate leaves have sheaths 
extending around the stems.   The seeds are black, 
shiny, flattened, and almost round.  There are 
approximately 62,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Pennsylvania smartweed is adapted to soils of all 
drainage classes except droughty soils.  It commonly 
occurs on mudflats of fresh water to moderately 
brackish areas through out the Northeast. 
 
Pennsylvania smartweed is distributed throughout the 
entire Unites States, excluding a few northwestern 
states.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
A seedbed that reduces most weed competition and 
permits smartweed to be covered by one inch of soil 
depth is usually sufficient.  Drop water quickly and 
broadcast seed on top of wet ground in mudflats or 
drawdown areas.  Seed after the last killing frost in 
the spring.  Smartweed may be seeded later so that 
seed maturity coincides with the arrival of migratory 
birds.  Seeds are generally broadcast at a rate of 10-
15 pounds per acre. 
Robert H. Mohlbenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwest Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Management 
As an upland wildlife food source, plant either in 
pure stands or in mixtures with other suitable and 
adapted species.  For waterfowl food, draw down 
water where necessary shortly before planting.  Do 
not re-flood until plants are at least 6 inches in height.  
Flood the area to a depth of 12-18 inches during the 
migratory season.  Re-plant annually to assure a 
uniform stand.  A light harrowing is recommended to 
encourage natural re-establishment of stands. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No varieties exist, but common seed may be obtained 
through wildlife and game  food seed dealers.

Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
and Lee Davis, Technical Office #2, Nacogdoches, 
Texas. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program. 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 28sep05 jsp; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.