Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
VIRGINIA CREEPER 
Parthenocissus quinquefolia  
(L.) Planch.  
Plant Symbol = PAQU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Although Virginia creeper has a 
rather open canopy structure, with its energetic 
growth and aboveground rooting and sprouting habits 
this species can be useful groundcover for erosion 
control and watershed protection, particularly in 
shaded areas.  
 
Restoration: Virginia creeper is a native component 
of eastern climax forests. 
 
Wildlife : Virginia creeper provides cover for many 
small birds and mammals.  Songbirds are the 
principle consumers of the fruit, however deer, 
gamebirds and small mammals will also feed on 
them.  Cattle and deer will sometimes browse on the 
foliage. 
 
Other : Virginia creeper is often cultivated as an 
ornamental because of its a ttractive foliage.  The bark 
has been used in domestic medicines as a tonic, 
expectorant and remedy for dropsy. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Virginia creeper is a native, woody, deciduous vine 
that climbs to a height of 60 feet on trees, poles or 
other structures, or forms a blanket of foliage up to 
12 inches high along the ground.  Stems are orange 
brown, finely hairy with branched tendrils that end in 
adhesive discs.  The leaves are alternate and 
compound with 5, or rarely 3, leaflets that turn bright 
red in autumn.  The leaflets are pointed, coarse-
toothed and grow to 6 inches long.  Inconspicuous 
green flowers borne in clusters during the spring are 
followed by a cluster of ¼-inch bluish black berries.  
There are 12,000 to 19,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Virginia creeper is found throughout the eastern half 
of the United States.  It prefers moist, well-drained 
soils but will grow in drier soils and conditions 
including coastal dune areas.  Virginia creeper is 
fairly shade tolerant, however it is often found along 
more open clearing borders, fencerows and 
streambanks.  It is also salt tolerant. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock  USDA NRCS  1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seeds should be drilled 3/8 inches deep in the fall or, 
preferably, in the spring after stratification.  Virginia 
creeper can also be prop agated from hardwood 
cuttings or layering.  Literature suggests germination 
rates vary between 20 and 50% with optimum density 
for erosion protection at 10 plants per square foot.  
For restoration, partial co ver, and wildlife plantings, 
it is often planted other species at densities of 1 plant 
or less per square foot. 
 
Management  
As Virginia creeper will grow in low fertility and 
droughty conditions maintenance for this species is 
minimal. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Engelmanni’ and ‘Monham.’

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush  
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center 
East Lansing, Michigan 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.