Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KLEINGRASS 
Panicum coloratum L. 
Plant Symbol = PACO2 
 
Contributed by: USDA–NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
 USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Kleingrass can provide abundant 
quantities of good quality forage for cattle.  However, 
horses, sheep and goats have been known to develop 
severe photosensitization and liver damage.  Green 
grass growth following moisture or grazing is 
reported to be relatively more toxic than old or 
dormant growth.  
  
Wildlife:   Kleingrass a bunch-type plant has value for 
nesting and loafing cover for wild birds and the small 
slick seed is readily eaten by quail.  Whitetail deer 
graze young plant growth.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation: 
Grass Family ( Poaceae).  Kleingrass is a warm-
season perennial bunchgrass introduced from Africa.  
Introductions were made as early as 1942, but it was 
not until the 1950’s that desirable types were 
introduced and evaluated.  It is fine-stemmed and 
leafy at maturity which culms are erect, 50-120  centimeters (20-47 inches) tall, from a knotty base.  
Leave sheaths glabrous or with papillose based hairs 
and blades 2.5 millimeters (1/16 to 3/16 inches) wide, 
with scattered papillose based hairs on margins.  
Panicle is 7 to 20 centimeters (2 ¾ to 8 inches) long, 
spikelets on short pedicels.  Spikelets are glabrous, 
2.6 to 3.1 millimeters (about 1/8 inch) long with 2 
florets which lower floret st
aminate, with long palea 
and upper floret fertile, glabrous, shiny, and hard, 
with acute apex.  It is the same genus as switchgrass 
and blue panicum and bears a slight grass 
appearance.  Kleingrass is quite variable in its 
makeup, sometimes prostrate but mostly erect.  
Kleingrass spreads by tillers or short rhizomes, and 
will root at the nodes when the stems contact with 
wet soils. 
 
Kleingrass is adapted to a wide range of heavy soils 
and dry conditions in central Texas and on wet soils 
in the Gulf coast.  In the Rio Grande Plains it does 
well on shallow sites, deep sandy soils and medium 
textured soils.  Kleingrass grows in the southern 
United States (Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, 
California, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, 
Georgia, Florida and South Carolina) as well as 
Mexico.  The plant is moderate salinity tolerant.  It 
produces good forage production with 46 to 76 
centimeters (18 to 30 inches) rainfall or under 
irrigation, but is a poor cold tolerant plant.  Cures for 
good winter forage in drier regions.    
       
Establishment 
Kleingrass seeds drilled ¼ to ½ inch deep on fine 
soils and up to 1 inch deep  on coarser or prepacked 
sandy soils.  Plant seeds at 2 pounds of Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) per acre in spring after the soil 
temperature reaches 60 degree s or early fall in coastal 
areas.  Seedlings growing in a clean, firm and well-
prepared ground are sturdy and have good 
development, but grow slow initially.  Grazing 
should be restricted until new plants are well 
established.  The seed is small and smooth, with 
approximately 500,000 seed per pound. 
 
Management 
Kleingrass is used for hay, pasture and silage.  
Fertilization is necessary for optimum growth and 
quality.  Although kleingrass may not respond to high 
rates of fertilizer, essentially all soils, especially in 
the higher rainfall areas, will need fertilization to 
maintain production.  A soil test is the best way to

determine fertilization needs for establishment and 
production. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of kleingrass. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Other than noted potential toxicity to sheep, goats, 
and horses, no other known concerns. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Kleingrass is native to Africa and was introduced in 
the United States as a forage plant for livestock.  
 
‘Selection 75’was released cooperatively by the 
James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center and 
Texas Agriculture Experiment Station in 1969.  
Selected for forage produc tion, the intended use of 
‘Selection 75’ was for pastureland, range seeding, 
hay production, wildlife food and cover.    
 
‘TEM-LD1’ was released in 1991 by USDA ARS 
and Texas Agriculture Experiment Station.  ‘TEM-
LD1’ was selected for rapid germination from the 
‘Selection 75’ plant release.   
 
‘TEM-SR1’ was released in 1992 by USDA ARS.  
‘TEM-SR1’ was selected for seed shatter resistance.   
 
‘Verde’ was released from Texas Agriculture 
Experiment Station and the James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center in 1982.  ‘Verde’ was selected 
for increase seed size.   
 
‘OKPC-1’was released by the Oklahoma Agriculture 
Experiment Station in 1982.  ‘OKPC-1’ was selected 
for increased cold tolerance. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Rudy G. Esquivel , USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
 
Edited: 080916jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.