Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
TEXAS BLUEGRASS 
Poa arachnifera Torr. 
Plant Symbol = POAR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Uses 
All livestock use texas bluegrass for winter grazing 
throughout its range.  It has also been used as a lawn 
grass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Texas bluegrass is a native, 
cool-season, rhizomatous perennial.  The height 
ranges from 10 to 20 inches .  The leaf blade is mostly  basal, long, narrow, and boat shaped at the end.  The 
seedhead is a narrow 
panicle with somewhat 
compressed 2 to 4 inches long and male and female 
spikelets on the same plant. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
Grazing should be deferred in spring every few years 
to allow this grass to produce  a seed crop.  It is a key 
management species on some sites that are winter 
grazed by cattle and sheep.  If it is, no more than 50 
percent of current year's growth by weight should be 
removed by grazing. 
 
Establishment 
Growth begins in the fall.  Foliage stays green all 
winter, if moisture is available.  It becomes dormant 
through the hot summer months.  In extremely low 
temperatures, leaves freeze but more leaves grow 
from auxiliary buds on the basal nodes.  It reproduces 
from stolons and from seed.  Seeds produced in the 
spring germinate in the fall.  It grows best on clay 
and clay loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.