Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PONDEROSA PINE 
Pinus ponderosa  P. & C. 
Lawson  
Plant Symbol = PIPO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
western yellow pine, yellow pine, bull pine, 
blackjack 
 
Uses 
Beautification: This is a handsome tree for purposes 
of beautification but due to its height should not be 
grown within road rights-of-way. 
 
Erosion Control : This tree with its native understory 
is an excellent erosion control cover.  It is one of the 
best evergreens for windbreaks. 
 
Livestock : The young tree itself is not eaten by 
livestock unless most of the other browse species 
have been destroyed by overgrazing.  When eaten by 
cows during gestation this species may cause 
abortion. 
 
Recreation : Some of the finest campgrounds and 
picnic areas in the west are found in native stands of  ponderosa pine.  Trees are stable and generally wind-
firm with little danger of top breakage. 
 
Wildlife
: While deer, elk and mountain sheep do not 
eat the needles unless other browse species are totally 
absent, they do feed on the understory species.  The 
seeds of ponderosa pine are choice food of red-
winged blackbirds, chickadees, mourning doves, 
finches, evening grosbeaks, jays, Clark's nutcrackers, 
nuthatches, white-throated sparrows, rufous-sided 
towhees, turkeys, chipmunks and squirrels.  The pine 
needles are important food of blue and spruce 
grouses.  The pine bark is fair food for beavers, and is 
used by porcupines which sometimes damage the 
trees.  Nuthatches dig nest holes in dead trees. 
Gerald and Buff Corsi 
© California Academy of Sciences 
@ CalFlora 
 
Wood Products: It is used in small extent for 
Christmas trees but not well suited to cultural work 
for this purpose.  It makes excellent lumber for 
cabinet and construction work.  It is used for veneer, 
core stock and sheathing.  It is used for paper pulp 
but demand is low.  It is used for poles and has fair 
durability for posts.  It is used for fuel especially for 
fireplaces. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pinus ponderosa  P. & C. Lawson, is a large, long-
lived, native forest tree common throughout the 
western U.S.  Height of mature trees range from 55 to 
90 feet.  Diameter breast hi gh ranges from 15 to 35 
inches.  Age at maturity rang es from 70 to 250 years.  
The needles are 3 to 5 inches long with 3, or rarely 2 
to 4, needles in a cluster (bundle).  The needles 
usually remain on the stem 3 to 4 years with the 
major needle drop in September and October.  The 
cones are pineapple-shaped, 3 to 6 inches long, and 
take 2 years to mature.  The bark is dark brown to 
nearly black when young and turns from cinnamon 
brown to orange-yellow at about 90 years of age.  
This tree has a deep tap root except on shallow soils 
where roots often follow cracks for considerable 
distance.  This tree is well adapted to grow on bare 
rock with its roots following  crevices or cracks in the 
rock.

Adaptation and Distribution 
Average annual-precipitation in the plant’s range is 
from 12 to 40 inches or more.  It will grow well in 
hot, dry sites and can withstand very cold winters.  It 
is very drought tolerant but can be drowned out by 
high water and still show surprising water tolerance 
in some situations.  The plant is found on a wide 
variety of soils from shallow to deep, and from 
gravely or cobbly sands to sandy clay loam and 
loams in texture, but mostly on sandy loams.  It is 
adapted to grow on bare rock with its roots in the 
cracks.  It has low alkalinity tolerance growing on 
soils with pH 6.0 to 7.0.  Has low water table 
tolerance and medium drought tolerance.  Slopes 
vary from 2 to 50%.  Elevation varies from 6000 to 
8500 feet.  Topography is gentle to steep mountain 
slopes, ridgetops and mesas. 
 
Ponderosa pine is distributed throughout the west and 
midwestern United States.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Site preparation is needed to control competition.  
Use transplant stock 1-1, 2-1 or 2-2.  Plant stock 5 to 
9 feet apart depending on site.  Seed matures August 
to November on trees over 20  years old.  A good seed 
crop may be produced every 2 or 3 years but good 
conditions for seedling establishment may occur only 
every 20 to 25 years on the poorer sites. 
 
Management  
Young stands should be protected from over-grazing 
by livestock when green feed  is limited.  Use of tree 
foliage by livestock usually indicates excessive 
overuse of the associated plants.  By proper grazing 
use of the understory species no damage to young or 
old trees will occur from liv estock grazing.  Proper 
spacing of trees will provide more feed for livestock 
as well as greater timber production.  More widely 
spaced trees will develop la rger crowns, resulting in 
heavier seed crops for wildlife and more forage for 
deer, elk and mountain sheep. 
 
Weeds should be controlled by grazing, culture 
control or by applications of approved herbicides. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Ips bark beetles may be present near green slash in 
young stands.  Avoid cutting April to August.  
Several other species of bark beetles may be found in 
older trees.  Mistletoe may be present especially in 
lower sites.  Cut these infested trees during 
intermediate cuts.  Western gall rust is a dark brown  oval branch enlargement ab
out 1 to 2 inches in 
diameter. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings are available from most commercial 
nurseries mainly in the western United States.  No 
specific cultivars are recommended.  There are 2 
varieties:   Pinus ponderosa var. arizonica  in the 
southwest and the Rocky Mountain variety,  Pinus 
ponderosa var. scopulorum , occurring east of the 
Continental Divide, in the Central Plateau of western 
Colorado, Utah, eastern Nevada, Arizona and New 
Mexico. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.