Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED SPRUCE 
Picea rubens Sargent 
Plant Symbol = PIRU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Red spruce is one of the most important forest trees 
in the northeast.  The wood is light, soft, narrow-
ringed and faintly tinged with red.  It is the most 
common species of eastern  spruce lumber.  Because 
of its resonance, it is especially adapted to sounding 
boards in musical instrument s.  It makes up a large 
percentage of spruce pulpwood produced in the 
northeast.  It is used as a Christmas tree also. 
 
Red spruce provides food and cover for various 
mammals and birds.  The spruce grouse feeds on the 
buds and foliage; red squirrels eat buds and seeds; 
varying hare browse twigs and foliage; porcupines 
feed upon the bark.  Red sp ruce seeds make up 25 to 
50 percent of the diet of white-winged crossbills.  
Red spruce can be an important cover tree in northern 
New England deer yards. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Red spruce reaches heights of 60 to 80 feet with 
trunk diameters of nearly tw o feet.  Larger sizes are 
attained in the southern Appalachians.  Needles are 
four sided, dark, shiny, yellow-green, and about 1/2 
inch long, growing singly from all sides of the twigs 
and branches.  The slender new twigs have a reddish 
coat of down through the first year.  This, together 
with the short incurved needles, help distinguish red 
spruce from most other spruces.  There are about 
139,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
In northern New England it is found mainly on 
shallow till soils that average about 18 inches deep to 
a compact layer.  At higher elevations it often grows 
in organic soils overlying rocks.  On poorly drained 
soils, lack of aeration limits its growth.  In the 
northern part of its range, red spruce grows at 
elevations from near sea leve l to about 4,500 feet.  In 
the southern Appalachians it is limited to slopes and 
mountain tops above 3,500 feet in West Virginia and 
above 4,500 feet in Tennessee and North Carolina. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Unfortunately, red spruce is showing damage from 
air pollution throughout its range, particularly at the 
higher elevations. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Good seed production of red spruce usually begins 
after the tree is 30 years old.  Heavy seed crops occur 
every three to eight years.  Spruce seedlings have 
exceptionally slow growing, fibrous, shallow roots.  
Consequently, a critical survival factor in natural 
establishment is the depth of the organic layers on 
which the seed germinates.  If the thickness of the 
layer exceeds two inches, the roots of spruce 
seedlings may not reach mineral soil and the moisture 
needed to carry them through dry periods.  Red 
spruce is very shade tolerant, but requires nearly full 
sun light for optimum development. 
 
Red spruce can be established in nurseries as easily 
as any of the other spruces.  It is used some for 
reforestation in the northeast.

Management 
Red spruce has not generally received intensive 
management in the northeast.  It can be harvested by 
partial cutting or clear cutting depending upon local 
markets and silvicultural conditions.  Weeding and 
releasing, if needed, should  be done at an early age, 
10 to 15 years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Red spruce has several insect enemies, the most 
important being spruce budworm.  Budworm damage 
may be heavy in stands that contain a large 
percentage of balsam fir.  Some stands of red spruce 
may be susceptible to damage by the eastern spruce 
beetle, European spruce sawfly and yellow-headed 
spruce sawfly.  Disease  problems are minor in 
management of red spruce. 
 
The overall health of red spruce stands seems to be 
declining due to pollution factors.  Weakened trees 
are more susceptible to insects and disease. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.