Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CUTTHROAT GRASS
Panicum abscissum Swallen 
Plant Symbol = PAAB  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
Cutthroatgrass 
 
Uses 
Cattle graze cutthroat grass al l year.  Deer graze it in 
the spring. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Cu tthroat grass is native, 
warm-season, robust, rhizomatous perennial.  The 
height ranges from 2 to 4 feet.  The leaf blade has a 
narrow keel from 16 to 18 inches long and is twisted 
when dry.  The leaf sheath is mostly basal and 
overlapping, keeled, wide, and cuts back sharply at 
collar.  The ligule has a membrane about 1/32 inches 
long.  The seedhead is an open purple panicle 8 to 10 
inches long. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Livestock that graze it in the winter must be fed a 
complete mineral and protein supplement.  Deferred 
grazing every few years durin g the spring for at least 
90 days keeps this grass vigorous and productive.  
Occasional controlled burn ing eliminates unused 
material.  New growth following a burn is excellent 
forage. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in January, but little foliage is produced 
until March, April, and May.  It regrows well after 
spring grazing.  The seedhe ads appear in June with 
seed ripening in late July and early August.  It 
reproduces primarily from robust, thick rhizomes.  It 
grows well in 35 - to 40-percent shade and only on 
strongly acid, seepy, sandy sites. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.