Plant Fact Sheet
NARROWLEAF 
MOUNTAINMINT  
Pycnanthemum tenuifolium 
Schrad. 
Plant Symbol = PYTE  
Contributed by: US A NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center  
 
 
Narrowleaf mountainmint (Pycnanthemum tenuifolium) (Photo by,     
Jolie Dollar, Xerces Society  
 
Alternat ive Names  
Common Alternate Names : 
Virginia thyme  
slender mountain mint  
common horsemint  
 
Uses  
Wildlife Use : Narrowleaf mountainmint provides a nectar 
source for pollinators and is well suited for use in 
pollinator restoration. Preliminary observatio n found that 
P. tenuifolium  attracted 20 different species of 
Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera in Cape May, New Jersey. 
The sweat bees Lasioglossum vierecki , Halictus  confusus, 
and  Halictus ligatus  were most frequently observed 
visiting the flower. Both  Lasioglossum sp. and Halictus 
confuses  in particular  are  important pollinators of pepper , 
watermelon, strawberry, and tomato plants.  
 
Robertson (1928) collected 29 species of Lepidoptera 
from  P. tenuifolium in Central Illinois. This is one of the 
greatest numbers  of species to visit a flower from the 244 
species of flowering plants in his study. In Tooker et al., 
(2006), 9 species of fly were found on P. tenuifolium; and 
Robertson (1929) captured 31 species of fly.   
Deer may browse the leaves and a variety of anim
als will 
eat the seeds. It is reported that the seeds are too small to 
attract birds (Hilty, 2012).  
 
Erosion Control:  P. tenuifolium  s preads quickly through 
rhizomes and so would make  a good soil stabilizer.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and y our State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values) . 
 
Description  and Adaptation 
Description : P. tenuifolium  is a native, warm season, 
perenn ial forb that grows 2 –3 f t tall and spreads equally 
wide . It is a member of the Lamiaceae (mint) family and 
the  crushed flowers or leaves  emit a minty scent. Like 
other mints, it has a four angled stem and small opposite 
leaves. The stem is smooth, without  hairs, and is slender 
and stiff. The plant has a taproot and rhizomes.  
 
The pale green leaves are approximately 0.15– 0.6 in wide 
and 0.5– 2 in long. They are smooth or minutely hairy on 
the uppermost leaves. The upper leaves are stalkless  while 
the lowest leaves  have short stems.  There are short leafy 
branches in the axils.  
 
The plant has profuse clusters of small, tubular,  white 
flowers which bloom in the middle of summer; July 
through August.  The flower petals have an upper lip, and 
three -lobed lower lip.  Clusters stagger their bloom period 
over a long period of time. It is thought that pollinators 
prefer this species because the florets  are tightly 
clustered, have short corolla tubes, and are white (Tooker 
et al,. 2002).  
 
Adaptation: P. tenuifolium  grows  in dry to medium wet 
soils and in full sun to partial shade. It can be found in 
rocky ground  in open prairies and upland  woods, as well 
as in low areas,  wet thickets, pine barrens, oak woods, and 
on the edges of wooded areas. Gleason and Cronquist 
(1963) o bserve that it is found most often in dry soils of 
upland woods and prairies. For  updated distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page  for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.

Narrowleaf mountainmint (Pycnanthemum tenuifolium) distribution 
from U SDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
Establishment 
 
P. tenuifolium should be  grown in full sun in moist to 
slightly dry soils. Although seeds are small and difficult 
t o use, it can be propagated by seed. Seeds germinate 
without pretreatment. It may also be propagate d by 
cuttings or division. Cuttings should be made in June and 
divisions should be done during dormancy (from late fall 
to early spring).   
 
Pests and Potential Problems   
There are no major pests or problems known for this 
plant, although it may be vulnerab le to rust. 
 
Environmental Concerns  
It forms colonies by spreading through rhizomes and can 
show aggressive growth.   
 
Prepared By : Christopher M. Sheahan. USDA -NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center , Cape May, NJ. 
 
Citation : Sheahan, C.M.
 2012. Fact sheet  f or  narrowleaf 
mountainmint  ( Pycnanthemum tenuifolium ). USDA-
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center. Cape May, NJ. 
08210.  
 
Published  July 2012 
 
Edited : 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER