Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CHOKECHERRY 
Prunus virginiana L.  
Plant Symbol = PRVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan, Kansas 
Plant Materials Center and Kansas State University 
Forestry Division  
 
 Joseph Scianna USDA-NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names  
common chokecherry, choke cherry, black 
chokecherry, red chokecherry, California 
chokecherry, Virginia chokecherry, eastern 
chokecherry, western chokecherry, rum chokecherry, 
whiskey chokecherry, wild cherry, wild blackcherry, 
bird cherry, jamcherry, chokeberry, cabinet cherry, 
chuckleyplum, sloe tree, bitter-berry, caupulin 
 
Uses 
Chokecherry is primarily used today as a food 
product that makes fine preserves, juice, jelly, and 
syrup. It is a very important commercial fruit tree.  
Anthropologists indicate cherries have been 
harvested in Eurasia from 4,000 to 5,000 B.C.  In 
1629, chokecherry was imported to England where it 
has been cultivated as an ornamental.  It was first 
cultivated in North America as an orchard crop in 
1724. Conservation uses include plantings in 
shelterbelts, windbreaks, wildlife plantings, and mass 
plantings for erosion control. 
 
CAUTION: PARTS OF THIS PLANT CAN 
BE POISONOUS 
 
The seeds are toxic due to production of hydrocyanic  acid in the leaves, stems and seeds.  The almond-like 
nuts are treated to deactivate the poisonous 
glycosides before they are put on the market.  Cases 
of illness and deaths have been traced back to eating 
the seeds of these trees.   
  
In some parts of the U.S., chokecherry is a popular 
ornamental.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
General
: Rose Family (Rosaceae).   Chokecherry is a 
native, perennial, deciduous, woody, thicket-forming 
large erect shrub or small tree. It rarely reaches a 
height of over 30 feet.  The crown is irregular and 
from 10 to 20 feet wide when mature.  The stems are 
numerous and slender.  Reproduction can either be by 
seed or root rhizomes.  
  
Leaves are dark green and glossy above and paler 
beneath.  They are alternate, simple, glabrous, oval to 
broadly elliptic in shape, 1 to 4 inches long, and 3/4 
to 2 inches wide.  The margins are toothed with 
closely-spaced sharp teeth pointing outward forming 
a serrated edge.  They turn yellow in autumn.  
  
The bark of young trees may vary from gray to a 
reddish brown.  As it ages the bark turns darker, into 
brownish-black and becomes noticeably furrowed.  
The bark is distinctly marked by horizontal rows of 
raised air pores (lenticels).  With maturation the 
lenticels develop into shallow grooves.   
  
It has perfect flowers which are aromatic and 
arranged in cylindrical racem es 3 to 6 inches long.  
The racemes always grow on  the current year's leafy 
twig growth.  Individual flowers are perfect, 1/4 to 
3/8 inch in diameter with 5 white petals.  The flowers 
start appearing  before the leaves are fully developed.  
Flowers may appear from April to July and fruits 
form a couple of months later.     
 
The fruits are spherical dr upes (fleshy fruit with a 
stone in the center), globose, 1/4 to 3/8 inch in 
diameter.  Small ripe cherries range in color from 
dark red or purple to almo st black.  There are from 
3,000 to 5,000 seeds per pound.

The roots are a network of rhizomes.  Deep root 
systems grow at irregular intervals along the length 
of the rhizomes.  Rhizomes can extend beyond the 
drip zone, up to 35 feet away from the base of the 
tree.  Rhizomes grow up to 3/4 inch in diameter.  
  
There are three recognized varieties of Prunus 
virginiana .  The variety  demissa is commonly called 
western chokecherry.  It produces dark red fruit.  The 
variety melanocarpa  produces black fruit.  The 
variety virginiana  produces crimson to deep red fruit. 
This variety can be found in two forms, one with red 
and one with white fruit.  
  
Chokecherry occurs naturally in a wide range of soil 
types and textures.  
     
Many wildlife animals eat the fruit and distribute it.  
Birds, rabbits, hares, rodents and bears all seek out 
and eat its fruit.   
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Nursery grown seedlings es tablish satisfactorily if 
planted free of competition in areas having 15 or 
more inches of annual precipitation.  Use of weed 
barrier mat, a strict cultivation regime, or proper 
herbicide treatment is necessary if a successful 
planting is to occur.  Ch eck with your local NRCS 
Field Office to determine if  chokecherry is adapted to 
your area or soils before planting any trees.  
 
Management  
On range and pastures it is often considered a 
potential hazard to livestock.  As a consequence 
either mechanical and/or herbicide treatments 
combined with good grassland management is 
needed to prevent animal  loss. Control of weedy 
vegetation, and treatment for potential diseases, is 
necessary if it is expected to grow for an extended 
period of years  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Chokecherry is susceptible to X-disease, black knot, 
stem decay, shothole, Valsa canker, and honey 
fungus  Plowrightia stansburiana .   Common insect 
pests are the prairie tent caterpillar, eastern tent 
caterpillar and aphids.  In the northeastern United 
States, chokecherry is a pr imary host of the eastern 
tent caterpillar.  Browsing by deer on young 
immature trees causes consid erable damage in some 
areas.   
  Environmental Concerns 
The leaves, bark, stem, and stone (seed pit) of 
chokecherry are all toxic.  It is potentially poisonous 
to all classes of livestock, but cattle and sheep are the 
ones commonly affected.  The meaty flesh of the fruit 
is not toxic. Poisoning generally occurs when animals 
consume 0.25 percent or more of their body weight in 
toxic plant material in an hour or less.  
 
 Tim Dring, USDA NRCS Washington State Office 
 
Eating a single seed or cherry pit, though not 
recommended it is unlikely to cause discomfort or 
serious illness.  However, there have been reported 
deaths, usually of children chewing on the stems and 
leaves, or swallowing the stones. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Planting materials can be obtained from most 
commercial hardwood nurseries and seed sources.  
Several cultivars have been released by government 
agencies and private nurser
ies for use in landscaping 
and/or fruit production.  The two most commonly 
marketed cultivars are 'Schubert', and 'Canada Red'. 
 
'Schubert' is one of the olde st cultivars.  Its parent 
rootstock is  Prunus virginiana melanocarpa  selected 
from a native stand near Valley City, North Dakota.   
Releases from Canada include, 'Garrington', 'Goertz' 
and 'Robert'.

Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants .usda.gov.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Control : 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:  
Wayne A. Geyer , Forestry Division, Kansas State 
Research and Extension, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Patrick J. Broyles , Formerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
John M. Row, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Patrick J. Broyles , Formerly USDA NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Edited:  080724 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call  202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about 
Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.