Plant Fact Sheet
SHORTSPUR SEABLUSH  
Plectritis congesta (Lindl.) DC.  
Plant Symbol = PLCO4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Corvallis Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon  
 Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Plant Materials Center, 1999 
Alternat ive Names  
Alternate  Common Names: sea blush, rosy plectritis , pink 
plectritis, short -spurred plectritis , showy plectritis  
Alternate  Scientific Name s: There are two subspecies of 
P. congesta, ssp. congesta  and ssp. brachystemon.  A 
synonym  for P. congesta  ssp. congesta  is Valerianella 
congesta  Lindl.  Synonyms  for P.  congesta  (Lindl.) A. 
DC. ssp.  brachystemon  (Fisch. & C. A. Mey.) Morey  
include  Plectritis congesta  (Lindl.) A. DC. s sp. nitida  (A. 
Heller) Morey , Plectritis b rachystemon  Fisch. & C. A. 
Mey. , Plectritis anomala (A. Gray) Suksd.,  Plectritis 
aphanoptera  (A. Gray) Suksd.,  Plectritis anomala var . 
gibbosa  (Suksd.) Dyal , Plectritis congesta var . major 
(Fisch. & C. A. Mey.) Dyal,  Plectritis magna (Greene) 
Suksd.  var.  magna,  Plectritis magna var . nitida (A. 
Heller) Dyal., and Plectritis samolifolia (DC.) Hoeck .  
Uses  
Ornamental:  This annual wildflower makes a pretty 
addition to a wildflower meadow, stony bank, parking 
area or rock garden.   Established  populations will 
generally reseed themselves and plants  are hardy in 
USDA  Zones 6a to 9b.  
Pollinator Habitat : Flowers provide a  spring nectar 
source for bumble bees and other native bees , as well as 
butterflies  including the endangered Fender’s blue 
( Plebejus icarioides fenderi ) and the rare Taylor’s 
checkerspot ( Euphydryas editha taylori ).   Restoration
:  This plant may be used as part of a seed mix 
for meadow revegetation p rojects or wildlife enhancement 
and  pollinator plantings  throughout its native range . 
Status  
This plant u sually occurs in non- wetlands, but is  
occasionally  found in wetlands.   Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g.,  threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Shortspur seablush is a native, annual wildflower  that  can 
paint  entire  hillsides pink in the spring .  It is a member of 
the valerian family (Valerianaceae).   The stems are 
usually unbranched , slender,  upright, angled,  and hairless, 
reaching  4 to 24 inches tall.   The basal leaves are early 
deciduous, while the  more persistent  stem  leaves are 
opposite,  smooth-margined  or slightly toothed , hairless, 
and 
3/8  to 2 ½ inches long by 1/8 to 7/8 inch wide.  Lower 
leaves have short stalks and are spatula to egg -shaped 
with the wider end near the tip, while upper leaves have 
no stalk,  are oblong to elliptic  in shape , and often 
clasping .  The small, bright pink to white flowers grow in 
densely crowded,  more or less headlike clusters at the 
stem tips .  Individual flowers  have five  p etals that are 
fused into a 2- lipped tube less than 
3/8 inch long  with a 
spur that often  has a wider, rounded  tip.  Flowering  period 
is from March to June.   The fruits are achenes and are 
one -seeded, keeled, and  sometimes winged.    
 Shortspur seablush distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
This plant prefers open to partly shaded  meadows and 
slopes that are moist in the spring , but also grows along 
coastal bluffs , rocky  balds, and roadsides  in spring -moist 
areas or seeps .  This species is found mostly west of the