Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FREMONT’S 
COTTONWOOD  
Populus fremontii S. Wats. 
Plant Symbol = POFR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
poplar, Alamo cottonwood 
 
Uses 
Ecological diversity, bank and sediment stabilization, 
maintenance of channel morphology, water quality 
improvement, ground-w ater recharge, flood 
abatement, fish and wildlife habitat. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Fremont’s cottonwood is a native tree growing in 
riparian areas near streams,  rivers and wetlands in the 
American Southwest.  Fremont's cottonwood trees 
range from 12 to 35 meters in height, and trunk 
diameter ranges from 0.30 to 1.5 meters.  The bark is 
smooth in younger trees, becoming deeply furrowed 
with whitish cracked bark w ith age.  The leaves are 
cordate (heart-shaped) with  white veins and coarse 
crenate-serrate teeth on the  margins. The leaves have 
petioles 1/2 to equal the blade length, laterally 
compressed near the blade which causes the leaves to 
flutter in the wind.  These trees are dioecious, with 
flowers in drooping catkins, which are 4 to 14 cm 
long.  Cottonwoods bloom from March-April.  The 
fruit is an achene, which is attached to a silky hair, en 
masse looking like patches of cotton hanging from 
the limbs, thus the name cottonwood.  The fruits are 
wind dispersed. 
Charles Webber ©  California Academy of Sciences @ CalPhotos 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Fremont’s cottonwood  is distributed throughout the 
Southwest, extending from California eastward to 
Nevada, Colorado, Arizona, Texas, New Mexico, and 
southward into Mexico.  This species occurs 
throughout California and is most abundant in the 
San Joaquin and Sacramento Valleys.  Cottonwoods 
dominate the riparian forests of lower terrace deposits 
and stabilized gravel bars .  Cottonwoods are found 
near water.  They require a bare gravel or sand 
substrate with adequate moisture for germination and 
development. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Fremont's cottonwood establishment from seed is 
difficult and seldom used.  Fremont's cottonwood 
propagation is possible from hardwood, pole and root 
cuttings, and containerized seedlings. 
  
The Los Lunas, New Mexico Plant Materials Center, 
in cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers, U.S. Bureau of  Reclamation, and U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service, developed a pole (farm 
grown rootless sapling trees, 3-4 years old) planting

technique for establishing Fremont's cottonwood.  
Trial planting on well adapted sites indicate more that 
80% survival of cottonwood and willow poles with 
this method.   
 
Currently the Plant Materials Center, in cooperation 
with the Albuquerque Parks Department, is 
conducting research on the  effectiveness of sprinkle 
irrigation on Rio Grande floodplains to induce 
germination of naturally dispersed cottonwood seeds 
and subsequent tree estab lishment.  Preliminary 
results indicate that, when na tural flooding cycles are 
absent, appropriately timed sprinkler irrigation of 
riparian areas combined with weed control can 
induce germination of naturally dispersed Fremont’s 
cottonwood seed and subsequent tree establishment. 
 
Management  
Many land uses in arid watersheds significantly 
decrease or destroy cottonwood riparian forests.  
Livestock grazing has widely been identified as a 
leading factor causing or  contributing to degradation 
of riparian habitats in the western United States.  
Timber harvests often adversely affect stream flows.  
Buffer strips can reduce sedimentation rates and 
flood velocities.  Stream diversion for irrigation may 
reduce surface flows to a level insufficient to 
maintain cottonwood vegetation.  Ground-water 
pumping lowers local and regional water tables and 
reduces stream flow, which  can eliminate or weaken 
riparian vegetation. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Cottonwood is susceptible to mistletoe. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Currently, there are no rel eased cultivars of Fremont's 
cottonwood.  Containerized Fremont's cottonwood 
samplings are available from most nurseries in the 
areas where adapted.  Fremont's cottonwood poles, 
suitable for transplanting, are available from the 
NRCS Plant Materials Centers in Los Lunas, New 
Mexico and Tucson, Arizona.  The Plant Materials 
Center at Lockeford, Calif ornia works with a private 
company that can provide cottonwood poles. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Prepared By:  
James Henson , Plant Physiologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center  
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Greg Fenchel, Manager 
USDA NRCS Los Lunas Plant Materials Center  
Los Lunas, New Mexico 
 
Species Coordinator 
James Henson , Plant Physiologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center  
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.