Plant Fact Sheet
RIO GRANDE 
CLAMMYWEED  
Polanisia dodecandra  (L.) DC. ssp. 
riograndensis  Iltis   
Plant Symbol = PODOR  
 
Contributed by: E. “Kika”  de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas   
 
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Uses   
Wildlife : Rio Grande clammyweed is recommended for 
upland wildlife plantings and in range seeding mixes. 
Clammyweed seed is eaten by game birds such as 
bobwhite quail, scaled quail, mourning doves, white -wing 
doves, and Rio Grande wild turkeys, as well as many non-
game species of birds and mammals. Rio Grande 
clammyweed is also an important nectar plant for many 
species of butterflies and provides habitat to many other 
insects. Clammyweed has no grazing value for livestock 
or wildlife.  Clammyweed is often found in  dense stands 
of non- native grasses, and may be useful in efforts to 
diversify these stands for wildlife.    
   
Beautification : Rio Grande clammyweed is an attractive 
nectar plant for butterfly gardens.  However, its leaves 
release a strong, unpleasant odor when crushed, so plants 
should be located away from foot traffic areas.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and y our State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
    Description and Adaptation  
Rio Grande clammyweed is a native annual forb, endemic 
to 
southern Texas. It is found in sandy, gravelly 
(sometimes limestone) or alluvial silty soil.  The plants 
are 2 -6 dm. tall and sparsely branched or unbranched.  
The leaflets are in groups of 3 with leaves 2 -4 cm long, 5-
20 mm wide.  The flowers are pink to rose with petals 5 -
16 mm long.  The fruit is a narrow capsule producing 
numerous rounded seeds.  Rio Grande clammyweed has 
an average of 154,500 seeds per pound.    
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web sit e.  
   
Establishment   
Rio Grande clammyweed is an early successional plant. It 
is quick to establish on disturbed soils, grows quickly, and 
provides a favorable environment for other slow to 
germinate native species. In mixed species native 
plantings in sou th Texas, clammyweed is often the first 
planted species to emerge and flower. Rio Grande 
clammyweed readily re- seeds itself with moderate soil 
disturbance.  
 
Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
Seeding trials at Kingsville, Texas have shown good 
establishment from seed in fall (October) and spring 
(April) plantings. Fall plantings should be made at least 2 
months prior to danger of frost so that seed is produced 
before freezing as clammyweed typically requires 45 -60 
days from emergence to seed maturity.     
   
For direct seeding, broadcast or drill seed during March 
through May or in September and October into a clean, 
weed free seedbed.  Seeds should be
 covered from ¼ to 
½” depth to ensure good soil to seed contact.  Plant at a 
seeding rate of 8 PLS (pure live seed) pounds per acre for