Plant Fact Sheet
KNOTGRASS 
Paspalum distichum  L.  
Plant Symbol = PADI 6 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
 
Robert  H. Mohlenbrock @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database/ USDA SCS 
1991.  Southern wetland flora: Field office guide to plant species. South 
National Technical Center, Fort Worth.  
 
Alternate Names 
Eternity grass, Fort Thompson grass, ginger grass, joint  
grass, joint paspalum, saltene, salt jointgrass, salt -water 
couch grass, salt -water paspalum, seashore paspalum, and 
turfgrass  
 
Uses  
Wildlife : Knotgrass is grazed by deer and other mammals.  
It provides a substantial source of food for ducks  as well .  
Kno tgrass also serves as a larval host to the sunrise 
skipper,  Adopaeoides prittwitzi.   
 
Livestock:   Knotgrass can provide  valuable forage for 
livestock, especially in areas of high salinity.  It can be 
used for  hay, but is not suitable for use in silage.  
 
Er osion:  Knotgrass can tolerate a waterlogged 
environment which allows it to be used in the restoration 
of wetlands, marshes, beaches, and stream banks.    
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS web site 
(
www.plants.usda.g ov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g.,  t
hreatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats  and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information  is also available from the PLANTS web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description  
Knotgrass is a warm season, perennial grass that grows in 
clumps or creeping along the soil surface.  N ew growth 
begins in March and  will remain green until the first frost.  
Stems grow along the soil and range from 6 -72 inches in 
length.  At each node, roots are sent downward, and 
flowering stems eme rge up to 18 inches tall.  N odes on 
the creeping stems are often pubescent whereas the nodes 
on the m at-fo rming stems are glabrous.  B lades are flat 
and taper to an enrolled  apex.  They are 2 -6 inches long 
and abou t one inch wide.  F lowers from knotgrass range 
in color from usually pink to red, gre en, or dull white.  
They  are about 1/8 inch long and grow in clusters of two 
to three per stem.  S eed have an oval shape with one end 
tapered to a point.  The y have a yellowish lig ht color and 
averages about 1/10 inch long.  
 
Adaptation  
Knotgrass is found in both wet and well -drained areas.  
Common locations to find knotgrass are meadows, 
marshes, and ditches, but it can also be found growing in 
cultivated and disturbed areas.  Knotg rass is also adapted 
to areas with high salinity.