Plant Fact Sheet     
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ANTELOPE 
BITTERBRUSH  
Purshia tridentate (Pursh)  DC. 
Plant Symbol = PUTR2 
 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental 
Plant Center 
 Steve Parr, UCEPC, Meeker, Colorado 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Antelopebrush, buckbrush, quininebrush 
 
Uses 
Antelope bitterbrush is a very palatable, high quality 
shrub for big game and livestock. It also provides 
cover for small animals and birds.  It is considered a 
medium quality cover for sage-grouse.  Bitterbrush 
seed is an important source  of food for small animals. 
The shrub is also used for reclamation of mined areas 
where adapted.   It has the potential for use as a living 
snow fence, roadside beautification, and xeriscape 
plantings. 
 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your state 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Antelope bitterbrush is an important native browse 
shrub in the intermountain Western United States. It 
is adapted to a wide range of soils with 8 to 34 inches 
of annual precipitation and  occurs at elevations of 
4000 to 8500 feet, but has been noted at 11,000 feet 
in California. The shrub is slow growing with a 
moderate to very deep root system and wide ecotypic 
variations. It is normally 2 to 6 feet in height and up 
to 8 feet in width with wedge shaped, three lobed 
leaves (some are persistent in winter). Branches near 
the soil may layer (branches that touch the soil 
develop roots) providing additional rooting for the 
plant. Flowering occurs in late spring to early 
summer with yellow to white blossoms. 
    
Establishment 
Natural establishment of antelope bitterbrush occurs 
in years with good seed production when rodents 
cache seed and do not use all of the caches. Moisture 
is necessary the first few years of seedling growth for 
establishment. Late fall or winter seeding is 
recommended and competition can be a problem for 
establishment. Plants should not be used for the first 
four years and seedlings should be protected until 
they are 8 to 10 inches tall.  Rodents normally cache 
seeds within 50 to 75 feet of an existing seed source. 
Suitable environmental conditions may allow natural 
revegetation in only one out of 20 years. Antelope 
bitterbrush can also be established with tubling 
plants. These should be planted in the spring or early 
summer.  
 
Management 
Since antelope bitterbrush is a very palatable shrub 
for big game and livestock, its use should be 
controlled or it can be easily eliminated by over use. 
The shrub is most often used by big game in the fall, 
winter, or early spring when other plants are still 
covered by snow. Stands of bitterbrush can become 
decadent with no use and mature plants should be 
browsed for good forage production and vigor. 
However, no more than 50 to 60 percent of current 
annual growth should be removed. The literature 
indicates that bitterbrush is not a fire resistant shrub, 
but is fire dependent and light to moderate fires may 
enhance stands.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Many species of insects and mites inhabit antelope 
bitterbrush, several of these are beneficial. It should 
be noted that bitterbrush is insect pollinated.  Insects 
that cause problems include defoliators such as 
mountain mahogany loper and Western tussock moth. 
Some of the noted seed insects are bitterbrush seed 
midge, Say’s stinkbug, dark bitterbrush leaf tier, 
white collared leaf tier, and flower thrips. Large 
numbers of seedlings and small plants have been 
destroyed by cutworms and false wireworms. 
Diseases associated with bitterbrush include root rot, 
root and stem wilt, and root-stem canker. Seedlings 
have been damaged by damping off (a disease caused 
by fungi). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with antelope bitterbrush. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Lassen’ is a cultivar of antelope bitterbrush released 
in 1984 by USDA Forest  Service, Shrub Sciences 
Laboratory, Provo, Utah, Soil Conservation Service 
and Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Ephraim, 
Utah. Seven other agencies in California, Idaho, 
Nevada, and Oregon cooperated. Its origin is near 
Janesville in Lassen County, California. 
 
Fountain Green germplasm is a source identified 
release of antelope bitterbrush. It was released in 
1990 by the USDA Forest  Service, Shrub Sciences 
Laboratory, Provo, Utah, and the Utah Division of 
Wildlife Resources, Ephraim, Utah. Its origin is 
North of Fountain Green, Utah. 
 
Maybell germplasm was released in 1997 as a 
selected class release by Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center. Five other agencies 
participated in the release.  Maybell’s origin is 
Moffat County in Northwest Colorado, near the town 
of Maybell.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Gary L. Noller, Ph.D. , Plant Materials Consultant 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center 
Meeker, Colorado 
 
Edited: 070814 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
  The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program
s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of 
discrimination write to USDA, Di rector, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 
or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is 
an equal opportunity provider and employer."
 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.