Plant Fact Sheet
LANCE  SELFHEAL  
Prunella vulgaris  L. ssp . 
lanceolata  (W. Bartram) Hultén  
Plant Symbol = PRVU L2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter, Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2010  
Alternative Names  
Alternate  Common Names:  mountain selfheal,  narrowleaf 
selfheal, lanceleaf selfheal,  American self -heal,  self heal, 
heal -all, all heal  
Alternate  Scientific Names:  Prunella  vulgaris  L. var.  
elongata  Benth.,  Prunella  vulgaris  L. var.  lanceolata  (W. 
Bartram) Fernald , Prunella pennsylvanica  Willd. var. 
lanceolata  W.P.C.Barton , 
Prunella vulgaris  var.  calvescens 
Uses  
Ornamental:  Lance selfheal  can be used as a  native 
groundcover or  alternative  lawn that will generally stay 
green all summer in the Pacific Northwest without 
watering  and will flower even when mowed fairly short.   
Plants will form a dense mat with small leaves when 
repeatedly mowed  or grazed.   This species  is also a 
valuable  addition to a wildflower meadow or butterfly 
garden , but can become weedy , so  it may not be 
appropriate for small spaces or formal gardens . 
Wildlife and pollinators:  Flowers provide nectar  and 
pollen to butterflies  such as  w hites  (Pierinae),  s ulfurs 
(Coliadinae),  and sk ippers (Hesperiidae) , as well as native 
bees  such as bumblebees  ( Bombus  spp.) , digger  bees  
( Anthophora  spp.), small  c arpenter bees  ( Ceratina  spp.) , 
long -horned  bees  ( Eucera  spp.) , and g reen sweat  bees  
( Agapostemon  spp.).  Caterpillars of the  gray  marvel moth 
( Agriopodes teratophora) sometimes feed on the foliage.   Due to its bitter taste, lance selfheal is not generally eaten 
by herbivorous mammals, but the plants may be 
incidentally eaten by catt
le, sheep, or deer along with 
pasture  grasses.  Ground- foraging birds sometimes eat the 
nutlets.  
Erosion control: Due to its fibrous, rhizomatous roots and 
spreading growth habit , lance selfheal can be used for 
erosion control along roadsides, streambanks and pond 
edges.   The species also  has potential as a perennial cover 
crop  to provide habitat for pollinators and other beneficial 
insects  in vineyards,  orchards, and can e fruit or blueberry 
plantations,  but more testing is needed.  
Ethnobotanic /medicinal: T his plant  was used medicinally 
by  many North American  tribes , giving rise to the 
common names used today . The Quileute, Quinault, and 
Coast Salish in the Pacific Northwest rubbed the juice 
from the plant on boils to heal them.   The Delaware, 
Mohegan and Iroquois made a drink or body wash of 
plant tops to reduc e fevers.  The Nuxalk boiled the entire 
plant to make a weak tea that was taken for the heart.   
Studies have shown that P. vulgaris  has antibiotic 
properties, lowers blood pressure, and contains a 
co mpound (ursolic acid) that is believed to increase 
urination and fight tumors.   It is still used as a medicinal 
herb today, but plants are known to concentrate lead 
compounds  and other  pollutants , so they should not be 
gathered  from roadsides . 
Status  
Pleas e consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in  some 
regions or habitats and may outcompete,  displace, or 
overrun  desirable vegetation if not properly managed.   
Prunella  vulgaris  (no subspecies specified)  is listed in 
Weeds of the Northeast and  Weeds of the Great Plains.  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.   
Description  and Adaptation 
Lance selfheal is a native,  fibrous -rooted,  herbaceous 
perennial that grows from short rhizomes or a n enlarged 
stem -base, reaching 4 to 20 inches tall.  Like other 
m embers of the mint family (Lami aceae), it has square 
stems and opposite leaves.   The stems are generally un -
branched, slightly hairy above, and may be solitary or 
clustered.  Leaves are lance- shaped, 0.8 to 2.8 inches 
long,  minutely hairy to hairless, with short stalks on lower