Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAIDENCANE  
Panicum hemitomon Schult. 
Plant Symbol = PAHE2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Material Center  
 
                                                                                  R. Alan Shadow                         USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Paille fine, canouche 
 
Uses 
Forage: 
Maidencane can be an important forage grass in the 
coastal zone of the southeastern Untied States, and is 
very palatable to livestock.  It is highly digestible, 
with a TDN of 50% and crude protein levels of 
10.5% from June to September.  This decreases to 
34% TDN and 7.4% crude protein during winter 
months.  Maidencane is very prolific; often forming 
monotypic stands, and can produce 4-5 tons of high 
quality forage per acre. 
 
Wildlife: 
Palatability among browse animals is rated as fair.  
Maidencane provides excellent habitat and cover for 
a wide array of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, 
and fish.  Maidencane marshes in Florida are reported 
to be extensively used by whitetail deer and the 
endangered Florida Panther.    
 
Conservation: 
Maidencane is an excellent  plant for use in shoreline 
stabilization in fresh water locations.  It has a rapid 
growth rate, and forms dense stand that extend from  shallow water, up the bank as far as moisture permits.  
It is capable of decreasing wave energies and 
trapping suspended sediment.  Its network of roots 
and rhizomes anchor the soil and trapped sediments 
in place.      
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, st ate natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.   
 
Description and Adaptation 
Description: 
Maidencane is a warm season, rhizomatous, 
perennial, grass that grows from 2 to 5 feet in height.  
Its leaves are alternate with  over lapping sheaths that 
grasp the stem and extend at approximately 35 degree 
angles.  Maidencane is smooth and hairless with a 
membranous ligule.  It typically spreads via rhizomes 
and produces few seed heads.  Seed heads are very 
delicate in appearance, and are often sterile.  
Vegetative stems will greatly outnumber reproductive 
stems. 
  
Adaptation: 
Maidencane will tolerate a wide array of soil textures 
and prefers a near neutra l pH.  It will tolerate 
anaerobic conditions, and is one of the dominate 
species found in the floating  marshes of Louisiana.  It 
will not tolerate salt, and is absent in brackish areas.  
Maidencane is fire tolerant, as long as the rhizomes 
and roots are moist, and can withstand temperatures 
down to -3 degrees Fahrenheit.   
   
Distribution:  
Maidencane is widespread throughout the 
Southeastern seaboard from Texas to New Jersey, 
and as far inland as Tenn essee.  It is commonly

associated with freshwater wetlands, marshes, river 
margins, and drainages.                     
 
Establishment 
Maidencane is not a prolific or dependable seed 
producer, and is typically established from vegetative 
propagules.  Rhizomes may be harvested and planted 
directly, or potted and grown out in a controlled 
environment for future use.  Rhizomes are perishable, 
but will tolerate brief storage if kept moist and cool.  
Storage should be limited to a week or less to ensure 
viability and planting success.   Maidencane should be 
planted in moist areas during the spring or fall to 
avoid weather extremes during establishment.  
Rhizomes should be spaced on one foot intervals and 
planted approximately 1-2 inches deep, but no deeper 
than 2 inches.  Avoid plantin g dry areas or areas that 
remain inundated for long periods, brief inundation is 
acceptable.  Moist, transitional areas make excellent 
planting sites and offer the best chance of planting 
success.     
 
Management 
Maidencane will respond favorably to fertilization, 
though it is typically not needed for conservation 
purposes.  Fertilization may aid in establishment of 
new plantings or when used as a forage.  Proper 
grazing management is necessary due to its high 
palatability and intolerance of heavy grazing.  No 
more than 50% of its biomass should be removed 
each year from grazing or cu tting to maintain healthy, 
vigorous stands.     
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests  of problems associated 
with this species. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Maidencane is very prolific and is capable of creating 
a monotypic stand.  Under favorable conditions, it 
can out compete other plants, decreasing the diversity 
within the ecosystem.  It can become invasive in 
moist soil units and constructed wetlands where a 
monotypic stand may not be desired. 
 
Control 
Maidencane can be controlled mechanically by 
mowing or environmentally with fire and hydro-
period management, if possible.  Herbicides may also 
be used to create openings in wetlands.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county 
weed specialist to learn what  works best in your area 
and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade 
names and control measures appear in this document 
only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS  does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Halifax’ was released in 1974 by the USDA NRCS 
Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials Center in 
Coffeeville, MS, and Citrus Germplasm was released 
in 1998 by the USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center in Brooksville, FL.   
 
Prepared By:  
R. Alan Shadow
, Soil Conservationists, East Texas 
Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
R. Alan Shadow , Soil Conservationists, East Texas 
Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas 
 
Edited: 080724 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.