Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BEACH PLUM 
Prunus maritima  Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = PRMA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Uses 
Beach plum is most useful in the secondary 
stabilization and restoration of coastal sand dunes.  
On Cape Cod, MA, efforts are being made to develop 
and promote the commercial fruit production of this 
native plum.  This native shrub is utilized by coastal 
wildlife. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
On sand dunes beach plum  will reach heights of 4 to 
7 feet; but if this species is moved inland, and it can 
attain heights of 16 to 18 feet.  When maximum 
heights have been reached, stem diameter will range 
from 4 to 8 inches at the ro ot collar.  The root system 
penetrates deep into the soil, and as lower branches 
are covered by shifting sands, adventitious roots 
develop.  Colonies formed from this layering effect 
can expand up to 20 feet. 
 
The egg shaped leaves of beach plum are firm, 
alternate, and dull green; they are rough and ridged  above, paler and finely hairy beneath.  The leaves are 
half as wide as they are long, measuring 1½ to 2½ 
inches long; each leaf is attached to the branches with 
a stout, hairy, often granular stalk.  The leaf edges are 
finely serrated, with broadly triangular to semi-
circular shaped, abruptly pointed teeth. 
 
In April to early May, flowers emerge before the 
leaves.  Each snowy white flower measures ¼ to ½ 
inch across, with very hairy stalks and sepals.  
Flowers develop in axillary clusters of two or three.  
After pollination occurs by bees or wind the flowers 
become pinkish in color.  The edible fruit that 
develops is round and ½ to
 ¾ inches in diameter.  
The color may vary from a purplish-black to red; 
there are some plants that produce yellow fruit.  The 
fleshy fruit’s surface is covered with a tough skin 
which has a heavy, white waxy residue.  Each fruit 
contains a single stone type seed which is egg 
shaped, swollen, and squared-off at the base.  
C. MIller USDANRCS
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Although indigenous to the mid-Atlantic coastal 
region, beach plum has been  planted successfully on 
more inland sites.  It is well adapted to droughty sites 
with moderately fertile, slightly acidic, loamy and 
sandy soils.  Beach plum  does not perform well on 
heavy clay soils, but will tolerate moderately well 
drained conditions. 
 
Beach plum is distributed th roughout the Northeast.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Quality seedlings are easily produced in nurseries on 
raised beds.  Fall sowing works best to utilize natural 
stratification forces to br eak seed dormancy.  If 
spring sowing is selected,  the seed must be exposed 
to a cool moist stratification for at least 30 days, prior 
to planting.  Due to the expansive root system which 
rapidly develops, seedlings are distributed as 1 year 
old bare-root or containerized stock.  Controlling 
competing weeds through the establishment period is 
critical to good survival  and performance of the 
seedlings.  Mulching, hand cultivating, and no 
fertilization for the first y ear or two are the most 
effective means of avoiding weedy growth.  
Application of fertilizer can initiate excessive growth 
of competing grasses.  Once this shrub is established 
it requires little or no maintenance.

Management 
Chemical control of mildew and aphids is sometimes 
necessary with beach plum, if an infestation becomes 
excessive. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There is one variety available on the commercial 
nursery market for conservation uses named ‘Ocean 
View’ (composite from plants  in DE, NJ, MA).  This 
cultivar was developed and released in 1992 by the 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, in Cape May Court 
House, NJ.  Foundation seed and orchard stock can 
be acquired from the PMC by commercial producers.  
Common stock material of locally collected sources 
can be purchased from nurseries. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Christopher Miller , PMS-Southern NE/Mid-Atlantic 
USDA NRCS, Somerset, New Jersey  
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.