Plant Fact Sheet
PEA  
Pisum sativum L. 
Plant Symbol = PISA6 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 
 Field of peas. Rebecca McGee, USDA-ARS 
Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names:  garden pea, field pea, spring 
pea, English pea, common pea, green pea (Pisum sativum 
L. ssp. sativum); Austrian winter pea (Pisum sativum L. 
ssp. sativum var. arvense) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names: Pisum arvense L., Pisum 
humile Boiss. & Noe, Pisum sativum L. ssp. arvense (L.) 
Poir., Pisum sativum L. var. arvense (L.) Poir., Pisum 
sativum L. var. humile Poir., Pisum sativum L. var. 
macrocarpon Ser., Pisum sativum L. ssp. sativum, and 
Pisum sativum L. ssp. sativum var. arvense (L.) Poir.   
Uses 
Commercial crop: Peas are a cool-season crop grown for 
their edible seed or seed pods.  Garden or green peas are 
harvested before the seed is mature for the fresh or fresh-
pack market (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).  Sugar snap 
peas and snow peas lack the inner pod fiber and are also 
harvested early for the fresh or fresh-pack market 
(McGee, 2012).  Field peas, including fall-sown Austrian 
winter peas, are harvested when seeds are mature and dry, 
and are primarily blended with grains to fortify the 
protein content of livestock feed.  Dried peas are also sold 
for human consumption as whole, split or ground peas.  
Peas are a nutritious legume, containing 15 to 35% 
protein, and high concentrations of the essential amino 
acids lysine and tryptophan (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).   
 
Forage crop:  Peas are grown alone or with cereals for 
silage and green fodder (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).  
Peas can also be grazed while in the field.  Young 
Austrian winter pea plants will regrow after being grazed 
multiple times (Clark, 2007). 
 
Rotational crop:  Peas and other legumes are desirable in 
crop rotations because they break up disease and pest 
cycles, provide nitrogen, improve soil microbe diversity 
and activity, improve soil aggregation, conserve soil 
water, and provide economic diversity.   
 
Green manure and cover crop: Peas are grown as green 
manures and cover crops because they grow quickly and 
contribute nitrogen to the soil (Clark, 2007).  Pea roots 
have nodules, formed by the bacteria Rhizobium 
leguminosarum, which convert atmospheric nitrogen to 
ammonia.  Peas also produce an abundance of succulent 
vines that breakdown quickly and provide nitrogen 
(Sarrantonio, 1994, as cited by Clark, 2007).  Austrian 
winter peas are the most common type of pea used as a 
green manure or cover crop because they are adapted to 
cold temperatures and fit in many rotations. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description and Adaptation 
General:  Legume family (Fabaceae).  The pea is a cool-
season annual vine that is smooth and has a bluish-green 
waxy appearance.  Vines can be up to 9 ft long, however 
modern cultivars have shorter vines, about 2 ft long.  The 
stem is hollow, and the taller cultivars cannot climb 
without support (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).  Leaves are 
alternate, pinnately compound, and consist of two large 
leaflike stipules, one to several pairs of oval leaflets, and 
terminal tendrils (McGee, 2012).   
 
Flowers have five green fused sepals and five white, 
purple or pink petals of different sizes.  The top petal is 
called the ‘standard’, the two small petals in the middle 
are fused together and called the ‘keel’ (because of their 
boat-like appearance), and the bottom two petals taper 
toward the base and are called the ‘wings’ (Elzebroek and

Wind, 2008).  The fruit is a closed pod, 1 to 4 inches long 
that often has a rough inner membrane.  Ripe seeds are 
round, smooth or wrinkled, and can be green, yellow, 
beige, brown, red-orange, blue-red, dark violet to almost 
black, or spotted.   
Peas are adapted to many soil types, but grow best on 
fertile, light-textured, well-drained soils (Hartmann et al., 
1988; Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).  Peas are sensitive to 
soil salinity and extreme acidity.  The ideal soil pH range 
for pea production is 5.5 to 7.0 (Hartmann et al., 1988).  
Peas grow well with 16 to 39 inches annual precipitation 
(Elzebroek and Wind, 2008). 
 
Uncovered pea plants may tolerate temperatures as low as 
14°F, and if covered with snow, may tolerate 
temperatures as low as -22°F (Elzebroek and Wind, 
2008).  Peas are most productive at temperatures of 55 to 
64°F (Hartmann et al., 1988).   
Distribution:  Pisum sativum is currently grown in 
temperate regions, at high elevations, or during cool 
seasons in warm regions throughout the world (Elzebroek 
and Wind, 2008). Major pea producers are China, India, 
Canada, Russia, France and the United States (Food and 
Agriculture Organization, 2012).  In the United States, the 
most production occurs in Washington, Montana, and 
North Dakota (USDA-National Agricultural Statistics 
Service, 2011).   
Establishment 
Peas are established by seed in the spring or fall.  Seed 
should be inoculated with Rhizobium leguminosarum 
prior to planting in fields where peas have not been 
previously grown to ensure root nodule formation and the 
fixation of atmospheric nitrogen.  Typical seeding rates 
range from 50 to 80 lb/acre when drilled and 90 to 100 
lb/acre when broadcast (Clark, 2007).  Seed is planted at a 
depth of 1.5 to 3 inches in rows spaced 6 to 12 inches 
apart (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).   
 
Management 
Peas are poor competitors with weeds.  Rapid seedling 
emergence, adequate crop density, pre- and post-plant 
tillage, and herbicides help reduce weed pressure 
(Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).   
 
Austrian winter peas grown as a green manure crop can 
produce 90 to 150 lb/acre nitrogen (Clark, 2007). The 
actual amount of nitrogen available for the next crop 
depends on timing and method of incorporation, soil 
temperature, moisture, and other factors.  Peas are easily 
killed with herbicides, mowing, or disking.  This should 
be done at full-bloom stage to optimize the nitrogen 
contribution (Clark, 2007).   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Peas are susceptible to multiple foliar, root, and seed 
diseases. 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Numerous pea cultivars for various purposes are 
commercially available.   
 
References 
Clark, A. (ed.) 2007. Managing cover crops profitably. 3rd 
ed. Sustainable agriculture research and education 
program handbook series, bk 9. Sustainable 
Agriculture Research and Education, College Park, 
MD. 
Elzebroek, T., and K. Wind. 2008. Guide to cultivated 
plants. CAB International, Oxfordshire, UK. 
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2012. FAO, Rome. 
http://faostat.fao.org (accessed 24 April 2012).  
Hartmann, H.T., A.M. Kofranek, V.E. Rubatzky, and 
W.J. Flocker. 1988. Plant science: growth, 
development and utilization of cultivated plants. 2nd 
ed. Prentice Hall Career and Technology, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ. 
McGee, R. 2012. USDA-ARS. Personal communication. 
USDA-National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2011. 
Press release. USDA-NASS, Washington, DC. 
http://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/Washin
gton/Publications/Current_News_Release/pealent11.
pdf (accessed 20 April 2012).  
 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant fact sheet for pea (Pisum 
sativum L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Pullman, WA. 
Published September 2012 
Edited: 31Aug2012 aym; 19Sep2012 plsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER