Plant Fact Sheet
SLENDER CINQUEFOIL  
Potentilla gracilis Douglas ex 
Hook.  
Plant Symbol = POGR9  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 
 
© G.D. Carr, 2006  
Alternative Names  
Alternate  Common Names:  n orthwest cinquefoil, 
graceful cinquefoil, western cinquefoil,  prairie cinquefoil,  
fivefinger cinquefoil,  cinquefoil, five -finger,  graceful 
five -finger, northwest fivefinger, slender potentilla   
Alternate  Scientific Names:  None  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: Slender cinquefoil serves as a nectar 
and/or pollen source for European honey bees , native 
bees,  butterflies , and other beneficial insects .  It is also a 
possibl e butterfly host plant for the p urplish c opper 
( Lycaena helloides ) and two-banded checkered s kipper 
( Pyrgis ruralis).   
Ornamental:  Slender cinquefoil  is an attractive plant for 
perennial garden borders, wildflower meadows, openings 
in a woodland or wildlife garden , or around a pond.  
Aside from the beautiful  early -summer golden blooms, 
p lants have  attractive seed heads , showy  fall foliage that 
turns  shades of pink, orange and yellow , and are generally 
deer -resistant .   Restoration
:  Slender cinquefoil is an important 
component of many n ative meadow and prairie 
ecosystems.  Restoration projects in these habitats should 
consider including this hardy, perennial wildflower in 
seed mixes.  
Ethnobotanic:  This plant was used for medicinal purposes 
by  tribes  of the Pacific Northwest.   The Okanagan-
Colville took a n infusion of pounded roots as a tonic for 
the blood, general aches and pains, diarrhea,  and 
gonorrhea, or used the infusion to wash sores.  The 
Thompson Indians used a poultice of mashed leaves and 
roots on wounds to draw out the pain.  
St atus  
This species is considered a facultative wetland plant  in 
California, meaning it usually occurs in wetlands, but it  
can also occur  in  non -wetlands throughout its native 
range.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and  your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) . 
Description  and Adaptation 
Slender cinquefoil, a member of the rose family 
(Rosaceae),  is a common,  native,  tufted  perennial 
wildflower  that grows from a short, thick rhizome  or 
branched woody crown .  Stems are brown-scaly at the 
base and  more or less ascending , extensively branched 
upwards,  bearing  short-woolly  to long- spreading  hairs, 
and  reaching  8 to  40  inches  long.  The leaves are  gray-
green,  oval, 2 ½ to 12 inches wide, divided  from a single 
point  into  5 to 9 inversely -lance- shaped,  sharply toothed 
leaflets.   The underside of the leaves is usually  white 
silky -hairy, while the upper sur face is green with some 
hairs.   Basal leaves are on long stems that can reach 12 
inches in length.   Flower cluster s are loose and consist of 
a  few to many  golden yellow flowers with  five heart -
shaped  petals that are 
1/8 to 2/3  inch long.   Flowering  
period is June to September.   The fruits are achenes that 
are  less than 
1/16 inch, more or less smooth, and light 
brown.   Slender cinquefoil is highly variable, with a 
number of ill -defined  varieties  that sometimes inter -grade 
across their range.    
Slende r cinquefoil is common in meadows,  grasslands, 
roadsides,  subalpine meadows , and open forests to moist 
areas in deserts and arid shrub -steppe regions  at 
elevations up to 11,500 ft.  The plants grow well in full 
sun to light shade, moist to fairly dry soil,  and have 
moderate saline and calcium carbonate tolerance.  This 
species is widely distributed throughout North America, 
from Alaska south to Baja California and east through the 
northern Great Plains to the Great Lakes Basin  and