Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HAVARD PANICUM 
Panicum havardii Vasey  
Plant Symbol = PAHA2   
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ Smith 
Plant Materials Center  
 
 Rudy G. Esquivel, USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ Smith Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Havard’s panicgrass, Havard’s panicum, Havard 
panic 
 
Uses 
Havard panicum grows naturally on deep, active sand 
dunes and arroyos. It is useful for the stabilization of 
active sand dunes and arroyos.  Harvard panicum 
produces low forage yield, and the forage is coarse 
and unpalatable when plants  are in the mature stage. 
But, cattle will eat the forage of this grass when 
plants are in the early vegetative stages.           
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Havard panicum is a perennial, warm-season, native 
grass with stout solitary culms and rhizomes 
elongated and scaly.  Inflorescence is a panicle which 
is 7 to 15 inches long. The panicle is open, about 7 to 
15 inches wide with an ovate shape.  Panicle 
branches are stiff.  Seeds are nearly twice the size of 
switchgrass.    Culms are decumbent and 25 to 63  inches long.  Culm-internodes are covered with a 
waxy coating that gives a blue-green color and are 
hairless.  Leaf sheaths are without a keel and without 
hairs on the leaf surface.
  Ligules are a ciliate 
membrane, 0.08 to 0.16 inches long.           
 
Adaptation 
Havard panicum grows in arroyos and sand hills of 
western Texas, southern New Mexico and northern 
Mexico (Hitchcock 1935). This grass, like giant 
sandreed ( Calamovilfa gigantea ), and blowout grass 
( Redfieldia flexuosa ) are among the first native 
species to show up as stabilizers on deep, active, sand 
dune areas.  Giant sandreed and blowout grass are 
common over a wide section of the southern United 
States, but Havard panicum is found only in Texas, 
southern New Mexico, and northern Mexico, in 
arroyos and on the extensive dune areas.  It is 
prevalent in Ward, Crane, Winkler, Ector, and 
Andrews Counties of western Texas.     
 
Establishment 
Havard panicum is established from seed in the 
spring by either broadcasting on the sand dunes or 
sowing with a small grass drill at a depth of ¼ inch 
on flatter surface dune areas .  Applying a thin layer 
of hay mulch or an erosion control type mat after 
seeding will retain moisture when it rains to aid in the 
seed germination.   
 
An alternative is to propagate Havard panicum from 
rhizomes, harvested during  the previous year, in the 
greenhouse in 1 gallon pots and transplant these 
rhizomes in the spring to  sandy sites.  Irrigation of 
these sandy sites would be necessary during the first 
growing season.  
 
Management  
Havard panicum is valuable for controlling erosion 
on deep sands subject to severe wind erosion.   
   
When used for pasture the grazing value of the
 
havard panicum can be fair at early vegetative stages, 
before the inflorescence stag e, when plants are fresh 
with new growth.  Do  not overgraze and leave 
enough plant material for regrowth.  Begin grazing 
when plants reaches a height of 12 inches; plants 
should not be grazed below a stubble height of 6 to 8 
inches.  At the James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials 
Center near Knox City, Texas, the Havard panicum 
grown for seed production is swathed and baled for 
hay, after the seeds are harvested.

Pests and Potential Problems 
In a seed production field at the NRCS/James E. 
‘Bud’ Smith Plant Materials Center near Knox City, 
Texas the plant species did not encounter any pest or 
potential problems.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are currently no cultivars of Havard panicum, 
in the commercial seed company.  
 
Prepared By:  
Rudy G. Esquivel, USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Rudy G. Esquivel,  USDA NRCS James E. ‘Bud’ 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
 
Edited: 14jun07 jh; 29jun07 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.