Plant Fact Sheet  
 
 
NARROWLEAF SILKGRASS  
Pityopsis graminifolia   
(Michx.) Nutt  
Plant Symbol = PIGR4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center (NPMC), Beltsville, Maryland 
 John Englert, USDA, NRCS National Plant Materials Center  
Alternate Names 
Chrysopsis graminifolia  (Michx.) Ell.;  Heterotheca 
graminifolia  (Michx.) Shinners; grassleaf golden 
aster; silk-grass 
 
Uses 
Narrowleaf silkgrass has its  greatest potential as a 
component of conservation mixes.  It thrives in 
roadside or ornamental plantings in dry, sunny 
locations.  It will quickly spread by underground 
stems (rhizomes) to form thick colonies.  The plant 
will also perform well in ornamental perennial 
gardens, where it should be placed in front of taller 
wildflowers.  It is a useful component for 
xeriscaping.  It is grazed by livestock and wildlife, its 
rhizomatous growth habit is useful for controlling 
upland erosion  
 
Status 
 Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your state 
department of natural resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Potential Weediness 
Narrowleaf silkgrass spreads by seed and rhizomes.  
It can form large colonies on poor soils but does not  displace other plants.  Seed 
is carried by the wind up 
to several hundred yards.  Seed establishment 
through stands of other vegetation is minimal.  In a 
landscape or garden setting plants expand in size 
similar to other garden perennials. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Narrowleaf silkgrass,  Pityopsis graminifolia , is a 
native, warm-season, rhizomatous, perennial 
wildflower.  It will grow to a height of 1 to 3 feet 
with equal or slightly greater spread.  It has linear, 
grass-like leaves with parallel venation; lower leaves 
are up to 10 inches long by ¾ inch wide, becoming 
progressively smaller up the stems.  Both the leaves 
and stems are covered with a whitish, silky hair that 
gives the plant a silvery app earance from a distance.  
Bright yellow composite flower heads occur in 
clusters at the end of branches from September 
through October in the Mid-Atlantic U.S.  Seeds are 
1/16 of an inch long and linear-shaped.  Seeds turn 
from tan to dark brown at maturity and are easily 
pulled off the seed heads. 
 
Narrowleaf silkgrass is found on sandy or shaley, dry 
soils from Delaware to Ohio and south to Texas and 
Florida (USDA hardiness zones 5 – 9). For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site , 
http://plants.usda.gov/.   
 
Establishment 
Field Establishment from Seed 
Narrowleaf silkgrass can be direct sowed by drilling 
seed at the rate of 2.5 lbs.  (pure live de-bearded seed) 
per acre at a depth of a 1/4 inch or less.  Seeding 
should occur in April/May for the Mid-Atlantic U.S.  
This planting date would need to be shifted to earlier 
dates in more southern sites (i.e. March/April in 
North Carolina, February/early March in Florida).  It 
is very important to control broadleaf weeds before 
planting.   Treat the field with glyphosate at least 10 
days prior to control aggressive species such as tall 
fescue, clover or crown vetch which will out-compete 
narrowleaf silkgrass seedlings. 
 
There are approximately 642,900 narrowleaf 
silkgrass seeds per pound.  
 
Field Establishment from Plugs 
In order to produce plugs, sow seed on germination 
mix.  A pre-germination cold treatment is not 
necessary.  Germination generally occurs 9 to 12 
days after sowing.  After four weeks, seedlings may

be transplanted into larger plugs.  Maintain seedlings 
under long-days (>14 hrs.) to prevent premature 
flowering in the spring.  The best planting date for 
plugs is May for the Mid-Atlantic U.S., as narrowleaf 
silkgrass is a warm-season perennial.  As with seed, 
planting dates this should be shifted to earlier dates 
for planting in more southern sites 
 
Management 
Weed Control 
In conservation plantings due to the strong spreading 
nature of narrowleaf silkgrass, weed control typically 
is not a major concern.  However in some situations 
weeds may be problematic, mowing and spot 
herbicide applications are the two best weed control 
options.  Mowing at a height of 4’ – 6’ is an effective 
way to control taller growing weeds.  Stop mowing 
when flower buds of silkgr ass emerge in late summer 
(MD).  Established stands are also tolerant of late 
winter/early spring burning.  Be aware though that 
burning the foliage creates a thick smoke due to the 
resins in the leaves. 
 
Pre-emergent herbicides Treflan™ (trifluralin) and 
Surflan
™ (oryzalin) have been used successfully to 
prevent weed seed germination in established stands.  
Yellow nutsedge has also been controlled effectively 
by the selective post-emergent herbicide Manage
™. 
 
For seed production fields, a multivator type 
cultivator (spaced on 4’ rows) will reduce weed 
competition.  Cultivate areas around the plants only 
during early stages of growth as you might damage 
rhizomes of older plants. Alternately, planting a 
cover crop of hard fescue or red fescue between rows 
when plugs are transplanted will limit weed 
competition.      
 
Irrigation 
Supplemental watering may be needed if droughty 
conditions arise after planting during the first season.  
An established stand can tolerate dry conditions and 
will not require irrigation. 
 
Fertilization 
Fertilization during the establishment is not 
recommended.  Established stands can be fertilized 
according to soil test results .  In nitrogen deficient 
soils 30 – 50 lbs. nitrogen/acre applied will help 
maintain stands.                        
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Seedlings are susceptible to damping-off ( Pythium, 
Fusarium , and Rhizoctonia) due to fine hairs on the 
leaves.  Alternaria leaf spot and  Phyllosticta will 
affect silkgrass during cool wet spring weather.   Treatment of Alternaria and Phyllosticta is usually 
not necessary as the plants will out-grow the damage.  
No other serious pests or diseases have been 
observed under cultivation.
 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Narrowleaf silkgrass is 
somewhat available from commercial sources
. 
 
Prepared By:  
Shawn Belt , USDA NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland  
 
Mary Anne Gonter , USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida  
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt , USDA NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland  
 Edited: 27Jan07; 070209 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.