Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN PLUM 
Prunus americana Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = PRAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS  
 
Uses 
Windbreaks: Plant American plum in the central or 
outside rows where adequate water is available.  It 
may also be planted in single-row windbreaks. 
 
Wildlife: American plum is highly important as 
wildlife cover and food.  The thorny, suckering 
growth, when protected, forms a thicket valuable for 
bird nesting, loafing, and roosting, and animal loafing 
and bedding.  Twigs and foliage provide a highly 
preferred browse for whitetail and mule deer. 
 
Recreation and Beautification:  The thorny growth 
and suckering characteristic s should be considered 
before planting this species near a recreation area.  It 
can be used for screening and natural barriers.  The 
fruit is used widely for making jams and jellies. 
 
Ethnobotanic : American plum was and still is used as 
a source of food and medi cine by Native Americans 
in the Midwest and West. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Prunus americana  Marsh., American plum, is a 
deciduous large shrub or small tree with a broad 
crown, reaching heights up to  15 feet.  Fruits are red 
to yellow, almost globular edible plums about l inch 
in diameter.  Flowers are white, 5-petaled, about 1 
inch across, and borne singly  or in clusters at the 
juncture of a stem and leaf.  Leaves are alternate, 
broadly oval in shape with a sharply tapering tip, and 
sharply, often doubly toothed edges; they are 
generally 2 to 4 inches long on slender stalks, dark 
green above, pale and smooth below.  The plant’s 
numerous stems are grayish and become scaly with 
age; its branches are more  or less spiny with sharp-
tipped twigs.  The roots of American plum are 
shallow, widely spreading, and readily sprouting. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Widely distributed over the eastern two thirds of 
central North America, Am erican plum grows in 
prairies, woodlands, pastures, and along roadsides 
and riverbanks.  The shrub is winter-hardy, but 
intolerant of shade and drought; it requires the 
equivalent of 22 to 25 inches of precipitation. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
American plum can be planted from seed and is 
relatively easy to transplant.  Plant in well-drained 
soil. 
 
Management  
Plantings in dry areas must have supplemental water 
or available ground moisture.  Traditional resource 
managers used burning as a management tool, which 
eliminated plant competition and provided nutrient 
enrichment for increased  fruit production; branch 
pruning was also used to increase production. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious insect problems; plum 
pocket and black knot are common diseases, but are 
generally not serious.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are many different cultivars of Prunus species 
that have been developed for ornamental flowers and 
edible fruit. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.