Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PINK PAPPUSGRASS 
Pappophorum bicolor Fourn. 
Plant Symbol = PABI2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Uses  
All livestock graze pink pappusgrass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Pink pappusgrass is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 1 to 2 feet.  The leaf blade is 
narrow; flat or slightly rolled inward, giving a 
threadlike appearance when dr y.  The leaf sheath is  mostly basal, rounded, and shorter than the 
internodes.  The ligule has a tuft of long hairs.  The 
seedhead is a spike-like, pinkish panicle 4 to 5 inches 
long.  The lemmas are somewhat hard and the end is 
dissected into about 12 awns of unequal length about 
as long as lemmas with the glumes transparent. 
 
Management 
This grass is seldom used as a key management 
species.  It responds to proper use and deferred 
grazing during the growing season. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in late spring and early summer.  
Seedheads appear about 6 weeks later.  Leaves 
remain green until the early fall.  It reproduces from 
other seeds.  It seldom grows in pure stands and 
grows best on deep loam to clay loam soils that are 
subject to overflow. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.
 
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.