Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BROWNSEED PASPALUM  
Paspalum plicatulum  Vasey 
Plant Symbol = PAPL3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 
Alternate Names 
top paspalum, coqueirinho, pasto-negro, gamelotillo, 
hierba de cepa, Paspalum texanum  
 
Uses  
Livestock grazes brownseed paspalum throughout all 
seasons.  Quail and wild ducks eat the seed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Brownseed paspalum is a 
warm-season, rhizomatous perennial, native to the 
U.S.  The height ranges from 2 to 4 feet.  The leaf 
blade is slightly folded; stiff; bluish green; 8 to 20 
inches long; smooth and hairy near base.  The leaf 
sheath is compressed; smooth; papery and slightly 
purple at base.  The ligule has brown membrane 1/8 
inch long.  The stem is compressed and often 
purplish at base.  The seedhead has 3 to 7 racemes 
with each 2-1/2 to 3 inches long.  Mature seeds are 
dark brown and spikelet s are extremely cross-
wrinkled on the flat side. 
 
Management 
This grass responds to grazing deferments of about 
30 days.  It decreases under continuous grazing. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts during late winter and early spring.  
New growth is usually mixed with old growth.  It 
produces seedheads from early summer until frost.  
Mature seedheads are mixed with green leaves and 
new seedheads.  In Florida, basal leaves stay green all 
winter.  It reproduces from short rhizomes and from 
seed.  It grows well on strongly acid to neutral, 
poorly drained, clay loam  soils, and on excessively 
drained, deep, sandy soils.  It grows in the 
mountainous region of Puerto Rico on clay soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
 A.S. Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.