Plant Fact Sheet     
 
SCRIBNER’S 
ROSETTE GRASS 
Dichanthelium oligosanthes  
(J.A. Schultes) Gould var. 
scribnerianum  (Nash) Gould 
Plant symbol = PASC5  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Alternate Names 
Scribner panic, Scribner panicum, Heller's rosette 
grass, Scribners panicum, scribner's panicum, 
Panicum helleri, Panicum scribnerianum, Panicum 
scoparium  
 
Uses 
Scribner’s rosette grass and other low panicums 
furnish some green forage to livestock during the 
winter. 
 
Wildlife:  Deer eat the green leaves and birds eat the 
seed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Scribner’s rosette grass is a 
native, cool-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height is less than 18 inches.  The leaf blade is broad 
with long stiff hairs on the margin and sometimes  hairy underneath.  The leaf sheath is mostly basal, 
short, and hairy.  The seedhead has an open panicle. 
 
Management 
Low panicums grow so close to the ground that it is 
difficult for livestock to 
overgraze them.  Because 
they are seldom grazed between the time seedheads 
emerge in the spring and growth starts in the fall, no 
special management practices are required. 
 
Establishment 
Growth generally initiates in the late fall.  The basal 
leaves form rosettes, which grow little during the 
winter, but stay green.  It produces seedheads and 
leaves along the stems in the spring.  A few plants 
start growth in the spring and in the fall produce a 
reduced seedhead partly protected by the leaves.  
Low panicums grow on all sites, except marshes. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.