Plant Fact Sheet
TAPER -LEAVED  
PENSTEMON  
Penstemon attenuatus  Douglas ex 
Lindl.  
Plant Symbol = PEAT3  
Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA  
 
 
Penstemon attenuatus. Pamela Pavek  
Alternat ive Names  
Common Alternate Names:  taper -leaved penstemon, 
sulphur penstemon, sulphur beardtongue ( P. attenuatus 
var.  palustris ), south Idaho penstemon ( P. attenuatus var. 
militaris ), small penstemon ( P. attenuatus var. 
pseudoprocerus ) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  None  
  Uses
 
Pollinator habitat: Penstemon attenuatus  is a source of 
pollen and nectar for a variety of bees, including honey 
bees and native bumble bees , as well as butterflies and 
moths . 
 
Rangeland diversification:  This plant can be included in 
seeding mixtures to improve the diversity of rangelands.  
 
Ornamental: Penstemon attenuatus  is very attractive and 
easy to manage as an ornamental in u rban, water-saving 
landscapes.  It is hardy to US DA Plant Hardiness Zone 4.   
S tatus  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
General :  Figwort family (Scrophulariaceae).  Penstemon 
attenuatus  is a native, perennial forb that grows from a 
dense crown to a height of 10 to 90 cm (4 to 35 in) .  
Leaves are dark green, opposite and  have smooth edges, 
however the edge s of P. attenuatus var.  attenuatus leaves 
are often, at least in part, finely toothed.  Basal leaves 
have petioles , and are up to 4 cm (1.5 in) wide and 17 cm 
(7 in) long.  Stem leaves are smaller and mostly clasping.  
Flowers bloom in May and June, and can b e blue to 
purple and pink, or pale yellow to nearly white.  The 
inflorescence consists of two whorls of flowers around the 
stem at each leaf axis.  Flowers have  five long petals with 
translucent  edges, and are 1 to 2 cm (3/8 to 3/4 in) long.  
The petals ar e fused to form a tube that is expanded 
toward the mouth and has two lips.  The lower lip and 
stamens  are hairy.  Seeds are dark brown, round, and 
occur in capsules 3 to 6 mm (1/8 to 1/4 in) long.  Overall 
the appearance of P. attenuatus is very similar to other 
Penstemon  species, causing difficulties in identification.   
 
Penstemon attenuatus  is adapted to areas receiving 30 to 
64 cm (12 to 25 in) annual precipitation at elevations up 
to 3,000 m (5,000 ft).  It grows in well -drained, mediu m 
textured soils in dry meadows and on  moist, open to 
wooded slopes in the mountains and foothills.