Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PENSTEMON 
Penstemon species 
Plant Symbol = PENST  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Alternate Names 
beardtongue 
 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland: 'Cedar' and 'Bandera' are the only 
released penstemons noted to have any forage value.  
'Cedar' leaves stay green throughout the growing 
season providing some forage value.  All other 
varieties are considered fair to poor palatability and 
considered to be only incidental forage value.  All 
species provide diversity to the seeded plant 
community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : All species are 
mentioned for their value in mixes for erosion control 
and beautification values. 
 
Wildlife : Penstemons are considered desirable forages 
for deer, antelope and birds e ither as herbage or seed.  
They may also provide some cover for selected small  bird species.  They provide diversity to the plant 
community. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Penstemons ( Penstemon spp.) are perennial forbs, 
subshrubs to shrubs with  attractive flowers.  
Common to the western United States.  Except for 
one minor species, the genus Penstemon does not 
occur naturally outside of  North America.  They are 
short to long-lived.  Penstemons have opposite, entire 
or toothed leaves.  They have several stalked flowers 
or flower clusters that are borne in the axils of the 
upper leaves or leaflike bract s.  The tubular flower is 
strongly to distinctly two-lipped at the mouth with a 
two-lobed upper lip and a three-lobbed lower lip.  
There are 4 fertile stamens and a single sterile stamen 
that is often hairy at the tip.  The fruit is a many-
seeded capsule. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Penstemons do best on well-drained soils.  Most 
ecotypes do well on infertile, disturbed soils.  They 
have excellent cold winter and drought tolerance.  
They will tolerate weakly saline to weakly acidic 
sites.  They are usually f ound in open areas, but will 
tolerate semi-shaded conditions.  They are somewhat 
fire-resistant due to leaves staying green with 
relatively high moisture content during the fire 
season. Dr. G Dallas and Margaret Hanna 
© California Academy of Sciences 
@CalFlora 
 
Penstemon is distributed throughout the entire United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
These species should be seeded with a drill or 
broadcast at a depth of 1/4 inch or less into a firm 
seedbed.  Ideal seeding depth is 1/8 inch. Penstemons 
are not recommended for single species seeding.  The 
full seeding rate (not recommended) for these forbs-
shrubs is 1.5 to 3 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre or 20 to 26 PLS per square foot (varies 
somewhat by species).  When used as a component of 
a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  For mined

lands and other harsh critical areas, doubling the 
seeding rate component of penstemon is not required.  
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in 
very early spring (because of grass component of 
mix) on heavy to medium textured soils and in late 
fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seeding is not 
recommended.  Dormant fall seedings (preferred 
seeding period for penstemons) will pre-chill seed 
and reduce seed dormancy which is very strong in 
some species.  Mulching, irrigation and weed control 
all benefit stand establishment.  Seedling vigor is 
good, but not as good as most grasses.  Germination 
may not occur until the second growing season. 
Flowering should not be expected until at least the 
second growing season. 
 
Management 
Growth of penstemons begins in early spring and 
flowers appear in May through July depending on 
species.  Weed control and removal of very 
competitive species may improve chance of 
establishment.  Damage from wildlife and rodents 
may occur and they may need to be controlled.  
Disease problems are minimal except under 
irrigation.  Under irrigation, fusarium wilt can be a 
problem. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because penstemons are broad-
leaved, use of 2,4-D is  not recommended.  Mow 
weeds at or prior to their bloom stage.  New stands 
may also be damaged by grasshoppers and other 
insects and pesticides may be needed. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Penstemon species establish and spread slowly via 
seed distribution.  They  are not considered "weedy" 
or invasive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities unde r ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  They coexist with other 
native species and add biod iversity to those plant 
communities. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Alpine penstemon ( P. venustus Dougl ex. Lindl.) is a 
selected class release from  seed originally collected 
in  
the Clearwater River drainage, Idaho; 'Bandera' ( P. 
strictus  Benth.) Rocky Mountain penstemon was 
developed from seed origin ally collected in Torrance 
County, New Mexico; 'Cedar' ( P. palmeri Gray) 
Palmer penstemon was developed from seed  originally collected near Cedar City in Iron County, 
Utah; Firecracker penstemon (
P. eatonii  Gray) is a 
selected release from seed  originally collected near 
Richfield, Utah. 
 
A number of other penstemons are seeded primarily 
for soil stabilization on depleted, disturbed and 
erosive areas for erosion control and as ornamentals.  
These include low penstemon (P. humilis  Nutt. ex 
Gray), Rydberg penstemon ( P. rydbergii A. Nels.), 
and thinleaf penstemon ( P. pachyphyllus Gray ex 
Rydb.).  No releases have been made. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Program, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.