Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON REED 
Phragmites australis  (Cav.) 
Trin. ex Steud.  
Plant Symbol = PHAU7  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center
 Considered a noxious weed in several states. 
 
Alternate Names 
giant reed, giant reedgrass, Roseau, roseau cane, 
yellow cane, cane, Phragmites communis  
 
Uses  
Although coarse, common reed  is readily eaten by 
cattle and horses.  It provides high quality 
warm-season forage but becomes tough and 
unpalatable after maturity.  Animals grazing this 
grass during winter should be fed a protein 
concentrate.  This plant has been used in the 
Southwest for lattices in constructing adobe houses.   Indians have used the stems for arrows, weaving 
mats, and carrying nets. 
 
Status 
Considered a noxious weed 
in several states.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Common reed is a 
warm-season, rhizomatous, stoloniferous perennial, 
native to the U.S.  The height ranges from 6 to 12 
feet.  The leaf blade is flat; smooth; 1/2 to 2 inches 
wide; and 6 to 18 inches long.  The seedhead is an 
open panicle with a purplish or tawny and flaglike 
appearance after seed shatter.  Common reed is 
readily identified by its height.  It is the tallest grass 
in southern marshes and swamps. 
 
Management 
This grass cannot withstand prolonged heavy grazing.  
Its upright growth makes it easy for livestock to 
remove all the leaves.  For maximum production, no 
more than 50 percent of  current year's growth by 
weight should be grazed off during growing season.  
Common reed tolerates burning if water is above soil 
surface.  Burning is not essential for management.  
Water control that lowers the water level, but does 
not drain the area, increases production.  Grazing 
deferments of 60 to 90 days every 2 to 3 years during 
the growing season improve plant vigor. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in February in some locations.  Foliage 
stays green until frost.  New shoots grow from buds 
at nodes of old, stems, stolons, and rhizomes.  It 
grows in marshes and swamps, on banks of streams 
and lakes, and around springs.  It grows best in firm 
mineral clays and tolerates moderate salinity.  It does 
best if water level fluctuates from 6 inches below soil 
surface to 6 inches above.  Common reed is often 
codominant with big cordgrass (Spartina 
cynosuroides)  on the gulf coast marsh rangelands. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.