Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWITCHGRASS 
Panicum virgatum L. 
Plant Symbol = PAVI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
  
Uses 
Livestock: Switchgrass is noted for its heavy growth 
during late spring and early summer.  It provides 
good warm-season pasture and high quality hay for 
livestock. 
 
Erosion Control : Switchgrass is perhaps our most 
valuable native grass on a wide range of sites.  It is a 
valuable soil stabilization plant on strip-mine spoils, 
sand dunes, dikes, and other critical areas.  It is also 
suitable for low windbreak plantings in truck crop 
fields. 
 
Wildlife : Switchgrass provides excellent nesting and 
fall and winter cover for pheasants, quail, and rabbits.  
It holds up well in heavy snow (particularly ‘Shelter’ 
and ‘Kanlow’ cultivars) and is useful on shooting 
preserves.  The seeds provide food for pheasants, 
quail, turkeys, doves, and songbirds. 
 
Biofuel Source : Interest in switchgrass as a renewable 
biofuel resource has been increasing in recent years, 
primarily in the Southern United States.  The 
Booneville, Arkansas, Plant Materials Center (PMC) 
and the Plant and Soil Science Department of 
Oklahoma State University (O SU) are cooperating to  
evaluate several upland types of switchgrass for use 
as a biomass energy resource.  Selections of upland 
types of switchgrass have been evaluated by OSU for  
several years.  The development of hybrid progeny 
with substantial heterosis for increased biomass yield 
will ultimately result in improved hybrid cultivars for 
the Central and Southern United States.  The PMC is 
in the process of assessing several improved lines 
along with commercially available cultivars for dry-
matter potential and environmental adaptation.  
Results of this study may contribute to producers 
cashing in on a growing demand for renewable fuels 
and a decrease on our depe ndency on fossil fuels.  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock From the Southern Wetland Flora (1991) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Panicum virgatum  L., switchgrass, is native to all of 
the United States except  California and the Pacific 
Northwest.  It is a perennial sod-forming grass that 
grows 3 to 5 feet tall and can be distinguished from 
other warm-season grasses, even when plants are 
young, by the white patch of hair at the point where 
the leaf attaches to the stem.  The stem is round and 
usually has a reddish tint.  The seed head is an open, 
spreading panicle. 
 
Adaptation and Distributions 
On suitable soils, switchgrass is climatically adapted 
throughout the most of the United States.  Moderately 
deep to deep, somewhat dry to poorly drained, sandy 
to clay loam soils are best.  It does poorly on heavy 
soils.  In the East, it performs well on shallow and 
droughty soil. 
 
Switchgrass is distributed throughout the majority of 
the United States, excluding the far west states.  For a

current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Switchgrass should be seeded in a pure stand when 
used for pasture or hay because it can be managed 
better alone than in a mixture.  Its slick, free-flowing 
seed can be planted with most seed drills or with a 
broadcast spreader.  In the  Southeast, a planting rate 
of approximately 10 pounds PLS per acre is 
recommended.  Seedbeds should be firmed with a 
roller prior to the drilling or broadcasting of seed.  If 
seeds are planted using the broadcast method, the 
area should be rolled afterward to help cover the 
seed.  When drilled, seeds should be planted 1/4 inch 
deep.  No-tillage  seedings in closely grazed or burned 
sod also have been successful, where control of sod is 
accomplished with clipping, grazing, or proper 
herbicides.   
 
Phosphorus and potassium should be applied 
according to soil tests before  or at seeding.  Nitrogen, 
however, should not be used at seeding time because 
it will stimulate weed growth. 
 
Management  
To control weeds during establishment, mow 
switchgrass to a height of 4 inches in May or 6 inches 
in June or July.  Grazing is generally not 
recommended the first year,  but a vigorous stand can 
be grazed late in the year if grazing periods are short 
with at least 30 days of rest provided between 
grazings.  Switchgrass is the earliest maturing of the 
common native warm-season grasses and it is ready 
to graze in early summer. 
 
Established stands of switchgrass may be fertilized in 
accordance with soil test s.  Phosphorus and 
potassium may not be needed if the field is grazed 
since these elements will be recycled back to the soil 
by the grazing animal.  Apply nitrogen after 
switchgrass has begun to produce using a single 
application in mid-to-late May or a split application 
in both May and early July.  Avoid high rates of 
nitrogen because carry-over could spur cool-season 
grass growth and harm young plants the following 
spring.  
 
Switchgrass will benefit from burning of plant 
residues just prior to initiation of spring growth.  
Burning fields once every 3 to 5 years decreases 
weed competition, eliminates excessive residue and 
stimulates switch grass growth.  Switchgrass used for 
wildlife food and cover shou ld be burned once every 
3 to 4 years to reduce mulch accumulations that  inhibit movement of hatchlings and attract nest 
predators. 
 
Under continuous grazing management, begin 
grazing switchgrass after it has
 reached a height of 14 
to 16 inches, and stop wh en plants are grazed to 
within 4 inches of the ground during late spring, 8 
inches in early summer, and 12 inches in late 
summer.  A rest before frost is needed to allow plants 
to store carbohydrates in the stem bases and  crown.  
Plants may be grazed to a height of 6 to 8 inches after 
frost.  The winter stubbl e is needed to provide 
insulation. 
 
With management intensive systems, grazing can 
begin in the first paddocks when plants reach a height 
of 10 inches and should not be grazed below a 
stubble height of 6 to 8 inches.  Grazed paddocks 
need to be rested 30-60  days before being grazed 
again. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshoppers and leafhoppers can be major pests in 
new seedings.  Some stands are impacted by damping 
off and seedling blight.  Leaf rust occasionally affects 
forage quality. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Alamo’ (TX), ‘Blackwell’ (OK), ‘Cave-In-Rock’ 
(IL), ‘Dacotah’ (ND), ‘Forestburg’ (SD), ‘Kanlow’ 
(OK), ‘Nebraska 28’ (NE), ‘Shawnee,’ ‘Shelter’ 
(WV) (cultivars); Grenville  (NM) (informal release); 
Miami (Dade Co, FL), Stuart (Stuart, FL), Wabasso 
(Wabasso, FL) (source identified releases).  Seeds are 
available from most commer cial sources and through 
large agricultural supply firms. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 16Jan2001 JLK; 28sep05 jsp; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.