Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COASTAL 
PANICGRASS  
Panicum amarum Ell. var. 
amarulum  (A.S. Hitchc. & 
Chase) P.G. Palmer  
Plant Symbol = PAAMA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Panicum amarulum A. S. Hitchc. & Chase,  Panicum 
amarum  Ell. ssp. amarulum  (A.S. Hitchc. & Chase) 
Freckmann & Lelong, bitter panicgrass 
 
Uses 
Coastal panicgrass has a deep fibrous root system 
which has made it a top choice for secondary sand 
dune stabilization in the mid- Atlantic states.  Due to 
its upright form, this warm-season grass has been 
recommended for use in developing vegetative wind 
barriers.  Due to its hedges form and winter 
persistence, coastal panicgra ss is popular for wildlife 
cover on sandy coastal soils and reclaimed 
minelands.  It is also useful as a primary stabilizer of  very well or excessively drained sites, such as gravel 
pits, dikes, and road bank cuts and fills. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
This grass is deep rooted (+6 feet), robust, long lived 
where hardy, and grows to heights of 3 to 6 feet.  
This is a U.S. native grass.  The stems may be as 
thick as 1/2 inch, with bluish green leaves from 8 to 
20 inches long and 1/4 to 1/2 inch wide.  Although 
coastal panicgrass grows faster than most warm 
season grasses, it is slower than cool season grasses. 
Producing short outwardly spreading rhizomes, it 
forms clumps or bunches.  Li ke most other species in 
the genus  Panicum, coastal panicgrass has a large 
terminal inflorescence.  It is a tightly arranged, 
densely flowered cluster.  Seed dispersal is the 
primary means of reproduction of this species.  There 
are an average of 350,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Coastal panicgrass naturally occurs from 
Massachusetts to Florida, west to Texas.  Like most 
plants, coastal panicgrass flourishes on fertile, well 
drained soils, but will perform well on droughty, very 
sandy sites.  When established on sand dunes it will 
only survive where other species have initially 
stabilized the location.  It will tolerate moderate 
saline overspray, and pH as  low as 5.0.  It does not 
tolerate large deposits of sand. Coastal panicgrass is 
useful in warm season grass mixtures on sand and 
gravel pits.  There the good seedling vigor helps with 
initial stand establishment.  Inland and north of 
Massachusetts it will winterkill, but not before 
helping during the seeding years. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Coastal panicgrass can be propagated by seed or 
vegetative divisions.  It is the only species known to 
be successfully established on mid-Atlantic sand 
dunes by direct seeding.  It is best to sow from early 
spring, until May.  If sands shift after planting,

covering seed more than 2” deep, emergence will be 
obstructed.  Depending on soil texture and available 
moisture, seed should be placed 1 (with increased % 
fines) to 1 1/2 (coarse soils) inches deep.  Drilling in 
rows 10 to 20 inches apart, using 6 to 8 pounds of 
seed per acre results in the  best establishment.  In 
mixtures with other warm season grasses, 3 lb/ac of 
coastal panicgrass is sufficient.  Inland critical areas 
should be established using standard broad cast 
seeding, mulching, and fertilization procedures on 
sand and gravel pits, tracking with a dozer is 
recommended. 
 
Planting trials on field sites have been established 
utilizing bare-rooted stem divisions and containerized 
divisions, with mixed results.  Successful sites were 
on protected locations, while failures were located on 
exposed, unstable sites.  Under nursery conditions, 
most vegetative techniques work well. 
 
Management  
Annual controlled burning  often stimulates seed 
production, recycles nutrients, and suppresses weed 
growth.  At the time of planting 250 pounds per acre 
of 10-10-10, or the equivalent, should be band 
applied below the seed.  Top or side dressed spring 
applications of 500 pounds of 10-10-10 fertilizer or 
the equivalent per acre, in  post establishment years, 
will promote good plant and seed growth. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Only one cultivar is grown for commercial 
distribution; that is ‘Atlantic’ (Virginia).  ‘Atlantic’ 
was evaluated and selected for release by the Cape 
May Plant Materials Center in 1981.  Foundation 
seed of this grass is available from the Cape May 
Plant Materials Center in New Jersey; certified seed 
is available from commercial nurseries.  Seed 
distribution is the primary means of propagation. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 25may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.