Plant Fact Sheet
CLASPINGLEAF 
PONDWEED  
Potamogeton perfoliatus L.   
Plant Symbol = POPE7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center  
 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 1913. An 
illustrated flora of the northern United States, Canada and the British 
Possessions. 3 vols. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York. Vol. 1: 80.  
Alternate Names 
redhead grass, clasping leaved pondweed  
Uses  
Claspingleaf pondweed  beds stabilize sediments, reduce 
shoreline erosion, and provide valuable habitat and are a 
food source for a variety of fish, macroinvertebrates, 
crustaceans and waterfowl (Thayer et al 1975, Lubbers 
1990).  
 
Habitat:  
Claspingleaf pond weed beds provide protection from 
predators , as well as attract ing epiphytes and zooplankton 
upon which other species graze, providing  an important 
link in the food web. D uring the breeding season up to 80 
percent of  waterfowl’s  diet is plant material, muc h of it 
aquatic (Kenow and Rusch 1996).   
  Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Claspingleaf pondweed  is a submerged, rooted, flowering 
aquatic plant that grows in alkaline, brackish, and 
freshwater lakes, streams and estuaries.   Substrate 
conditions are oft en low in organic content form ing a firm 
muddy  bot tom  or  sand -based sediment in reasonably slow 
moving waters.  Plants tend to be darker green colored in 
shallow waters and are a paler green in deeper water 
(Bergstrom et al. 2006).  
 
   
 
Claspingleaf pondweed  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
 
Claspingleaf pondweed  is widespread in sheltered coves 
and bays throughout 24 states in the United States, 8 
provinces in Canada, Greenland and St. Pierre Miquelon.  
For  updated  distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PL ANTS Web site. 
Establishment  
Claspingleaf pondweed  pondweed is propagated through 
cuttings, rootstocks, and seeds. When starting new 
populations, using cuttings and rootstocks is the least time 
consuming method. . Cuttings can be taken and 
immediately planted to create new ones  utilizing a 
planting substrate composed of oyster shell and peat 
moss.  Seed propagation may result in a much higher yield

of plants than asexual propagation. Seeds must be 
harvested from plants at the right time of year.   
 
Germination  rates under ideal conditions are variable 
from 16 -60% (STAC 2007).  Seed collections occur from 
late July to August. Seed harvesting of the upper third 
water column includes the plant stems and florescence 
(i.e. 1 foot down in 3 feet of water, or 10 inches  down in a 
30 inch tank).  Seeds must be harvested from plants at the 
right time of year. Germination rates under ideal 
conditions are variable from 16 -60% (STAC 2007).  Best 
germination results require six to nine months of cold 
storage (at 40 deg F) submerged in 15 parts per thousand 
( ppt ) salin e water with aeration. To encourage fast  and  
high germinati on after the 6 to 9 months of cold storage  
transfer  the seed to a  warm, freshwater environment.  
Management  
In a domestic tank or experimental setting one of  the 
major concerns is ensuring that algae or invasive 
vegetation does not overwhelm stock plants. Keeping 
nutrients and organic matter low help s , but additions of 
water and tank cleaning with nets similar to those used 
cleaning pools are  important factors in aquatic plant 
maintenance.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
In most propagation and restoration scenarios natural 
predators such as crabs or cownose rays  require  an 
exclosure is to protect plants .  Non -migrating Canada 
geese graze extensively on the veget ation. T he  worst 
herbivores of submerged aquatic vegetation ( SAV) are the 
non -native mute swans and native cownose rays. While it 
is unlikely they will wipe out the entire SAV population 
in a given water body, they do reduce above and 
belowground plant material, and they have the potential to 
destroy  a restoration plantings in a single visit.  
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known issues with respect to clasping 
pondweed  and environmental problems.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known cultivars, improved, and/or selected 
materials for claspingleaf pondweed.  This plant is 
commercially available from specialized coastal and 
wetland plant nurseries.  
   
 
 
   
Citation
 
Zinecker, E. and J. West .  2010.  Plant fact sheet for 
claspingleaf pondweed ( Potamogaton perfoliatus  L.) .  
USDA -Natural Resources Conservation Service, National 
Plant Materials Center.  Beltsville,MD  20705.  
Edited:  01/09/ 2010; 09/25/12  jad 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER