Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARROW ARUM 
Peltandra virginica  (L.) Kunth.
Plant Symbol = PEVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Expansive stands of arrow arum often develop in the 
marginal waters it inhabits.  The foliage and stems in 
these stands create a wave  deflecting or buffering 
barrier, while the root masses knit together and 
stabilize the submerged sediments.  The roots and 
shoots translocate methan e from the substrate.  
Arrow arum fruit is a preferred food of wood ducks, 
and is also eaten by muskrats and rails.  The foliage 
is seldom damaged, providing good cover to 
waterfowl, wading birds, insects, and aquatic 
mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
The bright green, smooth, succulent, arrow- to heart-
shaped leaves of arrow arum ( Peltandra virginica ) 
emerge annually from perennial bulbs.  The bulbs are  tufted with thick fibrous roots.  The 4 to 30 inch long 
ascending leaves are 3 to 8 inches wide, and have 
three prominent veins with an abrupt, sharp tip.   
 
Arrow arum is monoecious, with both male and 
female parts contained in a partially closed 4 to 8 
inch green spathe.  It blooms from May to July.  As 
the fruit matures the entire flowering stem curves 
downward, immersing the spathe.  The green berry-
like fruit is up to 1/2 inch long, and usually contains 
one seed.  Upon separation from the flowering stem, 
this floatable fruit begins to turn black. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The native range of arrow arum is from Maine to 
Ontario and Michigan, south to Florida, Louisiana, 
and Missouri.  It commonly inhabits shallow water 
areas of marshes, bogs, swamps, stream and river 
bottoms, lakes, ponds, and ditches.  This emergent 
requires unconsolidated silty or organic sites, which 
are open, and saturated or inundated up to 1 foot.  It 
will tolerate pHs of 3.0 to 9.5, and salinity up to 2 
ppt. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
© William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Instituion 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
Arrow arum predominantly relies on its seed 
production for re-establishment and population 
distribution, but it can be propagated vegetatively.  
There are an average of 500  cleaned seeds per pound.  
When the fruit of this species falls into or is stored in 
water, the fruit coating swells and ruptures.  The seed 
separates, sinks, then begins to germinate if site 
conditions are adequate.  This same seedling 
development process can easily be replicated in 
cultivated fields or in greenhouses.   
 
Vegetative propagation is by root bulb divisions.  The 
bulbs form in layers around a root mass, which may 
be as deep as 8 inches.  Once dug, the bulbs are 
broken from the root mass,  then either directly 
planted or transplanted into containers or production 
beds.  One mature plant may produce up to ten of 
these planting units. 
 
Management  
If planted into soils with low organic contents, arrow 
arum responds well to applications of commercial 
fertilizer.  Only marginal effect is expected with the

addition of fertilizers on adequate sites.  To sustain 
good vigorous plant growth, soils must be deep and  
maintained at the saturation point, or inundated to a 
depth shallower than the leaves.  Once established, 
this species tolerates partial shade, but young 
seedlings need direct sunlight. If managing for seed 
production, timely harvest is necessary, since ripe 
fruit are readily consumed by wood ducks and 
muskrats.  No other damaging pests have been 
documented or observed.   
 
In the Northeast, arrow arum grows in association 
with facultative wetland trees and shrubs, wild rice, 
woolgrass, burreeds, and soft rush.  In shallower open 
water it often is over topped by aggressive 
rhizomatous species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known varieties are available, but wetland 
nurseries carry local or regional ecotypes. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.