Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
KENTUCKY 
BLUEGRASS  
Poa pratensis L. 
Plant Symbol = POPR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Beautification: This plant provides a dense green sod 
especially adapted for  parks and home lawns. 
 
Erosion control: Kentucky bluegrass is an excellent 
erosion control plant because of its dense, vigorous 
turf forming habit.  It can be used as a mix with 
legumes or other grasses for erosion control in 
conservation cover, waterway s, field borders, heavy 
use areas and critical areas such as steep banks and 
pond edges.  It is also used alone or in seed mixtures 
as permanent cover for tree plantings and orchards. 
 
Livestock : The species is highly palatable to horses, 
cattle, and sheep.  It produces relatively low yields 
compared to other pasture grasses, but can be very 
productive in the Northeast on closely grazed 
intensive rotational grazing systems. 
 
Recreation : Kentucky bluegrass turf is excellent for 
ball fields and other heavy use areas such as camp 
grounds, golf fairways, and picnic areas. 
 
Wildlife : This plant is highly palatable to elk and is 
one of the better grasses for deer.  The tender plants 
are grazed immediately after growth begins and the 
leaves remain succulent and green as long as soil 
moisture is present. Seeds  are eaten by several kinds 
of songbirds and rodents.  Leaves are eaten by rabbits 
and turkey. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 Robert H.Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwest Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS Description 
Poa pratensis L., Kentucky bluegrass, is a perennial, 
cool-season, sod-forming grass native to Europe.  
Seedhead stems are 18 to 24  inches tall, but can be 4 
to 6 inches in height when used for intensive grazing.  
The seedhead has an open  shape like a pyramid and 
produces many small seeds.  There are approximately 
2,177,000 seeds per pound.  Leaves are 6 to 12 inches 
long and boat-shaped (keeled) at the tips. Leaves are 
smooth, soft, and about 1/8 to 1/4 inch wide.  The 
plant becomes dormant duri ng the heat of summer, 
but regains or maintains its green color in fall.  
Growth starts early in the spring.  Tiller buds develop 
into stems or rhizomes.  New rhizomes also arise 
from nodes of older rhizomes.  Most rhizomes 
penetrate 2 to  4 inches into the soil, but some will go 
down more than 5 inches. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Kentucky bluegrass is used throughout the U.S.  It is 
best adapted to well-drained, fertile, medium-textured 
soils of limestone origin.  It performs satisfactorily on

poorly drained and heavy-textured soils.  Favorable 
pH level for this grass is 6.0 to 7.5.  Kentucky 
bluegrass grows best in the humid areas.  Optimum 
temperatures for forage production are between 60  °F 
and 90°F.  Although the grass is essentially dormant 
during dry or excessively hot weather, it survives 
severe droughts.  It prefers sunlight but will do well 
in light shade with ample moisture and nutrients. 
 
In the Northeast, seed is present in most hay and 
pasture fields so Kentucky bluegrass will appear 
wherever management favors the species. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Seeding : Areas to be seeded should be free of weed 
seeds, be shaped to well-drained gentle gradients, and 
have a firm, smooth seedbed prepared.  On disturbed 
areas being prepared for turf, soil conditioners, 
fertilizer, and soil amendments should be applied as 
indicated by soil tests and mixed with the soil during 
seedbed preparation.  The seed can be drilled or 
broadcast and should be covered with soil no deeper 
than 1/4 to 1/2 inch.  Where less than 16 inches 
precipitation occurs, the area  should be sprinkled, 
keeping the soil moist until the stand is 
well-established. 
 
Planting vegetatively : This plant can be established 
by cutting sod 2 or 3 inches thick and laying it on a 
smooth weed-free area.  The soil should be sprinkled 
or otherwise irrigated until the sod has rooted well 
into the soil. 
 
Management  
Proper fertilization and liming are the most important 
phases of Kentucky bluegrass management.  In 
pastures, grazing should begin when grass is about 5 
inches tall and should  not be grazed shorter than 1-
1/2 to 2 inches.  Without this treatment, Kentucky 
bluegrass sod will become weedy and unproductive.  
When overgrazed , poor root  and rhizome 
development occurs and weeds and shrubs may 
invade the pasture .  This grass is tolerant to horse 
grazing, but these pastures should be clipped 
regularly. 
 
When used as turf, frequency and height of mowing 
will vary depending on the specific use.  Lawns are 
mowed to a minimum height of 1-1/2 inches and 
frequently enough so that no more than 1/3 of the 
total leaf  surface is removed. For critical areas, one  mowing per year may be sufficient for weed control
 
and appearance. 
 
 
For disease management purposes, bluegrass should 
be cut low going into winter, especially where heavy 
snow cover is expected. In spring, raise the mower 
deck to promote strong, rapid regrowth with extra 
leaf surface, then lower to about 2-2 1/2 inches after 
about the first 6 weeks of the season. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Kentucky bluegrass is susceptible to attack by 
numerous diseases and insects.  Check local sources 
for the most current information on pests, control and 
resistance cultivars. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Many cultivars  have been developed by government 
entities and private breeders, released primarily for 
turf seedings.  Newer cultivars have disease and 
drought tolerance.  Coop erative Extension Service 
bulletins list the best selections and their attributes.  
No cultivars are known to have been developed 
exclusively for farm use.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Tony Bush 
USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center, East 
Lansing, Michigan 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.