Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SCOTS PINE 
Pinus sylvestris L. 
Plant Symbol = PISY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Windbreaks: Plant Scots pine in the central or 
leeward rows of multi-row plantings.  It is also 
recommended for planting as single-row windbreaks. 
 
Wildlife: Scots pine is of some importance as food 
and cover for many birds and small mammals.  
Although the plant is browsed by whitetail and mule 
deer, it is not a preferred forage.  
 
Timber/Christmas tree plantations : Scots pine is 
suitable for ornamental and sc reen plantings.  Its year 
long coloration adds variety to recreation plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Scots pine is an evergreen, spreading tree 80 to 100 
feet, pyramidal when young, becoming round topped 
and irregular in age.  The tree is introduced from 
Eurasia, and has become naturalized in eastern North 
America.  It is cultivated for windbreaks, timber, and 
Christmas tree plantations.  It does best on rich, moist 
soils, but its winter hardiness and moderate drought  tolerance enable it to do well on other soils.  It is 
moderately slow growing, but is long lived. 
 
Description 
Fruits are tawny-yellow, ob
long, symmetrical cones, 
1 to 2 inches long.  Clusters of flowers are yellow, 
minute, male and female.  Needles occur in bunches 
of 2, are stout and usually twisted, 1 to 3 inches long, 
and bluish-green in color.  Scots pine branches are 
spreading, and stems are ofte n crooked in early years.  
The plant’s bark is orange, thin and smooth on upper 
trunk, dark and fissured below.  The tree’s root 
system is widespread, moderately deep, and wind-
firm. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Scots pine is distributed throughout the Northeast and 
upper Midwest.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD Plantings should be established during the spring of 
the year on weed free sites.   Stand establishment can 
be enhanced by using 2 year old field-grown stock.  
Holes or furrows should be deep enough to contain 
roots without bending. 
 
Management  
Weed control is recommended in areas where the tree 
is grown for shade or Christ mas tree plantings.  It is 
also good to shape the tr ee for the form that you 
would like to have at time of harvest. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are several wood boring, root feeding, foliage 
feeding, and twig boring insects that attack this tree.  
The most common pest are cyclaneusma needle cast, 
western gall rust, Lophodermium needle cast, tip 
moth, sawflies, pine needle scales and giant conifer 
aphid. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Scots pine has several intergrading cultivars, 
differing chiefly in leaf color and growth form.  Most 
have ready use as Christmas trees, although leaves of 
some cultivars turn yellow-green in winter.  
Seedlings are available at most commercial conifer 
nurseries.  Seed origin is extremely important in 
obtaining quality trees for a given sub-region.

Consult the state extension forester for information 
from provenance testing to determine the best seed 
source for your planting. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.