Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
JAPANESE BLACK PINE 
Pinus thunbergii  Parl. 
Plant Symbol = PITH2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 
       J.S. Peterson        USDA NRCS NPDC        @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Pinus thunbergiana Franco 
 
Uses 
Japanese black pine had been among the best species 
for planting along Northeastern seashores until about 
1990.  The species has suffered from insects and 
diseases and has fallen rapidly in esteem. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Japanese black pine is an introduced evergreen.  In its 
most favorable habitat, Japa nese black pine can reach 
a height of 100 feet, but in beach plantings, it is 
usually less than 20 feet tall.  Its spreading, loosely 
swaying branches are orange-yellow in color, and 
form an irregular silhouette.  The blackish-gray bark 
is furrowed into irregular plates.  Its evergreen  foliage consists of bright green bundles of 2 stiff, 
sharp-pointed needles, 3-5 inches long.  The large, 
grayish-white terminal buds are oblong, with fringed 
scales at the tips.  After 4 or 5 years of age, nut-
brown colored, short-stalked cones, 2-3 inches long, 
are produced.  Fruiting and seed production are 
usually prolific.  There are 34,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
This pine is adaptable and will grow on a wide 
variety of soils under adverse conditions.  Japanese 
black pine exhibits excellent drought tolerance but 
poor shade tolerance; it tolerates moderately well-
drained soils.  This pine is more salt-spray resistant 
than any of the native pines. 
 
Japanese black pine is distributed primarily 
throughout the eastern United States.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Japanese black pine typically grows on medium 
fertility, slightly acid, loamy to sandy soils.  
Establishment is by planting bare-root or container-
grown plants 2-3 years old.  On sand dunes, the use 
of container-grown plants is recommended.  It may 
be established using bare-r
oot two-year-old seedlings 
where soil and moisture conditions are good for plant 
establishment.  It is desirable to dig a hole 2-3 times 
larger than the container, backfill with peat moss, 
then mix thoroughly with the sand.  Place the roots in 
the hole and backfill around them.  Water 
immediately. Japanese black pine is grown in 
nurseries from seed, using conventional propagation 
practices. 
 
Management  
Some protection from strong winds the first and 
second years may improve su rvival.  Average growth 
is 12-18 inches per year. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
European pine shoot moth ( Rhyacionia buolinana) 
frequently kills terminal growth of young trees, 
resulting in irregularly formed trees.  Japanese black 
pine is also susceptible to red-pine scale 
( Matsucoccus resinosae ). 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program

Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.