Plant Fact Sheet
HALL’S PANICUM  
Panicum hallii Vasey  var. filipes 
(Scribn.) Waller  
Plant Symbol = PAHAF  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS E. “ Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center  
 
Hall’s panicum  plant. Photo by Shelly Maher, STPMC, Kingsville, TX.  
Alternate Names 
Hall’s panicgrass, Filly panicum  
Uses  
Hall’s panicum  [ Panicum hallii  Vasey var.  filipes 
(Scribn.) Waller ] is recommended for highway rights -of -
way  plantings  because of its short stature.  It also can 
provide plant diversity to rangeland plantings.   
 
Wildlife:   Hall’s panicum provides  only fair forage for 
wildlife.  However, it is a good seed producer, and its 
seeds can provid e a source of food for birds and other 
wildlife.     Status
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Hall’s panicum  is a short -lived,  native, warm season, 
perennial bunchgrass  with stiffly erect stems.  Mature 
foliage height ranges from 0 .5 to 2.5 feet.  Leaves are 
mostly in a basal clump, curling with drying and age.  The 
inflo rescence is an open panicle with a pinkish or purplish 
tint.     
 
Hall’s panicum grows on sandy to clayey calcareous soils.  
It will tolerate soils that are weakly saline.  Its natural 
range extends from  Oklahoma south into Mexico, east to 
Louisiana, and  west to Arizona . 
 
 
Hall’s panicum  var.  filipes  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database.  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring , or 
where there are few cool -season weeds  Hall’s panicum 
can be planted in the fall.   Establish a clean, weed-free 
seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, 
the site sh ould be firm and have accumulated soil 
moisture.