Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
PACIFIC NINEBARK 
Physocarpus capitatus (Pursh) 
Kuntze 
Plant Symbol = PHCA11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 
© 2003 Hartmut Wisch 
 
Alternate Names:  Also known as Physocarpus 
opulifolius  (L.) Maxim. var.  tomentellus (Ser.) Boivin 
and  Spiraea capitatus  Kursh. 
 
Uses:  Pacific ninebark’s fibrous roots and capacity to 
root from un-rooted cuttings make it suitable for soil 
bioengineering techniques including live stakes, 
fascines and brush mats.  It is particularly valuable 
for streambank and lakeshore stabilization 
applications.  Pacific nine bark provides good cover 
and nesting sites for birds and small mammals but 
has low palatability when browsed by deer, elk and 
bear.  It has ornamental value for the wild garden or 
open woodland.  Although considered toxic by some, 
Pacific ninebark was used as an emetic, purgative and 
laxative by Native Americans. 
 
Legal Status:  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current stat us (e.g. threatened or  endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description: 
Pacific ninebark is a long-lived 
perennial shrub of the Rose family native to the 
Pacific Northwest.  It grows rapidly with multiple 
stems achieving 2 to 4 meters in an erect to arching 
form with angled branches.  The reddish papery bark 
peels off in long thin layers giving rise to the 
common name.  Deciduous leaves that appear 
alternately along the stem  are 3-10 cm long, 3-5 
lobed and doubly toothed at the margin.  They are 
deeply veined, shiny dark green above and lighter 
beneath with fine star-shaped hairs.  Fall color is 
described as rose-brown. Small (4 mm wide), 5-
petaled creamy white flowers with pink stamens form 
dense rounded clusters at the branch terminals.  
Flowers appear between late April and July.  One to 
four hard shiny pear-shaped yellow seeds form within 
small fruits that are individually surrounded by dark 
reddish brown, bell-shaped  bracts.  These bracts often 
persist during winter.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution:  Pacific ninebark 
prefers partial shade but tolerates full sun and is 
adapted to course, medium and fine textured slightly 
acidic soils.  Occupying low to middle elevations in 
areas with annual precipitation of 50 to 200 cm, this 
species has low fertility requirements and low 
drought tolerance.  Pacific ninebark is scattered to 
common west of the Cascades and often abundant in 
wet areas and on steep north slopes of the coastal 
mountains.  Habitats include streambanks, lake 
margins, and swampy areas or openings in moist 
woods.  Occasionally, Pacific ninebark is found in 
coastal marsh lands and meadows or at drier shrubby 
sites.  Pacific ninebark occurs primarily west of the 
British Columbia Coast, Cascade, and Sierra Nevada 
Mountain Ranges from extr eme southeast Alaska to 
central California.  It is  less prevalent east of the 
Cascades where its range extends along the 
Columbia, Snake and Clearwater Rivers into Idaho 
and overlaps with that of mallow ninebark 
( Physocarpus malvaceus ).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems: The genus is 
relatively free of insect pests and diseases although 
susceptibility to aphids and powdery mildew has 
been reported.  Flower  and seed eating specialist 
insects are known to occur on common ninebark

(Physocarpus opulifolius ), a native of the eastern 
United States.  
 
 © Province of British Columbia 
 
Establishment:  Pacific ninebark is typically 
propagated by seed (requiring 2 to 4 months cold 
stratification) or is rooted from softwood or 
hardwood cuttings.  There are 43750 seeds per ounce 
with viability ranging from below 50% to nearly 
100%.  Softwood cuttings taken in spring may be 
grown under mist, whereas dormant hardwood 
cuttings may be planted directly in the field as live 
stakes or fascines.  Autumn is the best time to 
transplant cuttings or rooted stock.  Mulching 
improves establishment. 
 
Management:  Nursery plantings of Pacific ninebark 
can be as dense as 1200 plants per acre in soil at least 
20 in. deep.  Consider supplemental irrigation during 
establishment year or years with low rainfall. 
 
Environmental Concerns:  Pacific ninebark spreads 
slowly either by seed or by root sprouting.  Concerns 
are minimal, except for possible toxicity. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin): Pacific ninebark is routinely 
available in containers or bare-root from west coast 
native plant nurseries.   There is a prostrate  ornamental cultivar named ‘Tilden Park’ that grows 
to a height of 4-5 feet. 
 
Prepared By:
 Pete Gonzalves  and Dale Darris .  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  Pete Gonzalves .  USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Line Drawing Source Document:  Douglas, GW, 
GB Straley, D Meidinger, and J. Pojar.  1999.  
Illustrated Flora of British Columbia  vol.3.  Ministry 
of Environment, Lands and Parks, Victoria, British 
Columbia. 
 
Edited: 28Jun2007 PG; 070717 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.