Plant Fact Sheet

THIS PASPALUM

Paspalum setaceum Michx.

Plant Symbol = PASE5 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
Britton & Brown 1913 Illustrated Flora of the Northern States and Canada @ PLANTS 
Uses 
Forage: In Texas, thin paspalum (Paspalum 
setaceum) provides fair quality livestock forage. It 
also has low forage value for deer.   
Wildlife:  Birds will eat the seed; however, low seed 
production limits this use. 
Restoration: Thin paspalum can be used in native 
site restoration. However, limited seed production 
will make it impractical for use in larger projects.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Thin paspalum is a short-lived, warm-season, tufted, 
perennial grass that grows 2 ½ to 3 feet tall.  The 
base of the plant is knotty and has short rhizomes.  It 
is a member of the Paniceae tribe of Poaceae, the 
grass family (Hitchcock, 1971). There are four 
varieties of Paspalum setaceum: setaceum, 
stramineum, muhlenbergii, and ciliatifolium. Not all 
plant authorities recognize these varieties. 
Paspalum setaceum var. setaceum (previously P. 
debile) is identified by some plant authorities as thin 
paspalum.  Others recognize the varieties, but 
consider thin paspalum to be Paspalum setaceum, a 
separate entity from the other varieties.  Still others 
see thin paspalum as the whole Paspalum setaceum 
complex, and do not recognize the individual 
varieties at all. The varieties will be discussed herein 
because the most recent authority recognizes them. 
 The variety setaceum (previously P. debile, which 
Gould (1975) calls thin paspalum) can be 
differentiated from the other varieties as having 
narrower leaf blades, shorter spikelets, and gray-
green herbage. 
The variety stramineum (previously P. stramineum) 
is distinguished from the other varieties by narrower 
leaf blades and yellow-green foliage. 
The variety muhlenbergii (previously P. 
muhlenbergii and P. pubescens) has light to dark 
green, pilose leaf blades and is distinguished by a 
conspicuous midvein on the lower floret. 
Finally, the variety ciliatifolium (previously P. 
ciliatifolium and P. propinquum) is recognized by its 
glabrous dark green to purplish herbage.  It is 
commonly called fringeleaf paspalum.   
It is important to note that populations of widely 
variable, but intergrading plant types are included in 
the Paspalum setaceum complex. 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Thin paspalum is found along the Atlantic Coast 
from Massachusetts to Florida, along the Gulf Coast 
to Texas and south into Mexico, and also found 
inland in Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky, and 
Tennessee.  In Texas, it can be found throughout 
most of the state, but it is rare in the Edwards Plateau 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

and Trans-Pecos regions.  It is the most common in 
East, and Southeast Texas, and the Coastal portions 
of the Rio Grande Plains. 
The variety setaceum has a similar distribution, but 
can also be found in Cuba.  The variety stramineum 
has a wider distribution.  It grows from 
Massachusetts west to Minnesota, south to Florida, 
Texas and Eastern Arizona, down the gulf coast as 
far as Panama, and can be found in the West Indies 
and Caribbean Islands as well.  This is the most 
common variety in Texas. 
The variety muhlenbergii is found from the Atlantic 
Coast west to Iowa and south to Texas.  It is common 
in Northeast Texas.  The variety ciliatifolium is found 
mostly at inland sites from New Jersey to Florida, 
west to Oklahoma and Texas, and in the West Indies. 
In Texas, it is found in the Pineywoods, Post Oak 
Savannah, and Coastal Plains regions, but not on the 
immediate coast and rarely farther south than Harris 
County. 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
All the varieties prefer sandy soils, but will grow in 
other soil types. Plants are typically found in open 
woods, open ground, in old fields, in ditches, and 
along wood borders. 
Establishment 
Thin paspalum can be best reproduced from seed. 
However, germination testing at the Plant Materials 
Center yielded only an average germination of five 
percent. There are approximately 705,304 seeds per 
pound of thin paspaulm.   
Management 
Thin paspalum does not require much management.  
A seed increase plot of thin paspalum growing at the 
Plant Materials Center has shown itself to be 
relatively drought hardy. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Low seed production and germination seem to be the 
main problems when using this grass. 
For additional assistance regarding the production 
and establishment of thin paspalum, please contact 
the Plant Materials Center at (361) 595-1313. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher, Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
Edited: 1Oct2003 SDM; 05Nov2003 jlk; 060802 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.