Plant Fact Sheet
RED PINE  
Pinus resinosa  Soland.  
Plant Symbol = PIRE  
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center  
 
© Joseph O’Brien  
USDA, Forest  Service, St. Paul Field Office 
Alternate Names  
Norway pine, eastern red pine, pin rouge  
Uses  
Economic : Red pine wood is moderately hard and straight 
grained.  It is grown primarily for the production of wood 
used for poles, lumber, cabin logs, railway ties, post, 
pulpwood, and fuel.  The bark is occasionally used for 
tanning leather (Sargent 1961).   
Ethnobotanic:  The inner bark of Pinus resinosa was 
pounded as a poultice for any kind of inflamed wound, 
sore, or ulcer when white pine bark was not available 
(Fielder 1975).    
 
Landscaping & Wildlife : Red pine is an attractive tree that 
is used in recreational areas because of its colorful bark.   Red pine
 provides cover for many species of mammals 
and birds.  Deer, small mammals and songbirds feed on 
the seed . 
Agroforestry:  Pinus resinosa is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to protect 
livestock, enhance crop production, and control soil 
erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with h arsh 
winter conditions better handle the impact of winter 
storms and reduce home heating costs during the winter 
months and cooling cost in the summer . 
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant ’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  
General : Red pine ( Pinus resinosa ) is a medium sized 
tree, up to twenty -five meters high and seventy- five 
centimeters in diameter (F arar 1995).  The leaves are soft 
and flexible evergreen needles, in clusters of two, slender, 
4” -6” long, dark green borne in dense tufts at the ends of 
branchlets.  The fruit is ovoid -conic, with thin scales, 
becoming light chestnut -brown at maturity.  The bark is 
thick and slightly divided by shallow fissures into broad 
flat ridges covered by thin loose red -brown scales 
(Sargent 1961).  The root system is moderately deep, 
wide spreading, and very wind firm.   
 
Distribution :    
Red pine is native to northeastern United States.  This 
species ranges from Newfoundland and Manitoba, south 
to the mountains of Pennsylvania, west to Minnesota 
(Dirr 1990).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   
Adaptation  
Red pine occurs most often on well drained, dry, highly 
acid, sandy soils of outwash plains, and gravelly ridges 
(Barnes & Wagner 1981).  It is frequently found where 
the soil fertility is low, in pure stands or mixed w ith 
species such as jack pine, white pine, aspens, oaks, and 
white birch.  This species prefers full sun and is shade 
intolerant and extremely cold tolerant.  Pinus resinosa  is 
easily cultivated in nurseries and easily raised in 
plantations (Ibid.).