Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GOLDEN RAGWORT 
Packera aurea (L.) A. Love & 
D. Love  
Plant Symbol = PAAU3   
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD     
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Wayne Hughes, used with permission 
 
Alternate Names 
Golden groundsel, Senecio aureus L. 
 
Uses 
Landscaping and Wildlife :  Golden Ragwort is a 
beautiful plant in flower and makes an effective 
groundcover even in dry shade conditions.  For these 
reasons it is often used in native landscape gardens 
and meadow plantings.  It also has potential as a 
component of conservation mixes.  It will grow well 
in moist to wet soils in sunny to shady locations 
where it naturalizes rapidly.  The nectar and pollen of 
the flowers are attractive to small bees and flies such 
as little carpenter bees, cuckoo bees, and various 
Halictid bees.  The caterpillars of the gem moth 
( Orthonama obstipata ) feed on the foliage.  
 
Ethnobotanical:  The root and leaf are used in teas by 
the Cherokee Indians for hear t trouble, and to prevent 
pregnancy.  Other Native Americans used it to 
regulate menses, to aid childbirth, treat urinary 
problems and to treat lung diseases such as 
tuberculosis.  It is also used for external ointments 
and infusions for ulcers an d wounds.  The leaves 
contain a low toxicity alkaloid (Pyrrolizidine).  The  foliage is shunned by most mammalian herbivores 
due to its toxicity, although sheep are more tolerant 
and will eat it.  
 
Status 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Golden Ragwort is a member of the Aster family 
(Asteraceae).  It is a some
what weedy, short lived, 
perennial forb growing from 6 inches to 2 feet tall.   
The two very different kinds of leaves are highly 
distinctive.  The blades of the basal leaves are 2 
inches long and 2 inches  across; they are cordate-
orbicular in shape.  The slender petioles of the basal 
leaves are 2 inches long.  A flower stalk develops 
from the center of each rosette.  Along this stalk, 
there are usually 2 – 3 alternate leaves.  These leaves 
are smaller in size than the  basal leaves and pinnatifid 
in shape.  Both the altern ate leaves and the stalk are 
hairless.  The stalk ends in  a flat-headed panicle of 
yellow flowers.  The blooming period occurs early 
spring (March – April) and lasts about 3 weeks.  Each 
daisy-like flower is 1 inch across; in the center there 
are numerous golden yellow disk florets, which are 
surrounded by 6-16 yellow ray florets.  Both the disk 
and ray florets are fertile.  Ea ch floret is replaced by a 
purple bullet shaped achene which is distributed by 
the wind.  The short rootstock has spreading fibrous 
roots and it produces rhizomes (and sometimes 
stolons).   
 
Golden Ragwort is a carefr ee plant which prefers full 
sun to light shade in wet to moist soils with ample 
organic matter to retain moisture.  Plants grown in 
full sun require more moisture than plants growing in 
shade.  It often forms colonies of plants in favorable 
habitats.   
 
Distribution :  This species is very widely distributed 
in the eastern North Amer ica in USDA hardiness 
zones 3 - 9.  Habitats include wet deciduous woods, 
meadows, banks of rivers, streams and lakes, slopes 
of rocky ravines, and roadsides. 
 
Establishment 
This species is easily grown; and can be planted as 
containers in the spring or early fall.  Divisions of the 
plant in the spring are another option for

establishment.  Golden Ragwort will form dense 
colonies even within the root system of mature trees.   
 
The seed does not require a pre-treatment for 
germination to occur and the plant freely self-seeds.   
 
Management 
Golden Ragwort is a hardy plant with relatively few 
problems.  This species is easy to grow and maintain 
with moderate levels of N, P and K.  It will naturalize 
under optimal conditions.  It can become weedy in 
moist conditions. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Golden Ragwort is a plant with no serious insect or 
disease problems.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Golden Ragwort is somewhat 
available from commercial nurseries specializing in 
native plants. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt,  USDA NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Edited: 080915jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.