Plant Fact Sheet
CHICKASAW PLUM 
Prunus angustifolia Marsh.  
Plant Symbol = PRAN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center & Kansas State University, Forestry Research  
 
 
Figure 1. Chickasaw plum in full fruit.  
Photo by John M. Row  
 
Alternate Names  
Sand plum, sandhill plum, sand hill plum, mountain 
cherry   
 
Uses  
Native Americans regularly consumed fresh fruits of 
Chickasaw plum or dried them for winter.  First cultivated 
in 1874, the fruit was used for making wine, jam, and 
jelly.  Its white flowers are attractive and fragrant in the 
spring, producing a beautiful f lower show.  It should be 
part of a native landscape planting.  Chickasaw plum is a 
popular plant for use in developing wildlife habitat on 
sandy soils.  The thorny thicket is valuable for songbird 
and game bird nesting, loafing , and roosting.  Various 
oth er animals also use it for loafing, bedding, and escape 
cover.  Numerous species of birds and other animals 
consume the fruit.  The plums provide nesting cover for 
northern bobwhites, brown thrashers, northern 
mockingbirds , and gray catbirds in the southea stern U S.  
Northern bobwhites nest in mixed shrub communities 
composed predominantly of Chickasaw plum in Texas. 
Field sparrow, Bell’s vireo, loggerhead shrike,  and 
painted bunting also  require woody plants including 
Chickasaw plum for nesting.  Plum is i mportant to lesser 
prairie -chickens for resting, escape,  and thermal cover.  
Cattle use plum thickets to escape the summer sun and 
actually gain weight faster when the thickets form a  usable part of their range.  Chickasaw plum is very 
effective in stabilizing blowing soil.  
It may be used in the 
outside row of windbreaks for ground level protection.   It 
is also used to stabilize stream banks and gullies . 
 
 
Chickasaw plum distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
For updated distribution, please consul t the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and w etland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation 
Chickasaw plum is a short, thickly branched shrub 3 to 10 
feet tall, often forming extensive thickets or colonies due 
to extensive suckering in the western part of its range.  In 
the eastern parts of it s range it forms a small tree; height 
at maturity is 14 to 25 feet.  Leaves are simple, lanceolate 
to oblong lanceolate, 0.8 to 2.4 inches long, 0.4 to 0.8 
inches wide, acute or short acuminate, rounded at the 
base, slender, lustrous and glabrous above, st rongly 
trough shaped with stalks that bear two red glands near 
the apex with leaf teeth finely serrate, tipped with glands 
or scars of these.  Its numerous zigzag twigs are smooth, 
reddish brown and slender.  Younger branches have 
smooth reddish brown bark  with large, horizontal 
lenticels.  Older trees have rough, scaly trunk bark.  There 
are short, side twigs that bear flowers and end  in sharp 
points.  Open- pollinated and early blooming, March-
April, the numerous off -white or yellowish -white flowers 
with little fragrance appear before the leaves and are less 
than 1/2 inch across; sepals green, no glands on the calyx 
lobes.  The ripe fruits small, 1/4 to 1/2  inch in size, thin-