Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DWARF SAND CHERRY 
Prunus pumila  L. var. 
depressa (Pursh) Gleason 
Plant Symbol = PRPUD 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
eastern sandcherry 
 
Uses 
Dwarf sand cherry is useful primarily as a 
streambank and lakeshore stabilization plant where 
the soil conditions are sandy and well drained. It is 
prostrate, and will be shaded out over time by taller 
plants, but produces an extensive root system and 
roots down where the stems touch the ground. The 
plant top growth tends to trap sand during flood 
events. Sand cherry produces  fruit which is of value 
to wildlife. 
 
This plant may also have landscaping potential due to 
it’s dense, neat prostrate gr owth and attractive spring 
flowers. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Dwarf sand cherry produces creeping stems that 
radiate outward from the orig inal plant.  The prostrate 
branches seldom produce growth over 12-15 inches 
high, but the branches may be 10-15 feet long.  The 
gray or black colored stems root prolifically where 
they contact the ground.  Th e root system is fibrous 
and extensive.  The simple leaves are long and 
narrow, roughly 2 1/2 by 1/2 inches, and  medium 
green in color.  The leav es are shiny on the top 
surface.  Small white to pi nkish flowers are produced 
in May. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Dwarf sand cherry is native to the region from the 
Delaware River to the Gaspe Peninsula in Quebec. 
As the cultivar was from the southern end of the 
range, it is expected that it will be adapted to the 
cooler microclimates in Pennsylvania and West 
Virginia. It is found on sandy soils along streams and 
other water bodies, but will grow successfully on 
other soils that have good drainage. The plant is 
drought tolerant once established, yet will tolerate 
periodic flooding of short duration. 
M. van der Grinten 
@USDA NRCS Big Flats Plant Materials Center  Big Flats New YorkFor a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Planting 1-0 nursery bare-root stock is preferred. 
Older plants are usually too large for easy planting. 
Take care to properly place  the root system in the 
planting hole or trench. Plant dormant stock early in 
the spring as possible. Co ntainerized plants can be 
planted in early summer as  well.  There are 2,900 
seeds per pound. 
 
Dwarf sand cherry should be planted in mixtures with 
other species for critical area treatment. Spacings of 
4x4 to 5x5 work well. This plant should not be used 
where reed canary grass, common reedgrass, or 
Japanese fleeceflower is present due to the rapid 
shading that these plants generate. 
 
Management  
Once established, dwarf sand cherry requires no 
management. Other local native species will seed into 
the environment created by the sand cherry and 
occupy the site. Sites with a combination of factors

which favor the sand cherry will retain the stand, but 
most will not over the long term.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Catskill’ dwarf sand cherry is the only cultivar that 
has been released in the US .  It was selected from a 
native stand found along the Delaware River on the 
NY-PA border. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 25Apr2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.