Plant Fact Sheet 
 
PANAX 
Polyscias guilfoylei  (Bull ex 
Cogn. & E. March.) Bailey 
Plant Symbol = POGU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant 
Materials Center   
Panax:  height - 28 feet  
David Duvauchelle, USDA NRCS Hawaii PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Afia, bebero, berobero, coffeetree, geranium aralia, 
geranium-leaf aralia, Guilfoylei panax, hedge panax, 
kaope pa, kapaie, ndanindani, tagitagi, tanetane, 
tanitani, te kaimamara, te to ara, ut, wild coffee, wild 
coffee panax. 
 
Uses 
Primarily, panax can be used for in-field windbreaks 
systems and as main windbreak systems.   
Alternatively, it can also be usde as a screen for 
noise, odor, or privacy.  Panax is widely planted for 
ornamental purposes. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description  
Aralia Family (Araliaceae).  Polyscias guilfoylei is a 
columnar shrub with erect branches up to 24ft tall; 
leaves mostly 5.9-19.7” long, 1-pinnate, leaflets 
opposite, blades variable, but commonly broadly 
ovate or elliptic and coarsely dentate or lacerate, 
commonly variegated with white or pale yellow 
margins, or sometimes all dark green; leaflets mostly 
1.9-3.9” long; inflorescence a compound panicle. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The origin of panax is unknown, but it is widely 
cultivated in the paleotropics and in some parts of the 
neotropics. 
 
Establishment 
Panax can be easily propagated by cuttings.  Cuttings 
should be 1 inch in diamet er and at least 18” long 
ensure a successful planting.  Panax can be started in 
the shade-house, but it also does very well by direct 
planting.  If planting for a  windbreak, plant at least 2 
feet spacing for single rows. 
 
Management  
Panax is not drought tolerant and requires a moderate 
amount of moisture.  A windbreak row that is 
irrigated by drip-line for 8 hours a day, once a week 
should be sufficient, with more frequent irrigations 
when first planted to aid in root development.  Panax 
will grow in nutrient deficient soils, but any nutrient 
amendments made, according to soil tests, will 
improve establishment and subsequent growth. 
Preliminary studies at the Hoolehua Plant Materials 
Center indicate that nitrogen supplements will 
increase the growth-rate of  panax significantly.

Infrequent trimming of side branches that have a 
slight tendency to lean over is all that is needed to 
control the upright form of a panax windbreak.  
 
 Panax, 1 year after planting 
David Duvauchelle, USDA NRCS Hawaii PMC 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Locusts like to eat the new shoots; ants favor panax 
to farm aphids, but not to the point of harming plant 
growth.  Other observations indicate that panax is 
prone to root rot if over-watered 
 
Environmental Concerns 
PIER (Pacific Island Ecosys tems at Risk) rates panax 
as a low risk introduced species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Many ornamental varieties available commercially. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:   
David Duvauchelle, USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant 
Materials Center, Hoolehua, Hawaii 
 
Edited: 070810 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>   
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.