Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PICKERELWEED 
Pontederia cordata L. 
Plant Symbol = POCO14  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Pickerelweed forms large colonies along shallow 
shorelines.  The emergent mass of stems and leaves 
provide wave-buffering protection.  Although slow to 
spread, the root base of this plant thoroughly covers 
the sediments with a tough vegetative mat.  The seed 
of pickerelweed is eaten by waterfowl.  Geese and 
muskrats will consume the vegetation, while only 
fish, and to a lesser extent birds and small mammals, 
utilize flooded foliage for cover.  This species is also 
used extensively in water gardening, due to its showy 
violet to blue flowers. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pontederia cordata  is a stout perennial herbaceous 
emergent that can reach four  feet tall.  The light green 
stems and leaves emerge annually from a thick pad of 
fibrous roots.  These roots give rise to short creeping 
rhizomes, allowing the plant to spread.  The waxy 
leaves develop at the ends  of stems, and are highly 
variable in shape and size.  Their shape will range 
from oval to lance-like, with size varying 2 to 10 
inches long and 1/2 to 6 inches wide.  Leaf veins are 
orientated in a parallel arrangement starting at the 
base. 
 
The compound, violet to blue flowers emerge from 
an erect spike.  The spike will grow to 6 inches in 
length.  The showy flowers appear anywhere from 
May to October over much of its range.  The corky 
fruit produced by these flowers is oblong and one 
seeded. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The natural distribution of pickerelweed is from 
Nova Scotia to Minnesota, south to Florida and 
Texas.  This plant is typically found growing in the 
unconsolidated sediments of marshes, streams, 
shallow lakes, and ponds.  It tolerates low fertility 
and partial sunlight and temporary inundation to 20 
inches, but flourishes in fully exposed fertile soils 
(pH: 6.0 to 8.0), and permanently inundated up to 12 
inches deep in freshwater (<3 parts per thousand 
salinity .). 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA, NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
In the wild, pickerelw eed is predominantly 
established from seed; ther e are approximately 5,000 
cleaned seeds per pound.  Th e seeds are dispersed by 
wind, water, and animals to favorable moist 
unconsolidated sites, where they establish. Similar 
processes can be mimicked by humans on-site, in 
nursery beds or greenhouses.  Cool moist 
stratification of the seed is necessary to trigger 
adequate germination of spring seedings.  Utilizing a 
seeding rate of 20-30 live seeds per square foot will 
result in the best establishment and development of a 
stand. 
 
Although vegetative dispersal is less frequent in 
nature, scale-like root corms are located near the soil

surface or sometimes exposed and easily separate 
from the parent plant. When harvested these corms 
can be planted as bare-foot stock or containerized 
transplants.  Bare-rooted material is typically small 
and manageable enough to plant using standard hand 
tools (spade, dibble, planting bar, etc.) Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 
Management 
Once established, it is very important to maintain 
water depths greater then saturation, but shallower 
than the leaves year round.  Maintaining site 
hydrology within this range will improve survival 
over winter.  Pickerelweed responds well to the 
addition of commercial or organic fertilizers.  The 
vegetative portions of this species are seldom 
damaged by insects, diseases, birds, or mammals.  
The seeds are often preyed  upon by waterfowl. 
 
Tightly spaced clonal populations of this species 
often co-exist with other shoreline inhabitors.  Once 
pickerelweed has become established, seldom will 
these other species of emergent vegetation grown 
within the perimeter of the pickerelweed clones. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known varieties are available, but wetland 
nurseries carry local and regional ecotypes. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Christopher Miller, PMS-Southern NE/Mid-Atlantic 
USDA NRCS 
Somerset, New Jersey 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.