Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN WHITE PINE 
Pinus stobus  L. 
Plant Symbol = PIST  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Uses 
Timber: The wood of white pine is light, durable, and 
easy to work.  It is good lumber for toys, boxes, 
cabinet work, and similar items. 
 
Christmas tree and ornamental : White pine is used 
occasionally in Christmas tree plantations and as 
ornamental planting in landscaping around homes 
and office buildings.  It can also be sheared as a 
hedge. 
 
Wildlife : It has fair wildlife value.  Gray and red 
squirrels, deer, mice and 16 species of songbirds have 
been known to eat the seed. 
 
Erosion control : White pine is frequently used for 
windbreaks and screens along fields new right-of-
ways and around campsites. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pinus strobus  L, eastern white pine, is the largest 
conifer of the eastern and upper Midwest forests, 
reaching 150 feet in height  and up to 40 inches in 
diameter.  In dense stands, trees produce tall, 
cylindrical stems with pyramidal shaped crowns, 
characterized by distinctiv e, plate like branching, 
especially noticeable as the trees become older.  On 
young growth, the bark remains rather thin, smooth, 
and greenish-brown in color.   On older trees the bark 
becomes deeply fissured and dark grayish-brown in 
color.  Its evergreen needles  are in clusters of 5, soft, 
flexible, 2 1/2 to 5 inches long, and bluish-green in 
appearance.  Its cones are about 4 to 8 inches long 
and 1 inch thick.  These remain attached for 1 to 
several months after ripening in the autumn of the 
second season. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Eastern white pine grows on a variety of soils ranging 
from light, sandy to heavy textured soils.  White pine 
ranges across southern Canada from Manitoba to 
Newfoundland, throughout the northern and eastern 
states from Minnesota and northern Iowa to the 
Atlantic coast, and southward along the Appalachian 
mountains to northern Georgia and Alabama. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995 
Northeast Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedlings of white pine are grown in nursery beds for 
field planting.  They may either be left in the nursery 
for 2 to 3 years and directly  planted into the field, or 
they may be transplanted  after the second year and 
left in a transplant bed for 1 or 2 years before field 
plantings.  This will produce a seedling 
approximately 12 to 16 inches in height with 1/4 to 
1/2 inch caliper.  Field establishment of seedlings is 
accomplished with tree planting procedures, using 
machine transplanters or hand planting.

Management 
White pine seedlings require weed control  for the 
first few years after outplanting.  Chemical and/or 
mechanical control can be used, preferably starting 
the year before planting.   
 
Management of white pine should focus on thwarting 
the white pine weevil where straight trunks and tree 
form is desired.  Growing white pine where there will 
be partial shade on the developing saplings and pole-
sized trees (especially on the terminal leader) seems 
to reduce infestation by the weevil.  Thus growing 
white pine in mixed uneven aged stands is a good 
idea to avoid this pest and those described below. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The white pine weevil is the tree's greatest insect pest 
affecting both timber quality and volume.  Terminal 
leaders may be killed repeatedly and result in such 
serious stem crooks that the tree has reduced 
merchantable saw timber value. 
 
The pales weevil is an insect that often attacks white 
pine seedlings in areas where white pine timber has 
been cut recently.  Cone crops may be destroyed by 
the pine cone beetle.  This insect compounds the 
problem of infrequent seed years and is a serious 
threat to white pine management. 
 
Diseases, including white pine blister rust, red ring 
rot, root rot, wo od decay, and certain  needle fungi, 
cause losses in white pine stands.  Such natural 
elements as snow, ice,  and wind may also cause 
damage to white pine. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no documented va rieties for reforestation 
purposes.  Local or regional ecotypes are typically 
utilized for this purpose.  There are several varieties 
available for ornamental applications.  Seeds and 
seedlings are available from most eastern conifer 
nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson  (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York  
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.