Plant Fact Sheet     
   
 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
 
Alternate names:   Another common name is 
Sandberg bluegrass.   Poa scabrella or pine bluegrass 
was formerly recognized as  a separate species.  It has 
since been combined with up  to 44 other bluegrasses 
into a large complex known as  Poa secunda or 
Sandberg bluegrass.   
 
Caution:   The Poa secunda  complex represents a 
highly variable array of  ecological forms occurring 
over a large area of the United States in diverse 
habitats.  Information pertinent to certain forms may 
not apply well to the entire species across all regions.  
Therefore, this fact sheet  applies best only to Poa  secunda
 (formerly  Poa scabrella ) as it occurs west of 
the Cascades in the Pacific Northwest. 
 
Uses:   Pine bluegrass is a native cool season 
bunchgrass of small to moderate stature useful for 
restoration of upland meadows, wet prairies, and pine 
or oak savanna, depending on region.  While slow to 
establish, it is drought tolerant and useful for dry, 
rocky outcrops as well as moist, slower draining 
sites.  Other uses include revegetation, rehabilitation 
after wildfire, erosion control in mixes with other 
grasses, upland bird habitat (nesting cover, source of 
seed), and natural area landscaping.   Specific 
information on livestock and wildlife utilization of 
pine bluegrass west of the Cascades is lacking.  
However, on drier western rangelands, ecotypes 
within the  Poa secunda complex have value for 
livestock grazing and big game forage, especially in 
early spring.  Palatability prior to dormancy and 
again in fall is rated fair to good for most ungulates, 
small mammals, and certain birds.  Productivity can 
be low, especially in dry years.  Potential uses that 
need further testing west of the Cascades are low 
input lawns and cover crops in vineyards or other 
horticultural crops where its early summer dormancy 
may be beneficial. 
 
 
Description:   Pine bluegrass is a fine textured, short 
to medium lived, strongly tufted perennial grass with 
erect culms (stems) 40-100 cm tall.  Mature clumps 
are typically 10-16 cm wide and the foliage is light to 
medium green or slightly bluish, and mostly basal. 
Leaf blades are numerous , 1-2 mm wide, 5-22 cm 
long, flat to folded or rolled inward, and lax.  The 
panicle (inflorescence or seed head) is upright and 
narrow.  Dormancy occurs  in summer when soils dry 
while new growth initiates during fall, winter and 
spring.  Seed matures in June-July in the western 
interior valleys of Oregon and Washington and in 
August at higher elevations.    
 
Key to identification: Pine bluegrass has narrower 
panicles, narrower leaf blad es (1-2 mm vs. 2-5 mm), 
and does not spread by stolons (or rhizomes) in 
comparison to two comm on, weedy introduced 
relatives: roughstalk bluegrass ( Poa trivialis) and 
Kentucky bluegrass ( Poa pratensis).  It does not have 
cobwebby hair along the veins or at the base of the 
floret (individual flower unit) like Kentucky 
bluegrass.  Pine bluegrass is no longer distinguished 
from Sandberg bluegrass, Canby’s bluegrass ( Poa 
canbyi ), and other bluegrasses in the same complex.
 
Commercial availability:  Populations originating 
from Oregon, California, Washington, and other 
PINE BLUEGRASS  
Poa scabrella  (Thurb.) Benth. 
ex Vasey 
Plant Symbol = POSC

western states are available and marketed as Poa 
scabrella or Poa secunda.   Selected germplasm and 
cultivated varieties have also been released within the 
complex and some are better forage producers.  
However, given the limited testing and potential site 
or use specificity of different forms, utilization of any 
population should be confined within the same 
ecoregion and elevation zone, or a reasonable 
geographic distance from the  original collection site.  
 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Pine bluegrass is 
somewhat infrequent west of the Cascades in Oregon 
and Washington.  However, it is more common in 
other regions of the West.  
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:  The 
species is susceptible to st em and leaf rust in some 
years, especially under seed production.  This can 
increase mortality and may necessitate the use of 
approved fungicides.  It is slow to establish during 
the first year and may be out competed by weeds. 
There are no substantial  environmental concerns. 
      
 Line drawing reprinted with permission,  
             University of Washington Press 
 
Adaptation:   Pine bluegrass inhabits open 
woodlands and sagebrush steppe as well as on dry, 
rocky slopes, exposed slopes, or shallow soils with 
good drainage.  However, populations are also found 
in higher precipitation zones under moister soil or 
slower draining conditions including seasonally wet  prairies of western Oregon and Washington.  The 
Poa secunda
 complex has a wide range, occurring 
from near sea level along  the Pacific Coast eastward 
to higher elevations in the mountain west as well as 
Great Plains.  Soil types vary from moderately acid 
sands to loams and clay loams with a pH from 6.0 to 
8.0. The species occurs in full sun as well as in partial 
shade of open timber or sa vanna.  It is well adapted 
to fire as a component of prairie ecosystems. 
 
Establishment:  Seed of Poa secunda  is classified as 
nondormant and typically germinates without 
treatment.  However some populations of pine 
bluegrass germinate more uniformly or at a higher 
percent with 14, 30 or 60 days of cold, moist chilling 
(stratification).  Th erefore, fall seeding is advised.  
No special physical conditioning of the seed is 
needed.  Seed weight varies from 900,000-1,500,000 
seeds/lb.  Each pound of  pure live seed (PLS) sown 
per acre results in 20-34 liv e seeds/sq. ft.  Seeding 
depth must be shallow, preferably less than ¼ in. on 
heavier soils and ½ in. on lighter soils.  Pine 
bluegrass is rarely sown alone (2-3 lbs/ac) but rather 
in mixes with other grasse s (0.5-2 lbs/ac).  Higher 
rates (4-8+ lbs/ac) are applied to higher precipitation 
zones (30+ inches/yr) and experimental uses such as 
low input cover.  Rate of establishment from seed is 
slow.  If fall sown, flowering can occur the following 
spring in milder climates. 
 
Prepared by:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. July 2007. 
 
Species coordinator:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service