Plant Fact Sheet
WHIPLASH 
PAPPUSGRASS  
Pappophorum vaginatum Buckley 
Plant Symbol = PA VA2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center and South Texas Natives  
  
Whiplash  Pappusgrass © Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  
 
Alternate Names 
Pappophorum apertum  Munro ex Scribn.   
Pappophorum mucronulatum  auct. non Nees   
Pappophorum suffulbosum  Arechav.  
 
Uses  
Whiplash  pappusgrass is recommended for upland 
wildlife, highway  rights-of -way s, and range plantings.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
De scription  and Adaptation 
Whiplash pappusgrass is a native, perennial bunchgrass .  
Stems are 30 -80 (sometimes 100) cm. t all, stiffly erect or 
somewhat jointed  near the base,  and  smooth . Sheaths 
have a tuft of long hairs on either side of collar, and the 
hai rs are deciduous with  age. Ligule is a ring of short  hairs, 
but the base of blade immediately above the  ligule 
has hairs 2 -4 mm long. Leaf b lades are flat or curled in 
when dry , 10- 20 (sometimes 30) cm. long and 1.5- 5 mm. 
broad. Panicles are narrow, tightl y contracted, whitish or 
tawny, only rarely with a slight purple tinge, mostly 12 -25 
cm. long. Spikelets with 1, rarely 2, perfect florets and 2 
reduced florets above. Chromosome number is reported to 
be  2n=40, or 60 (Reeder and Toolin 1989). Whiplash 
pappusgrass flowers from April through November 
(Gould 1975). Cleaned seed of whiplash pappusgrass 
contains approximately 436,250 seeds per pound.  
 
Whiplash  pappusgrass can be found from Texas to 
Arizona  and south into Northern Mexico.  It is also found 
in  one  county in New Yor k and in one county in Maine.   
 
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Establishment  
Numerous seeding trials have documented good 
establishment of whiplash pappusgrass  from seed in south 
Texas.   These plantings indicate  good seed viability and 
persistence, an important characteristic for rangeland  seed 
mix components in south Texas.   Plantings have shown 
that  seeding in the fall season has been  superior  to spring 
plantings  for establishment of pappusgrass in south Texas.   
 
The recommended seeding rate for pure stands of 
whiplash  pappusgrass is 3 lbs. pure live seed per acre. 
Seed coatings (talc based) increase the flowability of seed 
through standard seed drills. Success ful establishment has 
been obtained from  both drill and broadcast plantings.  
 
Management  
Whiplash p appusgrass seed fields should be mowed or 
burned annually to promote vigorous growth. Deep soil 
tillage or frequent close cultivation is also recommended 
to  promote seed production.   Consult your local 
Agriculture Extension office for herbicide 
recommendations.