Plant Fact Sheet
BEAKED PANICGRASS 
Panicum anceps Michx. 
Plant Symbol = PAAN  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 
A lternate Names  
beaked panicum, spreading panicum   
  
Uses  
Livestock:  
Beaked panicgrass is grazed by cattle and is of good value 
for grazing.   
 
Wildlife:  
Deer will graze beaked panicgrass . The seed are eaten by 
upland birds and some waterfowl.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland in dicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation  
Beaked panicgrass is a native, warm season perennial and 
a member of the grass family ( Poaceae). This grass grows 
from 2 to 4 feet tall (60 to 120 cm). The seedhead 
(inflorescence) is an open panicle 6 to 14 i nches long (15 
to 35 cm) and each spikelet ¼” to 1/8” long. The second 
glume is curved at the end like a bird’s beak, hence the 
common name.   
 
Vegetative growth begins in February and is usually 
completed by May or June. Seed is ready for harvest in 
Septem ber. Beaked panicgrass is a prolific seed producer.   Beaked panicgrass occurs from New York to Florida west 
to Kansas and Texas. In Texas, it is found in the eastern 
half of the state. This plant prefers moist to wet soils. This 
plant is found growing in b
ottomland freshwater marshes 
and swamps on sandy soils. Beaked panicgrass grows best 
under 30 to 35 percent shade. The plants form large 
clumps as they spread from short rhizomes.   
 
Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center  
Known Distribution  
Please consult the PLANTS web site for the current 
distribution of this species.  
Establishment  
Beaked panicgrass reproduces from seeds, tillers, and 
rhizomes. The seeds should be planted in the fall or early 
winter. If planting in the spring, treatment to overcome 
seed dormancy is necessary for satisfactory stand 
establishment. A common method for increasing seed 
germination is a cold/moist stratification treatment.   
 
Plant vegetative material on three foot centers in the 
spring.   
 
Management  
Beaked panicgrass is grazed by cattle and horses. This 
plant contributes small quantities of forage since it is 
rarely abundant except on small areas. Close grazing 
causes the plant’s basal tufts to spread widely and the 
leaves form a dense cover over small areas . 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Check with your local extension service for recommended 
herbicides if control is needed.   
  
Environmental Concerns   
Beaked panicgrass has no known pests or problems.  
  
   Melinda Brakie , East Texas Plant Materials Center