Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PIN OAK 
Quercus palustris  Muenchh. 
Plant Symbol = QUPA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Uses 
Even though the wood is heavy, strong, and hard, pin 
oak is typically used for fuel wood, wood pulp, and 
railroad ties, since it tends to warp.  Due to this 
species’ form, adaptability, growth rate, longevity, 
and fall foliar display, it is popular for ornamental 
usage.  Pin oak is utilized by many game species, 
especially wood ducks, white-tail deer, and wild 
turkey.  Due to its use by these highly sought after 
animals, pin oak is commonly planted for food plots. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Pin oak is a moderately large tree with normal 
heights ranging from 70 to 90 feet with diameters 
between 2 and 3 feet.  Trees reaching 120 feet tall 
with 5-foot diameters are occasionally encountered 
on good sites.  The bark of this tree is smooth, 
reddish to grayish-brown during the juvenile period, 
becoming darker and shallowly fissured as the tree 
growth slows with age.  The lower branches of pin 
oak are prostrate to descending, with smooth, slender, 
reddish-brown twigs.  Clusters of pointed buds are  located at the tips of twigs.  Three to five inch 
alternate leaves have 5 to 7 points or lobes with 
bristled tips and deep C-shaped sinuses.  The leaves 
change in color from a dark green to a deep scarlet 
red in fall.  The leaves are deciduous but will usually 
persist on the tree into winter. 
 
The flowers of pin oak emerge soon after new leaves 
unfold in spring (April to mid-May).  The acorns that 
develop are roundish, short stalked, 3/8 to 1/2 inches 
long, and capped with a th
in and shallow saucer-like 
cup.  The acorns will take 16 to 18 months to develop 
from pollination to maturity.  When mature the acorn 
turns light brown to reddish-brown, and will drop 
from September to November.  In 30 to 35 year old 
stands of pin oak, 4,000 to 20,000 sound acorns per 
acre yields have been documented.  There are 410 
acorns per pound. 
 
Pin oak is often confused with scarlet oak ( Q. 
coccinea)  due to similar appearance.  Scarlet oak is 
an upland species that prefers soils with good 
drainage on dry sites. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991. Southern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Pin oak’s native range spans from Rhode Island, 
Pennsylvania, Michigan, to Kansas south to North 
Carolina and northern Arkansas.  This tree grows 
under a wide range of site conditions, but is a true 
bottomland tree.  It is seldom found growing above 
elevations of 800 feet, or on sloped ground.  Pin oak 
grows in practically pure stands with good growth 
rates on wet, shallow sites with heavy soils that drain 
poorly.  On better quality sites it will often grow 
larger, but is normally out  competed by other species. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Both seed and stump sprouts are sources of natural 
regeneration for pin oak.  Although viable acorns 
sink, this species is often dispersed by water, as well 
as animals, wind, and gravity.  In areas that are 
regularly flooded, acorn damage by insects is reduced 
and germination is typically faster than most other 
species.  Since there is more than adequate annual 
seed yields and adequate moisture on the forest floor 
in spring, it is not uncommon to see seedlings 
blanketing the ground under pin oak.

Under nursery production conditions, mature acorns 
are placed on raised beds in fall or spring, but 
germination will not occur until spring.  Shoot 
elongation begins about the same time as leaf out of 
established trees and continues until fall.  Seedlings 
are distributed by most nurseries as 1 year old 
bareroot stock for field plantings, but balled and 
burlapped saplings are distributed for ornamental 
uses. 
 
Management  
Pin oak typically requires management only during 
the first few years after outplanting to a permanent 
site.  Weed competition and deer browse must be 
managed in many locations.  Site preparation to 
control weeds the year prior to outplanting will pay 
dividends in increased growth rate.  Contact 
herbicides, used according to the label, and/or control 
by tillage are most commonly used.  There are a 
variety of deer control products that may be useful 
such as tubes or mesh sleeves over the seedling.   
Weeds and deer control require repetitive action and 
maintenance to be effective.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Livestock must be kept out of tree and shrub planting 
areas.  Insect and diseases include gypsy moth and 
oak wilt.  Gypsy moth should be controlled when the 
trees are young, but older trees can tolerate infrequent 
defoliation.  Little can be done about oak wilt.  Entire 
stands may be killed by prolonged flooding. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Crownright,’ ‘Sovereign.’  The species is available 
through numerous native plant nurseries.  Nursery 
produced seedlings are currently grown from local or 
regional seed sources.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
John Dickerson (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.