Plant Fact Sheet
BUR OAK 
Quercus macrocarpa  Michx. 
P la nt  S ym bol = QUMA2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program  
 Photo by Joe Scianna, USDA -NRCS , Bridger, Montana  
Uses 
Windbreaks and Shelterbelts :  Bur oak is recommended as 
a medium to tall component in windbreak and shelt erbelt 
systems.  Although modest in growth rate, especially in 
the western U .S ., it is a strong -wooded and long lived 
species.  
 
Riparian Forest Buffers :  Bur oak can be used in riparian 
forest buffer plantings and may be a suitable substitute, 
depending on  site conditions, for green ash ( Fraxinus 
pennsylvanica ) and Russian olive  ( Elaeagnus 
angustifolia ).   
 
Woody Draw Restoration:   Bur oak is a natural 
component of woody draws in the central and western 
Great Plains.  Seedlings grown in containers are preferred 
over bareroot stock and direct sowing.  
 
Timber :  The wood of bur oak is quite valuable and is 
often marketed as  “white oak .”   It is used in the  manufacture of cabinets, barrels, hardwood flooring, and 
fence posts
. 
 
Ornamental :  Bur oak makes an excell ent landscape 
specimen, and is well suited to drought tolerant 
landscapes.  Its strong branches make it a good choice for 
street trees provided it has ample space to accommodate 
its wide spreading basal branches.    
 
Wildlife :  Bur oak is an excellent sourc e of food for many 
wildlife species including deer, turkeys, squirrels, rabbits, 
raccoons, and rodents.  As it reaches maturity it provides 
roosting, loafing, and nesting for numerous species of 
birds.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your S tate 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. , threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
Bur oak or mossycup oak is a medium - to tall -stature 
deciduous tree  widely distributed across the United States .  
B ur oak has several desirable attributes including strong 
branch es, drought tolerance, winter hardiness, and 
freedom from serious insect s or disease s.  
 
On good sites, bur oak has a spreading habit with a broad 
crown; mas sive bole; and low, large branches.  It is 
capable of reaching heights o ver 80 feet an d individual 
trees up to 100 feet  are  found  on good sites.   At the far 
western edge of its range, heights of 50  feet can be 
considered about the upper limits of growth.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution  
Bur oak has a large native range extending from Nova 
Scotia, west to Manitoba, south through Kansas to Texas, 
east to Alabama, and northeast to Virginia and New 
England.  Landscape specimens can be found in many 
western states 
outside of its native range.   Most 
references list bur oak as hardy in   
USDA Winter Hardiness Zones 4 to 8, although Zone 2 is 
given in at least one source.  Bur oak is considered only 
moderately shade tolerant.  
 
Although favor ing rich alluvial bottomland , bur oak 
grow s well on rocky hillsides, limestone soils, droughty 
soils, clayey sites, and other marginal sites  -- given full 
sun conditions.  This species performed better than most 
others tested on coal -mine spoils of pH 5.6 in eastern 
Kansas.  In the w estern United States,  bur oak is 
considered a pioneer species and is capable of invading