Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INTERIOR LIVE OAK
Quercus wislizeni A. DC. 
Plant Symbol = QUWI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Quercus parvula, Quercus shrevei , dwarf interior live 
oak, scrub interior live oak, Highland live oak, Sierra 
live oak 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : Interior live oak provides important food 
and cover for a wide variety of birds and mammals: 
black-tailed jackrabbit, Audubon cottontail, brush 
rabbit, Beechy ground squirrel, Sonoma chipmunk, 
beaver, porcupine, and elk.  It is important for winter 
browse by Columbian black-tailed deer.  Acorns are a 
valuable food source for deer and other wild 
ungulates, birds, and small mammals in the fall. 
 
Ethnobotanic : After leaching away the bitter tannins, 
Native Americans used the acorns of many oaks 
( Quercus  spp.) for cooking oils, soups, stews, or 
breads.  Interior live oak has a high value for fuel 
wood and is also used for landscaping. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Interior live oak is a slow-growing, variable 
evergreen that grows as a large shrub or small tree.  
Plants may reach 30 to 75 fe et in height or assume a 
shrub-like growth form with heights of only 8 to 10 
feet.  Leaves, which persist for 2 years, are mostly 
oblong-to-elliptic or lanceolate, and spiny-toothed to 
entire around the edges.  Bo th leaf surfaces are shiny 
green but the upper surface is  darker.  Interior live 
oak is monoecious (both male and female flowers 
borne on the same plant).   Male flowers are borne in 
catkins 1 to 3 inches in length, and female flowers 
grow in clusters of two to four in the upper leaf axils. 
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Interior live oak is native to California and Mexico.  
It occurs from northern California in Siskiyou and 
Shasta counties, south along  the foothills of the Sierra 
Nevada and inner Coast Ranges, plus the Channel 
islands.  It is adapted to the following zones in 
California: Douglas-fir, Ponderosa pine, lodgepole 
pine, redwood, western hardwoods, and chaparral - 
mountain shrub.   
 
This species is generally found on soils with a pH 
range between 5.6 and 7.5, with depths of 20 to 40 
inches.  Interior live oak grows particularly well on 
dry, shallow, well-draine d loams, clay loams, 
gravelly loams, or gravel.  Interior live oak is tolerant 
of shade, particularly when young.  Interior live oak 
appears to be well-adapted to  persist with or without 
fire.  For more information, consult the US Forest 
Service Fire Effects Information System on the web. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Interior live oak regenerates vegetatively after 
disturbance and also reproduces through seed.  
Cleaned acorns average ap proximately 125 per pound 
(275/kg).  Annual seed production appears to be 
somewhat variable, althou gh each interior live oak 
tree generally produces good seed crops at 5- to 7-
year intervals.  Acorns generally ripen after mid-
August.  Research indicates th at the acorns of interior 
live oak can germinate without exposure to low 
temperatures.  However, exposure to temperatures of

32 to 41° F can effectively stratify seed and enhance 
germination. 
 
Management  
Interior live oak sprouts vigorously after fire or 
mechanical disturbance. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No cultivars currently exist, but ecotypes are 
available, particularly from nurseries specializing in 
native plants within California. 
 
Prepared By:  
J. S. Peterson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator: 
M. Kat Anderson,  USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, c/o Plant Sciences Dept., University of 
California, Davis, California 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.