Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE OAK 
Quercus alba L. 
Plant Symbol = QUAL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
stave oak 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Acorns are eaten by squirrels, blue jays, 
crows, red-headed woodpeckers, deer, turkey, quail, 
mice, chipmunks, du cks and raccoons.  
 
Timber: White oak’s wood is strong and durable for 
staves for barrels, lumber, flooring, and interior 
woodwork. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: White oak is an 
excellent ornamental tree because of its broad round 
crown, dense foliage, and purplish-red to violet-
purple fall color. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Quecus alba  L., white oak, grows from Maine to 
Minnesota southward to Florida and Texas.  It is a 
large, stately tree that grows  up to over 100 feet tall, 
and 38 to 50 inches in diam eter, with a round to wide 
spreading irregular crown.  White oak bark is whitish 
or light gray, varying from scaly to irregularly platy 
or ridged and furrowed.  Leaves are simple and 
alternately arranged on the stems; they are 5-6 inches 
long and have a rounded tip and wedge-shaped base, 
with evenly notched edges; leaves are bright green 
above and whitish underneath.  Male flowers are 
green and 2-4 inches long, while female flowers are 
reddish and they appear as single spikes with the 
leaves.  White oak acorns ar e oval; about a quarter of 
the acorn body is covered with a cap which drops off 
at maturity.  There are approximately 120 seeds per 
pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Although found on many soil types, white oak does 
best on coarse, deep, moist, well-drained, with 
medium fertility, and slightly acid soils.  It is well 
adapted to heavy soils and north and east-facing 
slopes.  Natural stands are  often found in areas with 
loam and clay soil.  White oak is moderately resistant 
to ice breakage, sensitive to flooding, and resistant to 
salt spray and brief salt-water submergence.  It is 
sensitive to fire injury, coal smoke, and fly ash 
deposit on soil surface. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Fall seeding is preferable to spring seeding.  White 
oak acorns have no dormancy and germinate 
immediately following seeding.  Acorns are drilled in 
rows 8 to 10 inches apart, or broadcast and covered 
with ¼ inch of firmed soil.  In the nursery, seedbed 
densities of 10 to 35 per square foot are 
recommended.  Fall sown beds should be mulched to 
protect the seeds and seedlings.  Partial shade is 
beneficial for germination.  Seedlings are 
transplanted after the first year. 
 
Because of its deep root system, white oak is fairly 
tolerant of a range of soil conditions and fairly 
drought tolerant when well established; however, 
because it is taprooted, it is difficult to transplant.

Production in the nursery is difficult as well and 
growth is slow. 
 
Management 
White oak is generally classified as intermediate in 
its tolerance to shade.  It s tolerance decreases as a 
tree becomes older and larger.  Thinning combined 
with fertilization can boost diameter growth.  White 
oak usually becomes dominant because of its ability 
to persist for long periods of time in the understory, 
its ability to respond well after thinning, and its great 
longevity.  Even-aged silviculture is most suitable if 
oaks are growing in pure or mixed hardwood stands.  
Reducing both overstory and understory competition 
is likely to accelerate th e growth of seedlings. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
White oak is attacked by several insects: leaf eaters 
including gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar), 
orangestriped oakworm ( Anisota senatoria), oakleaf 
caterpillar ( Heterocampa manteo ), oak leaf tiers 
( Psilocorsis spp .) and walkingstick ( Diapheromera 
femorata ); Golden oak scale ( Asterolecanium 
variolosum ); gall forming insects like Cynipid wasps; 
and twig pruners, but none of these pose serious 
insect problems.  White oak is also susceptible to 
perennial cankers induced by bark diseases like 
Strumella coryneoides  and Nectria galligena; root rot 
caused by  Armillaria mellea , Armillaria tabescens  
and  Inonotus dryadeus ; irregular brown areas on 
leaves and shoots caused by  Gnomonia veneta; and 
oak blister caused by  Taphrina caerulescens .  The 
species has good resistance to oak wilt. 
 
Existing trees are very sensitive to disturbances in 
their root zones caused by grading, soil compaction, 
or changes in drainage patterns; if severe, these 
disturbances can lead to mortality. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds are commercially available at forest seed 
companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Lincoln Moore , Forest Biologist 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, LA 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060815 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.