Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SWAMP CHESTNUT OAK 
Quercus michauxii  Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = QUMI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
basket oak, cow oak 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Swamp chestnut oak acorns are eaten by 
white-tailed deer, wild hogs, wild turkey, black bear, 
squirrels, and chipmunks.   The acorns are also eaten 
by cows. 
 
Timber : The wood is used in many kinds of 
construction; for agricultural implements, wheels, 
veneer, boards, fence posts, tight cooperage, baskets 
and fuel. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Quecus michauxii  Nutt., swamp chestnut oak, grows 
along the Atlantic Coastal Plain from New Jersey 
south to north Florida, and west to east Texas; its  range extends up the Mississippi River Valley to 
Illinois and Ohio. 
 
It is a medium-size to large tree that grows up to over 
100 feet tall, with a trunk to
 over 6 feet in diameter, 
and a thick, scaly, loose, light-gray bark.  The leaves 
are deciduous, somewhat  oval, and 4 to 9 inches 
long; they are short-pointed at the tip, tapering to 
rounded at the base, with numerous shallow lobes or 
rounded teeth along the edges, dark green, smooth 
above and softly hairy beneath.  Leafstalks are 1 inch 
long.  The acorns are large and usually produced 
singly or in clusters of 2 or 3.  There are 85 acorns 
per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Although the species is widely distributed on the best 
well-drained loamy first-bottom ridges, it is 
principally found on well-drained silty clay, loamy 
terraces, and colluvial (rocky  deposit) sites in the 
bottomlands of large and small streams.  
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989. Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
Although it is not a prolific  sprouter, swamp chestnut 
oak can vegetatively reproduce by sprouts from roots 
and stumps.  Regeneration from seed is greatly 
hindered by animal activity.   Seed germination takes 
place soon following seedfall,  with literally no period 
of dormancy.  A moist, well-drained loam, covered 
with a light litter layer, provides an excellent 
seedbed.  It is site sensitivity with growth greatly 
influenced by soil type and drainage.  Acorns may be 
drilled in rows 8 to 10 inches apart or broadcast and 
covered with ¼ inch of firmed soil.   
 
In a nursery setting, seedbed densities of 10 to 35 
acorns per square foot are recommended.  Fall-sown 
beds should be mulched to protect seeds and 
seedlings.  Partial shade is beneficial for germination.  
Seedlings are transplanted after the first year. 
 
Management  
Swamp chestnut oak is shade intolerant and requires 
openings for establishment.  It normally receives 
heavy competition from vines, annuals, and brush 
that are common to most bottomland hardwood sites.  
When mature, they retard the growth of understory

vegetation because they are allelopathic, that is, they 
exude plant growth inhibitors. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Swamp chestnut oak is affected by wood decaying 
fungi species of Fomes, Polyporus , and Stereum , and 
sporadically by oak leaf blister ( Taphrina 
caerulescens ).  Acorns are attacked by weevils; 
insect defoliators like June beetles, orange striped 
oakworm, fall cankerworm, spring cankerworm, 
forest tent caterpillar, yellownecked caterpillar, 
oakleaf caterpillar, and the redhumped oakworm.  
Borers that attack the species include red oak borer, 
carpenter worms, Columbian  timber beetle, two-lined 
chestnut borer, tilehorned prionus, oak timberworm.  
Other pests are golden oak scale, gouty oak gall, 
horned oak gall, and basswood leafminer. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and seedlings are commercially available from 
forest seed companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln Moore , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.