Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILLOW OAK 
Quercus phellos L. 
Plant Symbol = QUPH  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
Alternate Names 
peach oak 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Willow oak is a good tree species to 
plant along margins of fluctuating-level reservoirs. 
 
Wildlife : Its acorn is relished by game animals and 
birds such as ducks, squirrels, deer, and turkey, blue 
jays and red-headed woodpeckers.  Grackles, flickers, 
mice and flying squirrels utilize the tree itself. 
 
Timber : The wood is used for lumber, crossties, 
construction and pulp. 
 
Recreation and Beautification: Willow oak is widely 
planted as an ornamental and shade tree. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Quecus phellos  L., willow oak grows mainly in 
bottomlands of the Coastal Plain from New Jersey  and southeastern Pennsylvania south to Georgia and 
northern Florida; west to eastern Texas; and north in 
the Mississippi Valley to southeastern Oklahoma, 
Arkansas, southeastern Missouri, southern Illinois, 
southern Kentucky and western Tennessee. 
 
Willow oak is a medium to large-sized tree that 
grows up to over 100 feet tall, with a trunk 3 to 6 feet 
in diameter.  It has thick, smooth, light-reddish bark 
when young; which becomes roughened and divided 
into narrow ridges on ol
der trees.  The leaves are 
simple, alternate, deciduous, elongated and slender, 
with smooth edges; they are light green and shiny 
above, dull and paler below with distinct venation.  
The small, round, brown acorns are usually produced 
singly or in pairs with a shallow, saucer-shaped cap.  
The overlapping scales that  make up the cap are thin, 
hairy, and dark red.  There are about 462 acorns per 
pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995. Northeast Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS Willow oak is well adapted to moist, well-drained, 
acid soils and full sun or light shade.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Natural regeneration is principally through sprouts 
from stumps of small trees and advance reproduction.  
Larger diameter stumps do not sprout readily.  
 
Willow oaks may be established by planting acorns.  
Acorns collected in the fall may be sown 
immediately or kept in cold storage until spring.  The 
seedbed must be kept moist, well-aerated with an 
inch or more of leaf litter.  Seedlings are very 
intolerant of saturated soil except during dormancy.  
Although only moderately tolerant to shade, 
seedlings may persist for years under a forest canopy, 
continually dying back and resprouting. 
 
One to two year old bareroot plants may also be used 
for field plantings. 
 
Management 
Thinning of a stand of trees may be necessary to 
encourage development of larger willow oaks. 
 
Willow oak’s principal enemy is fire.  Seedlings and 
saplings are readily killed by even a light burn; hot 
fires kill larger trees.  Canker infected trees should be

removed immediately both to salvage the log and to 
protect other trees. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Trees wounded by fire are susceptible to butt rot 
fungi.  A common canker is caused by Polyporus 
hispidus .  Common trunk borers considered as 
serious insect pests are the red oak borer 
( Enaphalodes rufulus ), carpenterworm (Prionoxystus 
robiniae ), and living-beech borer ( Goes 
pulverulentus ).  Willow oak is susceptible to acid 
rain. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seeds and seedlings are commercially available at 
forest seed companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Lincoln Moore , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.