Plant Fact Sheet
OILSEED RADISH  
Raphanus sativus L.  
Plant Symbol = RASA2  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Booneville Plant Materials 
Center, Arkansas 
 
Dr. Ray Weil harvesting oilseed radish. Photo provided by Dr. Ray Weil, 
University of Maryland. 
 
Alternat ive Names 
Common Names :  forage radish, fodder radish, tillage 
radish ®, radish ripper, daikon, Japanese radish  
 
Scientific Names:  Raphanus sativus var. oleifer Stokes, 
Raphanus sativus L.  ssp.  Oleiferus,  Raphanus sativus L. 
var.  oleiformis  Pers.   
Uses  
Cover Crop : Oilseed radish is a cover crop planted in 
early fall or after harvest of the primary crop. Planting 
occurs after the harvest of cash crops such as wheat , rye, 
early potatoes, pickling cucumbers, snap beans, or celery. 
It can  also be aerial seeded into standing corn, soybean, or 
cotton prior to harvest. Oilseed radish has a uniquely deep 
taproot, which can reach a depth of six feet. It develops an 
enlarged  upper portion of the taproot, which can reach 12 
to 20 inches in length and 2 inches in diameter. This deep -
rooting growth habit is capable of treating multiple 
resource concerns on cropland such as:  
 
Soil Compaction: The thick taproot penetrates  compacted 
soil layers. The root decomposes in the spring and leaves 
large, deep holes in the soil. These holes enable water, air, 
and cash crop roots to penetrate the soil in the summer 
when the soil is dry and hard. Planting oilseed radish is an 
alternati ve to using machinery to deeply rip or plow the 
soil, and can be used by farmers with no -till systems.  
  Nitrate leaching:
 The deep taproot can scavenge nitrogen 
in the soil left by the previous crop. The roots of oilseed 
radish absorb nitrogen at greater d epths than other crops 
and keep it from leaching into the groundwater. When the 
plant decomposes in the spring, nitrogen is released back 
to the cash crop.   
 
Weed  Management:  Oilseed radish seedlings can emerge 
as soon as 3 days after planting (if conditi ons are 
favorable), and can quickly grow and suppress weeds. 
Biomass decomposes quickly and may leave the seedbed 
ready for planting, without the need to till leftover 
residue.  
Pest Management: Like other plants in the Brassicaceae 
(mustard) family, the ro ots of oilseed radish exude 
chemicals that help suppress soil pests like nematodes . 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxi ous status, and wetland indicator values).  
Weediness  
To prevent oilseed radish from becoming a weed pest, kill 
the crop before plants produce seed. Seeds may remain 
viable in the soil for multiple growing seasons, and can 
germinate when the cash crop is gr owing. This plant may 
become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and 
may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department  regarding its 
status and use. Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description  and Adaptation 
Oilseed radish is a coarse winter annual in the 
Brassicaceae (or Cruciferae) family. Leaves grow in a 
basal rosette to 2 -3 feet tall. Seed stalks elongate from the 
rosette.  Pink, white, or lavender flowers bloom in spring.  
The Brassicaceae family also produces edible crops such 
as broccoli and cabbage. Oilseed radish differs from 
typical radish because it develops a thick, white taproot 
that can grow 1 -2 inches in diameter and up to 1 foot in 
length. Plants give off a foul “rotten egg- like” odor when 
they decompose in the spring.  
 
Oilseed radish grows best in cool, moist growing 
conditions (most often during the fall). Plants are not