Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK-EYED SUSAN
Rudbeckia hirta L. 
Plant Symbol = RUHI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Black-eyed Susan is an important 
component in critical area treatment plantings along 
with grasses, legumes, and other forbs when used 
along road cuts, hillsides, and other areas subject to 
erosion. 
 
Wildlife : This plant offers protection and food to 
several song and game birds. 
 
Recreation and beautification : Black-eyed Susan can 
be used for landscaping and in wildflower gardens. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Rudbeckia hirta L., black-eyed Susan, is a biennial 
forb about 1 m tall with yellow ray flowers and dark 
brown spherical centers.  After germination, the 
seedling grows into a rosette with oblong leaves.  
Sometimes flower stalks will appear in the first 
summer, but typically black-eyed Susan blooms from 
June to September of the second year.  After 
flowering and seed maturation, the plants die.  The  seed is very small (1,746,000 per pound) and black, 
about 2 mm long and 0.5 mm in diameter.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Black-eyed Susan is naturalized
 in most of the states 
east of Kansas and the bordering areas  of Canada.  It 
is adapted throughout the Northeast on soils with a 
drainage classification range from well-drained to 
somewhat poorly drained.   It will perform acceptably 
on droughty soils during years with average or above 
rainfall, but best growth is achieved on sandy, well 
drained sites.  It is winter hardy in  areas where low 
temperatures are between -30 ° and -20 °F. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Black-eyed Susan is easily established with most 
critical area seeding techniques.  Generally ½ lb. of 
seed per acre is sufficient in mixes with conservation 
grasses, legumes, and other forbs.  Where the intent 
is to maximize the impact  of the forb component, 
utilize bunchgrasses rather than aggressively 
spreading grasses such as reed canarygrass or 
bromegrass.  Once established, new seedlings will be 
produced from the preceding crop; the stand may 
perpetuate itself indefinitely. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD
 
Management 
After establishment, competing perennial vegetation 
should be controlled through the use of mechanical or 
chemical practices.  If competing vegetation is not 
controlled, one will observe a decrease in the number 
of black-eyed Susan plants. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no major insect or disease pests of black-
eyed Susan.  Stands can be reduced by powdery 
mildew and damping-off organisms. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Golden Jubilee' black-eyed Susan was released by 
the Big Flats Plant Materials Center in 1985.  It is 
typical of the species except slightly shorter in height 
with a longer bloom period.  It was 
not selected for 
its flower size or color.  'Golden Jubilee' is the only 
cultivar of black-eyed Susan that has proven 
adaptation throughout the  Northeast for conservation

use.  The original collection area of 'Golden Jubilee' 
was near Manchester, Vermont.  Foundation seed is 
distributed to commercial producers by the Big Flats 
PMC in Corning, NY.  Black-eyed Susan is readily 
available from commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.