Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
STAGHORN SUMAC 
Rhus hirta (L.) Sudworth  
Plant Symbol = RHHI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 Britton & Brown 1913 Courtesy of Kentucky Native Plant Society @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Rhus typhina  L. 
 
Uses 
Sumac serves primarily as a winter emergency food 
for wildlife.  Ring-necked pheasant, bobwhite quail, 
wild turkey, and about 300 species of songbirds 
include sumac fruit in their diet.  It is also known to 
be important only in the winter diets of ruffed grouse 
and the sharp-tailed grouse.  Fox squirrels and 
cottontail rabbits eat sumac bark.  White-tail deer like 
the fruit and stems. 
 
Sumac also makes good ornamental plantings and 
hedges because of the brilliant red fall foliage.  It is 
best used on drastically disturbed sites where pioneer 
species are desirable. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Anacardiaceae Family: Stag horn sumac is a U.S. 
native, deciduous, large shrub to small tree that can 
attain a height of 30-35 feet.  It has alternate, 
compound leaves, 16 to 24  inches long.  The leaflets 
are narrowed or rounded at the base and sharply 
pointed at the tip with finely serrated edges.  The 
leaflets are dark green and smooth above, and pale 
beneath, except along the midrib.  Compact clusters 
of greenish-yellow flowers bloom from June to July.  
Fruits mature from August to September.  The 
fruiting head is a compact cluster of round, red, hairy 
fruits called drupes.  Each drupe measures ¼ inch in 
diameter and contains one seed.  Each cluster of 
drupes may contain 100 to 700 seeds.  Fruit is 
produced on plants 3 to 4  years old.  Because most 
populations of sumac have male and female flowers 
on separate plants, only the female plants produce 
seed.  Occasionally, plants  are found which have both 
male and female flowers.  The germination of sumac 
seeds is enhanced by their passage through the 
digestive system of rabbits, ring-necked pheasants, 
and quail.  The presence  of fire also encourages 
increased germination.  There are about 60,000 seeds 
per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Staghorn sumac is found throughout the eastern half 
of the United States.  It generally prefers fertile, 
upland sites but tolerates a wide variety of conditions.  
Sumac is tolerant of slightly acid soil conditions and 
textures ranging from coarse to fine.  Typical 
growing sites include open fields and roadsides, 
fence rows, railroad rights-of-way, and burned areas.

Sumac is not highly shade tolerate and are considered 
early successional species. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
One year old nursery grown seedlings are normally 
used for planting large areas.  Once established, 
stands will spread from the root sprouts.  The lateral 
root system is extensive and spread outward three or 
more feet a year.  This sprouting is encouraged by 
cutting or fire injury.  The colonies appear to lose 
vigor in about 15 years. 
 
Management  
Sumac stands can best be maintained by eliminating 
competing vegetation by mowing, chemicals, or fire.  
Sumacs fail to compete with invading tree species 
and are seldom found growing under a closed 
canopy. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known varieties of thes e plants exist.  Rooted 
plants may be available from specialty nurseries. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.