Plant Fact Sheet
FRAGRANT SUMAC 
Rhus aromatica Ait. var.    
serotina  (Greene) Rehd.  
Plant Symbol = RHARS  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan  Plant  Materials 
C enter   
 
Figure  1. Example of leaves and flowers of fragrant 
sumac. Photo by Jeff  McMillian PLANTS Data base  
website.  
Alternate Names  
Aromatic sumac, lemon sumac , polecat sumac 
Uses:  The fruit is an important winter food for birds, 
including turkeys, ruffed grouse, robins and flickers, and 
for various small mammals. The foliage is relatively 
unpalatable due to the high tannin content of the leaves. 
Fragrant sumac  root was used by Nativ e Americans to 
produce a yellow dye, and the berries in an acidic tasting 
beverage. The Cheyenne  dried leaves of fragrant sumac 
and mixed them with tobacco, red willow dogwood and 
bearberry to make a smoking mixture. The leaves and 
bark were used for tanni ng leather because of the high 
tannin content of these plants. The Native American tribes 
also used the sumac’s astringent power to stop bleeding in 
all forms from wounds to hemorrhage after child birth. It  may also be grown for landscape purposes and for its 
orange to red fall foliage color.
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
De scription  and Adaptation 
 
 
 Figure  2. Fragrant sumac distribution from USDA -
NRCS PLANTS Database.
 
Description:  Fragrant sumac belongs to the 
Anacardiaceae  family. A straggling to upright native 
shrub 6 to 8 feet tall rarely tree like in appearance. This 
shrub occurs singly or in dense thickets that may be 
connected by rhizomes. Root systems are deep and 
extensively branched. Plants are deciduous, woody, 
spr eading, often forming clumps or thickets.  Crown 
diameter often exceeds height and may be more that 30 
feet across. Stems are numerous, woody, spreading, 
highly branched, and brown and pubescent when young, 
but develop a gray bloom with age. Leaves are 1 to  3 
inches long, trifoliate, petiolate, and puber ulant beneath.  
Leaves are alternate and compound with three leaflets 
which are variable in shape, lobing , and margins.  Plants 
of fragrant sumac  are polygamo -dioecious, thus 
functionally dioecious, but having a few perfect flowers 
on an otherwise staminate or pistillate plant. Flowers are 
yellow in small dense inflorescences on short lateral 
shoots, male (staminate) flowers in yellowish catkins, 
female (pistillate) flowers in bright yellow, short panicles 
at th e branches ends.  Fruits are orange red, sticky, berry

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 
 
like drupe containing a single bony seed. Leaves are 
fragrant or at least odorous. 
Adaptation:  Fragrant sumac grows in a range of sites 
including open rocky woodlands, valley bottoms, lower 
rocky slopes , and roadsides. The plants are hardy and can 
grow in sun or partial shade. It flowers in March to May, 
usually before the leaves expand, and produces densely 
hairy , drupe like fruits  in June to August  
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Pro file 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Fruits can be harvested in the summer and early  fall . Fruit 
of  Rhus aromatic  is synchronous and does not support a 
staggered fruit ripening pattern. Fruits are collected by 
hand or by  flailing the stems after leaf  drop in the fall.  
Harvested seed are macerated and flushed with water to 
remove pulp and debris. The remaining materials, 
including the seeds, are dried and fanned to remove loose 
debris. There are approximately 20,000 cleaned seeds per 
pound. Recommended standards of seed for purchase is 
40 percent germination and 95 percent purity. Cleaned 
seed can remain viable under cool, dry storage for up to 
five years.  Seed germination is  restricted by a hard 
impervious seed coat and em bryo dormancy. Erratic seed 
germination is a factor in this shrub not being more 
extensively planted. Both forms of dormancy vary widely 
among seed lots. Seedcoat permeability may be increased 
by a 20 minute to 2 hour sulfuric acid scarification. A wet 
pre chill for 30 to 120 days is required to release embryo 
dormancy.  Embryo dormancy can also be broken in 
fragrant sumac by treatment  with gibberellic acid (GA3) 
at 5 00 to 1000 parts per million ( ppm) concentrations.   
Management  
Seedlings grow moderately well , but young plants are not 
highly competitive with herbaceous plants. Scarified seed 
should be planted in the fall to provide a wet cool 
stratification period; scarified seed planted in the spring 
must have a cold, wet period or be treated with GA3. 
Seed s hould be planted at a ½ inch depth in a dry, course 
textured soil. Seeding rates of 2 to 4 pounds per acre are 
recommended depending on row spacing. It may be 
broadcast on rough surfaces or in pits. If drilled the seed 
should be planted with other slow gro wing shrub species 
that provide some distance from aggressive fast growing 
species . In the bareroot nursery trade seed should be 
planted ½ inch deep. A seeding density of 25 viable  seed 
units  per linear foot of row i s recommended. Beds should 
be mulched to  prevent excessive dry ing. Plants may be 
lifted as  1 -0 or 2- 0 stock, depending on their growth rate. 
Field transplanted seedlings should be at least 8 to 11 
inches tall. Established seedlings are hardy and resilient.    Pests and Potential Problems
 
The speci es is susceptible to vascular wilt caused by 
Fusarium oxysporum.  A sumac feeding psyllid ( Calophya 
triozomiwa ) has been collected on fragrant sumac in many 
locations.  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does n ot 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Fragrant sumac can be f ound in the commercial nursery 
trade. ‘Konza’ is a 1980 re lease from the Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center  in Manhattan, KS. Konza was a 
cooperative release with the Kansas Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Nebraska Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Nebraska Game and Parks Comm ission and the 
Kansas Fish and G ame Commission. The original 
germplasm for the release was collected on a limestone 
breaks site south of Manhattan, KS. After initial 
evaluation and selection at the Manhattan PMC, it was 
field tested in Oklahoma, Nebraska, and Kansas for over 
10 years. Konza pro ved to be superior in growth form, 
disease resistance, adaptability and wildlife cover 
potential over other similar standards of comparison.    
Prepared By Richard  L.  Wynia , USDA –  NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, KS.  
Citation  
Wynia, R. 2011. Plant fact s heet for  fragrant sumac  ( Rhus 
aromatic  var. serotina ). USDA -Natural Resources 
Conserva tion Service, Plant Materials Center. Manhattan, 
KS . 
Published  March 2011  
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your  local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov>  or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>