Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED-FLOWERING CURRANT  
Ribes sanguineum  Pursh 
Plant Symbol = RISA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 Pete Gonzalves 
 
Alternate Names: Also known as Ribes sanguineum  
Pursh forma atrorubens  (Loudon) Rehder, R. 
glutinosum  Benth, Coreosma sanguinea  (Pursh) 
Spach and  Calobotrya sanguinea (Pursh) Spach. 
Common names include redflower currant, blood 
currant, winter currant,  and pink-flowering currant. 
 
Uses:  Red-flowering currant is a drought tolerant 
deciduous shrub that may be useful in restoration 
plantings.  It provides early spring nectar for 
hummingbirds and butterflies, forage for the larvae of 
more than two dozen species of moths and butterflies, 
and nesting sites or cover for songbirds and small 
mammals. Numerous birds including grouse, quail, 
robins, finches, towhees, and woodpeckers, and small 
mammals consume the berries. Red-flowering currant 
provides occasional browse  for game animals and 
modest forage value for sheep and cattle. Abundant 
showy flowers make this plant attractive as a  landscape specimen or informal hedge and more than 
a dozen selections and hybrids are featured in the 
ornamental trade. Berries, although very tart, are 
considered suitable by some for jam, jelly, pie, juice 
or syrup. Native Americans 
ate the berries fresh or 
dried. This species has been investigated for 
medicinal anti bacterial and anti viral properties and 
is used in currant fruit breeding programs to confer 
resistance to anthracnose, powdery mildew and 
currant stem borer. 
 
Status: This plant is critically imperiled within Idaho 
and planting of currants is  restricted in Michigan. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and we tland indicator values).  
 
Description:  Red-flowering currant (family: 
Grossulariaceae) produces  numerous small flowering 
spurs on multiple thornless stems. It grows at a 
moderate rate up to 10 ft. and develops an upright to 
spreading form. Deciduous,  alternate leaves are 1-3 
in. and rounded with 3-5 shallow lobes and deep 
veins lending a wrinkled appearance. They are green 
above and dull green beneath due to fine hairs and 
turn yellow to reddish in mid to late summer. Leaves 
of some plants are pungen t when crushed. Numerous 
2-6 in. long, nodding clusters of  5-25 flowers appear 
in March to June. The flowers are composed of pink 
to deep red (rarely white) tubular fused sepals and 
small protruding red or white flower petals. Blue-
black berries smaller than 0.5 in. have a thin white 
waxy coating, hold about 20 seeds each, and mature 
in early to mid summer. Thin orange or red tinted 
bark turns gray-brown and peels from older stems.  
 
Adaptation:  Red flowering currant is a moderately 
long-lived woody perennial hardy to -4°F. It prefers 
sun or partial shade and well-drained, moderately 
fertile soil of near neutral or slightly acidic pH. Plants 
are commonly found fr om southwest British 
Columbia through western Washington and Oregon 
(mostly west of the Cascade Mountains crest) and the 
California Coast Ranges to Santa Barbara County. 
There are also small relict populations in northern 
Idaho.  Red-flowering currant habitat includes open 
woods, forest gaps, dry rocky slopes and disturbed 
sites from sea level up to 6,000 ft. For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.

Establishment: Red-flowering currant is a pioneer 
species sprouting from seed  or root crowns following 
fire. It is propagated by seed, cuttings or layering. 
Heavy seed crops occur ever y second or third year 
and 100 lbs. of berries will yield about 4 lbs. of seed. 
There are approximately 284,000 seeds per pound. 
Seed is naturally distributed by birds and small 
mammals and may remain viable in soil for several 
years. Fall sowing or cold moist storage 
(stratification) near 32°F for 30-140 days may aid 
germination. Propagation with cuttings has been 
successful with soft wood  in spring, semi-hard wood 
in summer and hard wood collected during the 
dormant season. Rooting ma y improve by including a 
‘heel’ of older wood and using bottom heat, mist, or 
rooting hormone. Red-flowering currant generally 
does not establish well using soil bioengineering 
practices such as live stakes  or fascines but may be 
successful on particularly favorable sites with 
supplemental irrigation or with mulch. 
 
 © University of Washington Press 
 
Management:  Provide supplemental water during 
the first and perhaps second season but allow soil to 
dry 3-4 in. down between irrigations and do not 
provide water after mid to late summer when leaves 
naturally begin to fall. Prune immediately after 
flowering to encourage vigorous growth suitable for 
future flower bearing. 
  Pests and Potential Problems:
 Red-flowering 
currant is fairly resistant  to most insect and disease 
pests of this genus including aphids and currant fruit 
fly ( Euphranta canadensis ). It is susceptible to 
currant borer ( Synanthedon tipuliformis ), oak root 
fungus (Armillaria mellea) and seedlings may be 
susceptible to damping off disease. 
 
Environmental Concerns:  Red-flowering currant 
spreads slowly by seed, root sprouting and layering. 
As an alternate host of white pine blister  rust 
( Cronartium ribicola), red-flowering currant has 
been considered a weed in several timber states and, 
along with other  Ribes sp., was the subject of 
extensive eradication efforts in the past. It is non-
toxic to humans and wildlife. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin):  There are four geographical 
botanical varieties of  Ribes sanguineum. More than a 
dozen named cultivars and hybrids are routinely 
available as container stock from retail nurseries. 
Popular choices include ‘White Icicle’ (early white 
flowers) ‘Pinky Pig’ (pink flowers) and ‘King 
Edward VII’ (compact with deep red flowers).  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinators:  Pete 
Gonzalves  and Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon.     
 
Line Drawing Source Document:  Douglas, GW, 
GB Straley, D Meidinger, and J. Pojar.  1999.   
Illustrated Flora of British Columbia vol.3.  Ministry 
of Environment, Lands and Parks, Victoria, BC. 
 Edited:  10Apr2008 pjg; 080917 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.