Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RUGOSA ROSE 
Rosa rugosa Thunb. 
Plant Symbol = RORU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
and New Jersey State Office 
 
Uses 
Traditionally used for its beautification qualities, 
rugosa rose’s value as an erosion control type plant 
has recently expanded to include sand dune 
stabilization.  Its ability to withstand salt spray makes 
it a good choice to plant on sand dunes and roadsides.  
With its thorny stems, this shrub can be strategically 
established at locations to direct pedestrians between 
the sand dunes.  The ripe fruits (hips) this plant 
produces are high in vitamin C, and can be made into 
teas, jams and jellies.  To a lesser degree, this species 
offers some food and cover to deer, and small birds 
and mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Invasiveness 
This plant is considered noxious in some states.  This 
plant may be invasive in some regions or habitats and 
may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extensio n Service office, or state 
natural resource or agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Invasive information is also  available from the PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
This erect, many branched, introduced, leafy shrub 
will grow to a height of 
four or five feet.  The 
deciduous compoun d leaves are dark green and 
lustrous.  The stout stems are densely covered with 
fine thorns and develop colonies from underground 
stems after a few years.  The two to three inch 
diameter flowers will range from white to purple.  
Single blooms emerge all summer long.  The flowers 
give rise to tomato-like re d hips which range in size 
from ½ inch to 1½ inch in diameter.  Heavy fruiting 
usually begins the second year after establishment.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Rugosa rose is a native of China, but has a wide 
range of adaptability.  Its best performance is on 
sandy, light textured soils, but it will do well on 
medium textured soils.  This rose will not tolerate 
poorly drained sites.  It is well adapted to coastal 
environments. 
William Skaradek 
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center 
Ca
pe May Court House, New Jersey 
 
Rugosa rose is distributed primarily throughout the 
Northeast.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
For successful establishment on roadbanks and sand 
dunes, vegetative establishment techniques are 
required.  One year old bare-root seedlings or rooted 
cuttings are typically adequate for planting most 
sites; but where establishment is critical, container-
grown 1 year old plants are recommended.  All 
potentially competing vegetation should be removed 
or controlled prior to planting, unless it is critical to 
site stability. 
 
For optimum nursery production, standard raised bed 
propagation techniques can be utilized.  After soil 
temperatures reach the 40s in fall, but before 
dropping into the 30s, apply a maximum of 3 grams 
pure live seed (PLS) per square foot area of bed to 
attain adequate production of quality seedlings.  For 
the over-winter period, these beds should be 
mulched.  Time released fertilizers, applied in late 
spring, have yielded the best growth results under 
nursery environments.  Hardwood cuttings harvested 
during the dormant season,  placed in a heated bench, 
work well to start rooted cuttings.

Management 
Periodic removal of older stems can improve the 
appearance of rugosa rose stands. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There is some concern that this rose is becoming 
naturalized at the expense of native species.  Where 
native roses occur in local st ands, rugosa rose should 
be used with discretion. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Many improved horticultural varieties are grown for 
beautification purposes.  Only one cultivar has been 
selected and released specifically for use on sand 
dune stabilization.  That cultivar is ‘Sandy’ (DE, MD, 
MA, NJ) which was released in 1992 by the Cape 
May PMC.  ‘Sandy’ is a polycross of twelve separate 
collections.  Foundation seed and seed orchard stock 
can be obtained by commercial nurseries from the 
Cape May PMC.  This released conservation variety 
and others are available from various commercial 
nurseries for use by the public.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Dickerson  (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York 
 
Chris Miller , Mid Atlantic Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS New Jersey  State Office, Somerset, 
New Jersey  
 Edited: 13May2002 JLK; 060809 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.