Plant Fact Sheet
GOLDEN CURRANT 
Ribes aureum  Pursh                   
var.  villosum  DC 
Plant Symbol = RIAUV  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan  Plant  Materials 
C enter   
 
Figure  1. Example of leaves and fruit on golden 
currant from the PLANTS Database website.  Photo by 
D.E. Herman, USDA- NRCS Plants database.  
Alternate Names  
Buffalo currant, fragrant golden currant, golden flowering 
currant, clove currant, wild currant , clove bush 
Uses  
Golden currant has been widely planted for wildlife 
habitat, ground cover, watershed protection, and in 
conservation plantings. Golden currant is a highly 
preferred spring and midsummer browse for big game 
with only m oderate summer and light fall grazing by big 
game animals. Golden currant is an excellent species for 
stabilization of roadways and other disturbances, 
particularly when transplanted stock is utilized. Both bare 
root and containerized plants will establish  well on 
disturbed sites . Golden currant is also widely used for 
hedges, windbreaks and in conservation and landscape 
plantings. It is usually planted in combination with other 
woody species. This species is also planted in hedges or 
rows to provide berrie s for jam and jelly production. 
Some Native American tribes used currants for making 
p emmican;  a high protein, high energy food made with 
meat, fat and fruit in a dry, edible form.  
Status   The golden currant is a widespread species that is the 
alternate ho
st for the pine blister rust fungus; this has 
caused the species to be a target for eradication in areas 
where  white pine is of economic an d commercial value.   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plan t’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
 
 
 Figure  2. Golden currant distribution from USDA -
NRCS PLANTS Database.
 
Golden currant belongs to the Grossulariaceae or currant 
family.  Golden currant is an unarmed, irregularly shaped, 
multi -stemmed shrub 3 to 10 feet tall that spreads by 
suckering. The reddish bark of young twigs turns gray 
with age. Leaves are simple, alternate, deciduous, and 
petiolate. Leaf blades are ovate with a cuneate to chordate 
base, usually glaborous, and palmately three lobed with 
the lobes being entire, toothed, or lobed. In May , either 
before or as leaves appear,  golden currant produces many 
racemes of ¾ to 1 inch long yellow tubular flowers that 
emit a pleasant clove or spicy odor. The cylindrical 
hypanthium consists of five spreading calyx lobes 
alternating with five shorter erect petals. The perfect 
flowers are initially golden yellow, but tur n reddish with 
age. The edible fruit is a globose, glabrous, many seeded 
berry. Fruit colors vary from yellow, to red orange to 
black. The large fruit, up to ½ inch in diameter, is 
excellent for human and wildlife consumption. The 
minute embryo is embedded  in a large amount of 
endosperm.                                                                
Golden currant is generally not widely abundant, but it 
occurs as scattered plants, patches, and clumps in

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER  
corridors along waterways and fence rows . It normally 
grows on fertile, well drained sites such as moist 
streambanks, washes, ditches, seeps and springs. While 
considered a species of moist sites ,  golden currant is also 
found on well -drained soils that only receive  16 inches of 
precipitation annually. Plants  generally grow in full sun to 
partial shade on soils ranging from slightly acidic to 
slightly basic.  Golden currant is moderately fire tolerant 
and recovers by resprouting or natural seeding.                                                                
F or updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site 
Establishment  
Fruits are hand harvested by stripping them from branches 
or by flailing them into containers as soon as they ripen. 
Few wild  land stands are large enough to produce much 
seed. Collection of 100 pounds of fruit will only yield 
about 4 pounds of usable seed. Thus, seed collection costs 
are high and limit the use of this shrub in large scale 
plantings. Fruits are processed by maceration in wat er to 
separate the fruit pulp from the seed. Pulp and empty 
seeds are separated from sound seeds by floatation. There 
are 200,000 to 285,000 seeds per pound. Seed viability is 
normally quite high, usually in excess of 75 percent. Seed 
germination can be ha stened and increased by a long 
period of cold, moist stratification. A wet prechill of 60 to 
90 days at 28 to 36 degrees Fahrenheit (° F) is often 
sufficient to reduce embryo dormancy . Seeds retain good 
viability for 5 to 17 years if stored cool and dry in sealed 
containers.    
Management  
Seeds should be fall planted to provide a cold, moist 
period for maximum germination. Seeds are small, round, 
and easily dispersed by most seeders. Golden currant can 
be seeded alone or more commonly in mixtures with other 
w oody shrub and forb species. Seeds are usually sown at 
a rate of 0.25 to 2.0 pounds per acre depending on 
mixture components, method of seeding and row spacing.   
In a nursery setting, seeds are usually sown at a rate of 60 
to 80 seeds per square foot or 40  viable seed units per 
linear foot of row . Seed should be planted 0.25 inches 
deep on a firm, weed free seed bed. Adding mulch to the 
soils surface is recommended for nursery beds subject to 
rapid drying and crusting of the soil surface. Seeds that 
germina te often due so uniformly and initial emergence is 
usually very good even under range or wild land 
conditions.   Compared with most shrubs, seedlings of 
golden currant are very persistent. Seedlings grow rapidly 
and generally attain heights of 6 to 12 inche s the first year 
of growth. Seedlings of few other shrubs are as vigorous 
as this species.   
Bareroot or containerized transplants can be quickly 
grown. Planting beds are normally thinned to the correct 
spacing and density. One year old transplants develop a  dense, well branched root system, and field survival of   
1
-0 transplants is usually high. Transplants establish well 
on harsh disturbed sites due, in part to their well 
developed root system. Container stock is grown from 
seed or hardwood or softwood cu ttings.  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Currants are subject to defoliation by western tent 
caterpillars and they are the alternate host for white pine 
blister rust  (Cronartium ribicola) . A bacterial spot 
( Pseudamonas  syringae pathovar ribicola ) can cause 
se vere defoliation of golden currant  and necrotic spots to 
form  on leaves, shoots and fruit . 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always  read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other product s may be equally effective.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
These plants are readily available from commercial 
sources.  The cultivar ‘Crandall’ was discovered by R.W. 
Crandall of Newton, Kansas and introduced into 
commercial production by Frank Ford and Sons, Nursery, 
Ravenna, Ohio, in 1888. Fruit of this clone is mild, sweet, 
pleasant, and very different from European black currants. 
It performs well in hot summers, is resistant to white pine 
blister rust, and shows little or no damage from powdery 
mildew in Idaho and Oregon trials.  
Prepared By : Richard L. Wynia , USDA-NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center  
Citation  
Wynia,  R. 2011. Plant fact s heet for  Golden Currant  
( Ribes aureum ). USDA -Natural Reso urces Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Manhattan,  KS . 
Published : March, 2011  
Edited:   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRC S field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>