Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLACK LOCUST 
Robinia pseudoacacia L.  
Plant Symbol = ROPS 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
Alternate Names 
False acacia, yellow locust 
 
Uses 
Since the wood of black locust is strong, hard, and 
extremely durable, it is extensively utilized for 
fencing, mine timbers, and landscaping ties.  This 
tree also serves as a good  erosion control plant on 
critical and highly disturbed areas, due to its ease of 
establishment, rapid early growth and spread, and soil 
building abilities.  It has limited value in wildlife 
food plots, but provides excellent cover when planted 
in spoil areas.  Due to its showy aromatic flower, it 
has often been planted as an ornamental, but this 
practice should be discouraged due to the potential 
for spread by root suckers.  This species has been 
planted outside its natural range, and can crowd out 
other plants, particularly in sandy soils. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant is considered noxious and/or invasive in 
some states.  This plan t may become weedy or  invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed. Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Servi
ce office, or state natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Black locust has a shallow, aggressive root system.  
The bark of black locust is deeply furrowed and is 
dark reddish-brown to black in color.  It has an 
alternate branching pattern, which creates a zigzag 
effect.  A pair of sharp thorns grows at each node.  
They are ½ to ¾ inches  long, and very stout. 
 
The pinnately compound leav es are 8 to 14 inches 
long, with 7 to 19 short stalked leaflets.  These dull 
green leaflets are ovoid or oval, 1 to 2 inches long, 
thin, scabrous above and pale below. 
© William S. Justice 
Department of Botany, Smithsonian Institution 
  
The separate male and female plants have sweetly 
fragrant flowers that are creamy white with five 
petals (bean-like) arranged in a pyramidal spike.  
They usually bloom in May or June.  Heavy seed 
production can be expected annually or biannually.  
The legume type seed is produced in a flat, brown to 
black pod, which is 2 to 4 inches long.  There is an 
average of 25,500 seeds per pound.  Although black 
locust is a good seed producer, its primary means of 
spread is by both rudimentary and adventitious root 
suckers. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Black locust’s native range follows the Appalachian 
Mountains from Pennsylvania to Alabama, and a 
secondary population exists primarily in the Ozark 
Mountains.  Black locust is adapted to a wide variety 
of soil types, but grows best on sites that are deep, 
well drained, and derived from limestone.  This tree 
tolerates a pH range of 4.6 to 8.2.  It is commonly 
found on south and west slopes in West Virginia. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Due to the ease of vegetative reproduction, black 
locust is seldom grown from seed.  If seedling 
production is desirable, the hard seed coat must first

be reduced or broken to allow germination; this can 
be done with sulfuric acid or hot water.  Once treated, 
the seed can be sown on raised nursery beds or 
directly on to field sites.  Black locust seed combined 
in grass and legume mixtures can be broadcast, 
drilled, hydroseeded, or aircraft dispersed.  Limit 
locust to 3 pounds per acre in such mixtures. 
 
Black locust is easily propagated from softwood, 
hardwood, and root cuttings.  Preparing 6 to 12 inch 
hardwood cuttings, collected while dormant is often 
the most effective procedure.  This form of cutting 
responds well to root-inducing chemicals.  Grafting is 
also a viable propagation option to maintain varietal 
integrity. 
 
Management  
During establishment, protection from weeds and 
deer are the main management priorities.  Due to the 
rapid early growth, two years of protection are 
usually sufficient.   Pre-plant site preparation to 
control weeds with tillage or herbicides is 
recommended, with contin ued weed control after 
planting.   Where exceptional deer pressure exists, 
tubes or mesh sleeves may be required.  Once 
established this species will not require active 
management unless straight trunks are desired for 
fence posts- see Pests  for information about 
controlling locust borers. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are 2 primary insect s inflicting damage on 
black locust: locust leaf mine r and black locust borer.  
The leaf miner attacks the tr ee in spring, turning the 
leaves brown by mid-summer  or early fall.  Overall 
tree growth is impacted, but  not seriously.  The larvae  
of the locust borer carve tunnels through the trunk of 
the tree, weakening it enough for wind breakage.  
Planting on good quality sites or in conjunction with 
other hardwood species and shading trunks will 
discourage infestation by locust borers.  Heart rot is 
the only noteworthy disease effecting black locust. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Ornamental varieties have been developed which are 
available from commercial nurseries.  The Steiner 
group black locust was selected and released by the 
NRCS Plant Materials Program, for critical area re-
vegetation in the Appalachian region.  The three 
cultivars in the Steiner group, 'Appala chia' (VA), 
'Allegheny' (WV), and 'Algonquin' (WV) are clonally 
propagated. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson  (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York  
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.