Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BLOWOUT GRASS 
Redfieldia flexuosa (Thurb.) 
Vasey  
Plant Symbol = REFL  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Uses 
The primary use of blowout grass is to protect sandy 
areas from wind erosion. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Blowout grass is a native, 
warm-season, rhizomatous perennial grass.  The 
average height ranges from  2 to 2-1/2 feet.  The leaf 
blade is smooth, rolls inward, and tapers to a fine 
point.  The seedhead has an open panicle one-third to 
one-half as long as the seed stalk. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Management 
This grass is managed primarily as a wind-erosion 
control plant.  It may be grazed lightly by cattle and 
horses during the dormant season. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in spring when the average daily 
temperature is 60' to 65' F.  Most leaves are basal.  It 
reproduces from long, slender rhizomes grow in the 
upper few inches of soil.  It is found growing in 
colonies on deep sandy to  very sandy soils that are 
subject to blowing, plus on sand deposits several 
inches deep. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.