Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WINGED SUMAC 
Rhus copallinum L. 
Plant Symbol = RHCO  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 Britton & Brown 1913 Courtesy of Kentucky Native Plant Society @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
flameleaf sumac, dwarf sumac 
 
Uses 
Sumac serves primarily as a winter emergency food 
for wildlife.  Ring-necked pheasant, bobwhite quail, 
wild turkey, and about 300 species of songbirds 
include sumac fruit in their diet.  It is also known to 
be important only in the winter diets of ruffed grouse 
and the sharp-tailed grouse.  Fox squirrels and 
cottontail rabbits eat the sumac bark.  White-tail deer 
like the fruit and stems. 
 
Sumac also makes good ornamental plantings and 
hedges because of the brilliant red fall foliage.  It is 
best used on drastically disturbed sites where pioneer 
species are desirable. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Winged sumac is a native, deciduous, large shrub that 
rarely exceeds 10 feet.   It has alternate, compound 
leaves, 16-24 inches long, w ith a winged leafstalk.  
The leaflets are narrowed or rounded at the base and 
sharply pointed at the tip with finely serrated 
margins.  The leaflets are dark green and smooth 
above, and pale beneath,  except along the midrib.  
Compact clusters of greenish-yellow flowers bloom 
from July to September.  Fruits mature later in the 
fall. The fruiting head is a compact cluster of round, 
red, hairy fruits called drupes.  Each drupe measures 
¼ inch in diameter and co ntains one seed.  Each 
cluster of drupes may contain 100 to 700 seeds.  Fruit 
is produced on plants 3 to 4 years old.  Because most 
populations of sumac have male and female flowers 
on separate plants, only the female plants produce 
seed.  Occasionally, plants  are found which have both 
male and female flowers.  The germination of sumac 
seeds is enhanced by their passage through the 
digestive system of rabbits, ring-necked pheasants, 
and quail.  The presence  of fire also encourages 
increased germination.  There are about 60,000 seeds 
per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Winged sumac is found throughout the eastern 
United States.  While sumacs generally prefer fertile, 
upland sites they also tolerate a wide variety of 
conditions.  All are tolerant of slightly acid soil 
conditions and textures ranging from coarse to fine.  
Typical growing sites include open fields and 
roadsides, fence rows, railroad rights-of-way, and 
burned areas.  Sumacs are  not highly shade tolerate 
and are considered early successional species. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Establishment 
One year old nursery grown seedlings are normally 
used for planting large areas.  Once established, 
stands will spread from the root sprouts.  The lateral 
root system is extensive and spread outward three or

more feet a year.  This sprouting is encouraged by 
cutting or fire injury.  The colonies appear to lose 
vigor in about 15 years. 
 
Management  
Sumac stands can best be maintained by eliminating 
competing vegetation by mowing, chemicals, or fire.  
Sumacs fail to compete with invading tree species 
and are seldom found growing under a closed 
canopy. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known cultivar of this species is known to exist.  
Rooted plants may be available from specialty 
nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.