Plant Fact Sheet

PRAIRIE 

CONEFLOWER

Ratibida columnifera  (Nutt.) 

Woot. & Standl.

Plant Symbol = RACO3 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bridger Plant 
Materials Center 
Susan R. Winslow USDA NRCS Bridger PMC 
Alternate Names  
Upright prairie coneflower, yellow coneflower, long 
headed coneflower, columnar prairie coneflower, 
Mexican hat 
Uses 
Grazing: Prairie coneflower is palatable and 
nutritious to all classes of domestic livestock when 
utilized in early stage of plant growth and 
development. It is considered a desirable spring 
browse plant for big game animals, and the seed of 
prairie coneflower is preferred by several species of 
upland birds and small mammals.   
Restoration: Prairie coneflower is a medium to tall­
statured forb that may fill a structural cover and 
nesting niche for multiple species of upland birds in a 
variety of plant community types.  A more diverse 
native plant community will be attained when this 
species is included in native seed mixes for the 
rehabilitation of such disturbed sites as rangelands, 
minelands, roadsides, park and restoration areas, 
prairie restoration projects, and conservation 
plantings in accordance with government farm bill 
program requirements.   
Landscape: Prairie coneflower is commonly 
recommended as an ornamental wildflower in 
pollinator friendly, low maintenance, or natural 
landscapes. 
Ethnobotanic: Native peoples utilized a decoction of 
leaves and stems to treat pain, poison ivy rash, and 
rattlesnake bites.  An infusion was made from plant 
tops to treat headache, stomachache, cough, fever, 
epileptic fits, and to induce vomiting. A medicinal or 
beverage-type tea was made from the ripened flower 
heads and leaves.  An orange-yellow dye was 
produced from boiled flowers. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description and Adaptation 
Prairie coneflower is a native, late-season, 
herbaceous perennial in the Aster Family.  It usually 
has a taproot and grows upright from a woody base to 
a height of 12 to 24 inches (30 to 60 cm).  The 
numerous, pinnate leaves are deeply cut into linear or 
lance-shaped segments along alternately branched 
stems.  Showy yellow ray flowers droop and 
surround the columnar-shaped, brown, central disk.  
Occasionally, the ray flowers are reddish-brown in 
color.  The flowers tend to bloom from late June until 
August, with seed ripening completed in early 
August to September.  The mature seedhead has a 
pleasant odor when crushed that is similar to anise or 
licorice.  The fruit is a 1-seeded, gray-black achene. 
Prairie coneflower is a native, drought-tolerant 
wildflower of the Great Plains that is commonly 
found from south central Canada to northern Mexico, 
and west from Manitoba and Minnesota to 
southeastern Idaho. It prefers to grow in the dry, 
open spaces of prairie grasslands and mountain 
foothills and is found along roadsides, in waste and 
disturbed areas, and along railroad rights-of-way.  
Prairie coneflower does well on a variety of soil 
types, including loams and rocky to gravelly-sandy 
textures.  It tolerates a pH range from slightly acidic 
to moderately alkaline and weak saline soils, in areas 
receiving 10 to 30 inches (254 to 762 mm) of annual 
precipitation. Prairie coneflower attains optimum 
growth in full sun and low to moderate levels of 
competition within a native plant community.  This 
plant is a common component of such ecological 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

sites as shallow, silty, shallow to gravel, and silty 
steep.  Associated species include western 
wheatgrass, bluebunch wheatgrass, prairie Junegrass, 
Sandberg bluegrass, common gaillardia, white and 
purple prairie clover, big sagebrush, and western 
yarrow. 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
Establishment 
Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-free 
seedbed, preferably with a drill that will ensure 
uniform seed placement depth of ¼ to ½ inch (6 to 12 
mm). The processed seed of prairie coneflower has 
approximately 600,000 seeds/lb (1,320,000 
seeds/kg).  The full seeding rate is 2 lb/acre (2.2 
kg/ha) pure-live-seed (PLS), but it would seldom be 
seeded in a pure stand.  It is recommended that 
prairie coneflower be included as a component of a 
native seed mixture at a rate of ¼ to ½ lb/acre (0.3 to 
0.6 kg/ha). When used in a mix adjust the seeding 
rate to the desired percentage of mix.  Spring seeding 
is preferred over a dormant, fall planting date.  
Periodic mowing during the establishment year is one 
option for weed suppression. 
Seed Production 
Seed production fields should be established in rows 
at 25 PLS per linear foot of row (82 per linear meter 
of row). Between-row spacing is dependent on the 
type of planting and cultivation equipment, and 
ranges from 24 to 36 inches (60 to 90 cm).  Adequate 
between-row space should be provided to perform 
mechanical cultivation.  At 24-inch row spacing, the 
recommended seeding rate is 1 PLS lb/acre (1.1 
kg/ha), and at 30- and 36-inch row spacing, the 
seeding rate is 0.7 and 0.6 PLS lb/acre (0.8 and 0.7 
kg/ha), respectively.  There are presently no 
herbicides specifically labeled to control weeds in 
seed production fields.  Seed harvest of prairies 
coneflower is effective by several methods such as 
swathing and combining or direct-combining. 
Direct-combining should take place when the seed 
has just begun to shatter from the very top of the 
ripened conehead.  Processing of the seed works well 
over a 2- to 3-screen fanning mill with final cleaning 
over an indent cylinder or gravity table.  Seed 
production of 300 to 500 lb/acre (336 to 560 kg/ha) 
can be expected under irrigated conditions.  Seed 
production stands may remain productive for only 3 
years (2 seed crops).  Seed viability is very high and 
longevity can be expected for 5 to 8 years when 
stored at moderate temperatures and low humidity.   
Management 
Growth of prairie coneflower begins in mid spring 
and flowers begin to appear in early summer. 
Excessive competition from other species may 
require removal to promote prairie coneflower 
establishment and longevity.  Livestock grazing and 
wildlife browsing should be limited to avoid over-
utilization during the active growing season. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no major insect or disease pests of prairie 
coneflower.  Stands can be reduced by powdery 
mildew and root and crown rot organisms. 
Environmental Concerns 
Prairie coneflower will establish relatively quickly 
via seed distribution. It is not considered weedy, but 
often finds its way into adjacent vegetative 
communities.  Prairie coneflower coexists with other 
species and adds biodiversity to a variety of native 
plant communities. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Stillwater Germplasm was released in 2004 from the 
Bridger Plant Materials Center.  It is a selected class 
release of prairie coneflower that is a composite of 
five accessions collected from native stands in 
Montana.  The five accessions were selected because 
of their consistent taller stature, uniformity in seed 
maturity dates, and superior seed production. 
G1 seed (analogous to foundation seed) is produced at 
the Bridger PMC and made available to commercial 
growers through the Montana Foundation Seed 
Program at Montana State University-Bozeman and 
the University of Wyoming Foundation Seed Service 
at Powell, Wyoming.  One generation (G2 equivalent 
to certified) beyond G1 is recognized.  
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA NRCS Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana 
Edited: 24jan06 jsp; 060816 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.