Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
YELLOW 
CONEFLOWER  
Ratibida pinnata (Vent.) 
Barnh.  
Plant Symbol = RAPI 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Material Center 
  
Alternate Names 
gray-head prairie coneflower, drooping coneflower, 
pinnate prairie coneflower  
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic :  American Indians used the flower 
cones and leaves to make a tea, and the root was used 
as a cure for toothache (Runkel and Roosa 1989). 
 
Landscaping and Wildlife :  Yellow coneflower 
produces an attractive and distinct flower that is 
easily grown in gardens.  The flowers attract  butterflies throughout the summer, and its seeds are 
sought by birds in the late fall. 
 
Forage
:  When young, it provides good grazing for 
livestock (Runkal and Roosa 1989).  However, the 
stems become woody with age, and less palatable.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Division of Natural Areas and Preserves                Ohio Department of Natural Resources
 
Description and Adaptation 
Yellow coneflower is a member of the daisy family, 
Asteraceae, and is a summer perennial.  It grows up 
right and may be a meter or more in height.  The 
slender, grooved stems have fine, upward pointing 
hairs, and may branch with a flower on top of each 
stem.  The flowers may have between 5 to 10 petals 
that droop down toward the stem with a distinct 
“cone” in the center. 
 
Distribution:  This species is widely distributed across 
the United States.  It can be found up and down the 
east coast from Vermont to Florida and westward to 
Kansas, Oklahoma, and Nebraska.  It is most 
commonly associated with th e prairie regions of the 
central United States, and is often seen along 
roadsides.   
 
Establishment 
Stands of this species can be readily established from 
seed.  Plantings can be made  in either the spring or 
fall.  Spring plantings may require the seed to be 
stored slightly above freezing  for at least 30 days to 
ensure good germination.  The seed requires a clean, 
firm seed bed, and may be drilled or broadcast.  
Stands have been established using 12-24 inch row 
spacing at a seeding rate of 20-40 seeds per foot, and 
by broadcasting 5 pounds of seed per acre. Four 
ounces per acre is recommended when mixed with 
other species.       
 
Management 
Yellow coneflower is not inhibited by competition, 
and does well when used in conjunction with other 
species.  It has an open structure and should be 
planted in relatively dense stands to inhibit weed 
growth if a monoculture is desired.

Pests and Potential Problems 
Birds will feed heavily on the seed heads of this 
flower in the fall of the year.  This is advantageous 
for the wildlife watcher, but maybe a potential 
problem for those growing this species for seed 
production.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Sunglow ’ – (Kansas) Sunglow was released in 1978, 
and has shown to have excellent vigor. This cultivar 
is especially adapted to the central United States.  Its 
range includes portions of South Dakota, Minnesota, 
Nebraska, Iowa, Missouri, Illinois, Kansas, 
Oklahoma, and Arkansas. This plant material is 
readily available from commercial sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
R. Alan Shadow  
USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Material Center , 
Manhattan, Kansas   
 Edited: 20July2005 rln; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.