Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MARYLAND 
MEADOWBEAUTY  
Rhexia mariana L. 
Plant Symbol = RHMA  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated, 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Several states consider th is species threatened or 
endangered.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current stat us (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description 
Melastomataceae Family: An upright (up to 2.5 feet), 
hairy perennial that frequently spreads to form large 
colonies.  It is native to the U.S.  The opposite leaves 
are elongated, three-nerved,  with toothed margins.  
The pink to lavender or occasionally white flowers 
are produced from May to October in small clusters 
near the top of the plant.  Ea ch flower is 1-2 inches in 
diameter and contains 4 petals; the yellow to orange 
anthers in the center are elongated and curved  downwards.  The tiny tan to brownish seeds are held 
in a reddish urn-shaped capsule. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Meadow beauty grows best in a sunny exposure.  It is 
adapted to heavy textured and to highly organic soils.  
Natural stands are usually found on moist to wet sites 
such as in ditches, marshes, and wet meadows. 
 
Maryland meadow beauty is distributed primarily 
throughout the East and lower Midwest.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
A clean, firm seedbed is essential.  The site should be 
treated with a herbicide to control vegetation, tilled, 
culti-packed once or twice, and allowed to settle 
thoroughly before sowing. 
 
Broadcast 0.5-1 gram seed per 100 square feet (0.5-1 
lb/acre).  The seed can be mixed with sand or rice 
hulls to increase volume so that it will be easier to 
spread uniformly over the planting site.  The seed 
must remain on the soil surface because it is easily 
smothered when buried in the soil.  Heavy rains after 
planting may cause the seed to be buried or washed 
from the site. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Management  
Apply fertilizer according to soil test 
recommendations.  If not available, a rate of 3.5-5.5 
oz per 100 square feet (100-150 lb/acre) of 13-13-13 
should be applied after the seedlings are established 
and annually thereafter.  If  necessary, stands can be 
mowed in the spring before stem elongation begins.  
Later mowings should be delayed until the plants 
have set seed. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political

beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.