Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BRISTLY LOCUST 
Robinia hispida L. var. fertilis 
(Ashe) Clausen  
Plant Symbol = ROHIF8  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Robinia fertilis Ashe, Robinia grandiflora  Ashe, 
Robina pedunculata  Ashe  
 
Uses 
Bristly locust is perhaps the best erosion control 
shrub for steep sloping sites with active erosion.  It 
provides quick, woody, vegetative cover on droughty, 
critical areas needing stabilizing cover.  It is useful 
for vegetating acid soils with a pH of 3.5 to 4.0, as 
well as alkaline soils of a pH 8.0.  Bristly locust is 
especially adapted to stabilizing soils with active rill 
and gully erosion.  Rill erosion that exposes the roots 
stimulates root suckering there by creating a denser 
growth.  Bristly locust is primarily used for surface 
mine spoil reclamation, industrial waste piles, 
roadbanks, cuts and fills, etc.  In comparison with 
most other shrubs it will excel in seedling vigor.  It 
has the ability to fix nitrogen in the soil, and with 
light shade it does not inhibit growth of annual and 
perennial herbs.  Its value for wildlife food is 
minimal, but is a very attractive shrub when in 
bloom.  It should not be used for residential 
plantings, or anywhere that formal landscaping is 
desired. 
 
Bristly locust is used by the Maine Department of 
Transportation as living fence along major highways.  
The stems trap snow, improving public safety.  
Bristly locust winterkills above the snow line in 
USDA Hardiness Zones 4 and 3, which keeps the 
growth in check. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bristly locust is an open branched, straggly, woody 
legume of vigorous growth.  It attains a height of 8 to 
12 feet in a few years, but normally when planted on 
critical sites it will grow no taller than 6 to 7 feet.  It 
spreads rapidly on some sites by root suckers, 
particularly those soils light in texture.  Where 
herbaceous plants are dense, spreading is severely 
restricted.  Spreading by seed is secondary to root 
suckers.  There are 23,000 seeds per pound. 
Charles B. Ford 
Upper Darby, PA 
 
Numerous small leaflets comprise the compound leaf 
that occurs alternately on the bristle covered 
branches.  The sweet pea-like rose colored flowers 
bloom in May and June.  Flowering usually begins 
the second year.  Seed is produced in the bristle 
covered pods that are 2 to 5 inches in length.  Seeds 
are about 3/16 inch in size, dark brown, and very 
hard. 
 
Root suckers may appear the first year, and the 
thicket forming growth habit will begin by the second 
year.  Leaf litter accumulates early, and is held in 
place by the many small stems that develop from the 
roots. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bristly locust will grow throughout the Northeast.  In 
the northern sections of Maine, New Hampshire, 
Vermont, and New York it may winterkill above the 
snow.  Bristly locust grows best on silt loams and 
loamy soils with good drainage; however, it will 
tolerate soils that are moderately well drained.  It will 
grow on acid soils as low as pH 3.5 but it thrives at a 
pH of 6.0 to 7.0.

For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Follow standard tree planting techniques.  Planting 
stock should be 1 year old seedlings.  Prepare holes 
large enough to take care of entire root system.  
Fertilizer is not required.  Bristly locust responds to 
fertilizers high in phosphorous, such as Mag-Amp, 
particularly on acid sites. 
 
Management  
On steep eroded sites, plant 3 to 4 feet apart in the 
row, and space rows 4 to 6 feet apart.  Spacing of 6 
by 6 feet is satisfactory  where quick cover is not 
essential. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Arnot' (NY) bristly locust  was selected by the USDA 
NRCS Big Flats Plant Materials Center in New York.  
This variety is available  as seedlings from both state 
and private nurseries.   Seed is available from 
collectors in West Virginia, Pennsylvania, and New 
York. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060816 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.