Plant Fact Sheet
PACIFIC ASTER 
Symphyotrichum chilens e (Nees) 
G.L. Nesom  
Plant Symbol = SYCH4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter , Oregon  
 
Photo by Annie Young-Mathews, NRCS, 2010 
Alternate Names  
Previous ly known as  Aster chilensis Nees , the currently 
accepted name is Symphyotrichum chilense .  Other 
common names include coast aster, Pacific American -
aster, and common California aster.   When it was named 
it was mistakenly thought to occur in Chile, but in fact is 
limited to North America.   There are currently three 
recognized  varieties of Pacific aster: S. chilense  var. 
chilense , var. invenustum , and var. medium .  
Uses  
Pacific aster can  be used in wildlife or pollinator 
enhancement plantings, native prairie restoration,  
meadow gardens,  and erosion control or critical area 
plantings.  Its deep, extensive, fibrous root system can 
help stabilize slopes .  
Native a ster species  ( including  Symphyotrichum  spp.)  are 
good late -season pollinator plants , providing a critical  
pollen  source  for  bees active in the late fall, including 
new  bumble bee  queen s building up their energy reserves 
before winter dormancy.   They also serve as nectar 
sources and  h ost plant s for c heckers pot and c rescent 
butterflies.   Status
 
Pacific aster is  considered a facultative plant within its 
native range, meaning it is e qually likely to occur in 
wetlands or non- wetlands.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Pacific aster  is a common ,  native, rhizomatous, 
herbaceous perennial th at grows 1 to 4 ft tall.  Plants can 
be clumped or spreading, with one to many ascending or 
erect stems  that are hairy towards the tips .  Basal leaves 
are usually hairless , stalked , thin  ( generally 1  to  8 inches 
long by 0.2  to  1.5 inches wide ), and wither by the time the 
plant flowers .   Leaves along the stems are arranged 
alternately,  stalkless, and are 1 to 3.5 inches long by 0.2 
to 1.2 inches wide.   Flower heads are arranged in open, 
flat -top or round- top, branched clusters  (cymes) , with 
violet to pink or  white  ray flowers (petal -like outer part of 
the aster flower) and yellow disk flowers (centers).   
Bloom time varies by latitude and elevation, but can 
extend from June to October.     
 Pacific aster  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
Pacific aster grows in a variety of habitats including 
g rasslands , meadows , salt marshes, coastal dunes and 
bluffs, coastal scrub, and  open or disturbed  areas.  It is 
adapted to fine - to medium -textured soils, full sun to 
partial shade, is relatively drought toler ant, and has a  high 
salinity  tolerance.   Pacific aster  is  distributed in  coastal 
regions  from southwest British Columbia to  S outhern 
California at elevations below 1600 ft.  For  updated