Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CREEPING 
BLUESTEM  
Schizachyrium scoparium  
(Michx.) Nash var. 
stoloniferum  (Nash) J. Wipff  
Plant Symbol = SCSCS3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
creeping bluestem, Andropogon stolonifer  
 
Uses  
Livestock readily grazes creeping bluestem 
throughout the year.  It retains its nutritive value and 
stays green during the winter. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Creeping bluestem is a 
native, warm-season, rhizomatous perennial grass.  
The height is between 2 and  6 feet.  The leaf blade is 
1/4 to 3/8 inch wide; often 2 feet long with v-shaped  
or flat; abruptly tapered at  tip.  The leaf sheath is 
strongly flattened; often light purplish at base; upper 
parts of sheath, collar, and lower part of blade very 
hairy.  The stem is solitary or few.  The seedhead is 
several racemes, each 1 to 1-1/2 inches long, droop 
slightly at maturity; seedheads are commonly 1 to 2 
feet long. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Where double chopping with heavy rolling cutters 
has controlled saw palmetto ( Serenoa repens), 
creeping bluestem is one of the first plants to become 
re-established if grazing is deferred 6 to 8 months 
following the treatment.  Plants are weakened if more 
than 50  to 60 percent of the current year's growth by 
weight is removed by grazing. 
 
Establishment 
Rhizomes grow actively in December and January, 
12 to 14 inches in a single season.  New leaf growth 
starts in January and February.  Leaves stay green as 
long as 17 months.  Basal leaves are usually only 4 
inches long in 4 to  5 weeks.  Creeping bluestem 
forms dense colonies and grows best in open areas, 
but tolerates 25 - to 30-percent shade.  Pure stands 
yield about  2 tons of air-dry forage per acre.  Seed 
production is uncertain and erratic.  It grows on a 
wide variety of soils in the sandhills and flatwoods. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.