Plant Fact Sheet
ALKALI SACATON 
Sporobolus airoides   
(To rr.) To rr. 
Plant Symbol = SPAI  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Photo courtesy of  Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names   
bunchgrass, finetop salt grass   
   
Uses   
Livestock:  Alkali sacaton is good forage for horses and 
cattle in the far western United States in arid or semiarid 
regions.    
   
Wildlife : This plant is a so urce of food for deer, small 
mammals (it is relished by jackrabbits), birds (game and 
non game), and waterfowl.   
   
Conservation: Alkali sacaton  is frequently utilized for 
seeding and stabilizing disturbed areas. Due to its salt 
tolerance, it is recommended for seeding saline sites such 
as oil well pits and saline waste from power generating 
plants.   
   
Landscaping: A mass planting of this species could create 
a contrast to coarser foliaged plants.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).   
    Description and Adaptation  
Alkali sacaton is a native perennial large bunchgrass 
ranging in height from 50 to 150 cm (20-
60 inches). The 
leaves are flat, 2 -6 mm (1/16- 1/4 inches) wide, and taper 
from the base of the leaf. The inflorescence is an open 
panicle 20 -50 cm (8- 20 inches) long with a pyramidal 
shape. The small seeds rest singly on branches in the 
loose, open seedhead.  Bloom periods vary by region: 
April to May in the Southwest, June -October in th e Great 
Plains, and July- August in the Northwest.   
   
Alkali sacaton is found in the western half of the United 
States. It grows in both saline and nonsaline coarse, 
medium, and fine textured soils. This grass is tolerant of 
salinity and a broad range of pH . After establishment, 
alkali sacaton is tolerant of drought and water inundation. 
However, it is intolerant of shade and is found growing in 
open areas.  
   
Establishment   
Alkali sacaton reproduces from seeds and tillers. The 
seeds remain viable for years  and germinate without being 
scarified. In Utah, a seed study reported 99% seed 
germination of seeds that were stored in an open 
warehouse for 7 years. Plant seeds in the spring when soil 
temperature will be near 860 F (300
    C) and precipitation 
probabilities  are greatest. The plants can survive on 12 to 
18 inches of precipitation per year.   
Management   
Alkali sacaton is an important forage species in the arid 
and semiarid regions of the Southwest United States. The 
grass is tolerant of moderate grazing and  a good forage 
producer. It has the ability to efficiently use extra water 
during forage production. Alkali sacaton is tolerant of 
fire; however, it can be killed if the fire is severe. Fire 
recovery has been reported from 2 to 4 years. Summer 
fires have m ore of an effect than winter fires.    
   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Alkali sacaton is considered a primary or secondary 
invader on saline soils. The plant intrudes directly on 
saline flats or follows a stage where “succulent” plants are 
dominant.   
   
Cult ivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
‘Salado’ was released by the Los Lunas, New Mexico 
Plant Materials Center in 1982. It originated from a
 seed 
collection in Lincoln County in central New Mexico.