Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CEREAL RYE 
Secale cereale L. 
Plant Symbol = SECE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Cereal rye is a commonly used winter cover crop in 
the northeastern U.S.  Due to the late harvest of many 
crops, fall-planted cover crops often do not make 
adequate growth to provide winter soil protection, but 
cereal rye can germinate  and grow under cooler 
conditions than other covers.  Cereal rye can also be 
used for spring forage production, and fed as pasture, 
green chop, or put up as haylage.  It is reported that 
rye forage may impart an off-flavor to milk.  Cereal 
rye does have an allelopathic affect on some weed 
species. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Cereal rye is an erect annu al grass, with flat leaf 
blades and dense flower spikes.  Each large spike 
consists of many 2-flowered spikelets with long 
awns.  The grain is relatively large, typically around 
½ inch long.  There are 18,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The cultivar ‘Aroostook’ is expected to produce a 
satisfactory stand as a late seeded cover crop if a 
minimum of 260-350 growing degree days (base 40 
degrees F) remain after seeding.  While ‘Aroostook’ 
was developed primarily for use in northern climates, 
it is widely adapted as a cover crop and forage 
producer outside the Northeast. 
 
Cereal rye is distributed throughout the United States.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Establishment 
The best method to plant ‘Aroostook’ following 
potatoes, corn, soybeans, and other row crops, is to 
drill the seed one inch deep using a conventional 
grain drill equipped with packer wheels.  Another 
satisfactory method is to broadcast the seed followed 
by a shallow disking or harrowing and cultipacking.  
Use a minimum of 2 bushels per acre (110 to 120 
lb/acre).  ‘Aroostook’ rye can also be aerial seeded in 
standing corn or other row crops.  Aerial seeding is 
very dependent on favorable weather for success.  
For very late plantings or aerial seedings, 3 bushels 
per acre is recommended.  No seed treatment is 
recommended. 
 
Management 
There is usually adequate residual fertilizer following 
a row crop to produce th e cover crop.  Due to 
‘Aroostook’s abundant spring growth, it is important 
to plow, spray, graze, or cut its stands in a timely

manner when managed for green manure, cover crop, 
or forage.  Strong growth can be anticipated in March 
in the southern part of the Northeast.  Northern 
locations typically begin growth in April.  For 
pasture, extremely rapid rotation or stocking with 
large numbers of animals is required to capture the 
spring growth.  In areas with high nitrogen 
availability, take preventative measures for grass 
tetany or other related reactions; an acclimation 
period for livestock is highly recommended. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This section is under development. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Late fall and early spring growth, and prostrate fall 
leaf growth make ‘Aroostook’ (New York) rye a 
valuable cover crop.  ‘Aroostook’ rye can be seeded 
in northern Maine as late as September 30th.  The 
leaf area index, (when the plants are growing at 200 
growing degree days with a base of 32 degrees F) is 
significantly greater than ‘Balbo.’  The foundation 
seed for ‘Aroostook’ rye is produced by the Big 
Flats, NY Plant Materials Center, and is available to 
commercial seed producers.  Commercially produced 
certified seed is available from some dealers.  
Currently, most seed production occurs in the 
Midwest. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.