Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
FLORIDA DROPSEED
Sporobolus floridanus 
Chapman  
Plant Symbol = SPFL3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Uses 
Cattle graze Florida dropseed occasionally deer use it 
during the spring and summer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Florida dropseed is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 feet.  The leaf blade  is mostly basal, wide, and folded at the base.  The 
upper part is usually flat, slightly twisted with 
saw-toothed bristles on the edge.  The leaf sheath is 
keeled, the basal ones hairy at
 the throat, and the base 
hard and shining.  The ligule is hairy.  The seedhead 
is an open panicle 12 to 20 inches long and only 1 or 
2 seed stalks are produced from single bunch. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Management 
This grass increases on areas grazed during the 
winter and on which grazing is deferred during the 
summer.  Burning does not easily damage Florida 
dropseed. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the late spring.  It produces 
seedheads in October.  It usually scattered throughout 
plant community, although pure stands do occur.  It is 
adapted to poorly drained soils that have a low pH. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.