Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COASTAL LITTLE BLUESTEM  
Schizachyrium littorale (Nash) 
Bickn. 
Plant Symbol = SCLI11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, New Jersey 
 
Chris Miller, USDA NRCS Cape May PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Seacoast bluestem, Andropogon littoralis , 
Andropogon scoparius var.  littoralis, Schizachyrium 
scoparium  var. littoralis 
 
Uses 
Dune Stabilization : Coastal little bluestem is useful 
for adding plant diversity to frontal back dune and 
secondary dune systems. It is especially well-suited 
for stabilizing back dune “blow-out” areas.  
 
Wildlife : This plant provides cover for ground birds 
and small mammals. 
 
Landscaping : With its blue-green leaves during the 
growing season and attractive rusty color with white 
fluffy seed heads in the fall, coastal little bluestem is 
useful as an ornamental planting in coastal 
landscapes.  Because of natural physiological 
tolerance to hot, dry soils with little fertility, this 
plant is an excellent choice for “low input” 
sustainable landscape designs. 
  Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetl and indicator values).   
 
Description and Adaptation 
Coastal little bluestem occurs almost exclusively 
along the coastal strip from southern New England to 
Texas.  It is a short (1-2 foot) bunch grass with coarse 
blue-green stems and basal leaves which often appear 
purplish. Coastal little bluestem is very similar to the 
inland little bluestem but can be distinguished by the 
bent stems at the base, whereas little bluestem stems 
are erect. Leaves are smooth but frequently are 
covered with hair at the base next to the sheath.  
Leaves tend to fold with maturity.  Seed head clusters 
are about three inches long  and consist of a number 
of short, silvery hairs (awns) when the seeds are ripe. 
In the late summer to early fall a low sun slanting 
across the seed heads of this grass give the plant a 
frosty appearance.  As a warm season grass, it begins 
growth in late spring and continues through the hot 
summer period until the first killing frost. The entire 
plant has a reddish cast after frost. Ragged brownish-
tan stems often persist through the winter.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation : Coastal little bluestem is very well 
adapted to dry, well to excessively drained, infertile 
secondary dunes. It does not tolerate large amounts of 
sand accretion. This grass has excellent drought 
tolerance once established, some salt spray tolerance 
and poor flood tolerance.  It grows preferentially on 
sites with pH 7.0 and slightly higher. 
 
Establishment 
Seeding methods for this species have not been 
developed for back dune stabilization. Chopping 
stems with mature seed attached into the sand may 
result in some natural recruitment. However, the most 
reliable method of establishment is planting plugs of 
this species on a 2-3 foot spacing between rows of 
American beachgrass ( Ammophila breviligulata ).  
 
Management 
Fertilizer : For decades managers of coastal resources 
have had to develop cost effective techniques for 
applying fertilizer to literally miles of sand dunes.

Most coastal municipalities have used aerial 
application of fertilizers applied in accordance with 
recommendations for  American beachgrass 
( Ammophila breviligulata ), since it is the key frontal 
dune species that intercepts  the brunt of coastal storm 
energies.  It appears that the fertilization 
recommendations for Ameri can beachgrass serve the 
plant needs of multiple sp ecies within the same eco-
system application. 
 
Fertilize coastal little bluestem in nurseries, the 
ornamental horticultural industry and in home owner 
settings using the soil test recommendations of the 
local county extension service.  Apply fertilizer in 
accordance with soil test results .  If the soils lab does 
not maintain recommendations specifically for this 
species, they may use guide lines for similar species 
such as little bluestem ( Schizachyrium scoparium ) or 
other native warm season grass.
 
 
Multiple passes with a fla il-vac sweeper stripper has 
proven to be very effectiv e in collecting seed from 
this species. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of coastal little 
bluestem. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
A Mid-Atlantic ecotype of coastal bluestem is 
currently under developmen t by the Cape May Plant 
Materials Center.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
William B. Skaradek, USDA  NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, New Jersey 
And 
Christopher F. Miller, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, New Jersey 
 
Edited: 070123 jsp; 070209; 070808 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about 
Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.