Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLENDER LITTLE BLUESTEM  
Schizachyrium tenerum Nees  
Plant Symbol = SCTE5 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
slender bluestem, Andropogon tener 
 
Uses 
Although slender little bluestem is not one of the 
preferred forage grasses in the southern U.S., cattle 
graze it when it is young and tender.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Slender little bluestem is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height is between 1 and 3 feet, often found reclining 
or lying flat on ground.  The leaf blade is narrow; 2 to 
8 inches long; 1/16 inch wide or less; wiry.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded; smooth; mostly basal.  The ligule 
is hairy.  The stem is a bend at each node giving a 
zigzag appearance; often br anching at nodes.  The 
seedhead is single straight spike-like raceme on each 
seed stalk.  The seeds sh atter soon after maturity, 
leaving a tiny hollow tip on each stalk. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Grazing practices should  favor the broader leafed, 
more palatable grasses rather than slender bluestem.  
Heavy grazing for a short pe riod after spring growth 
starts followed by a 6-month grazing deferment and 
light use make it possible for later maturing grasses, 
such as pinehill bluestem ( Schizachyrium scoparium 
var.  divergens ) to shade out slender bluestem and 
dominate the site.  Slender bluestem increases if 
burned annually and grazed continuously.  New 
growth following a burn is the most palatable.  As 
seed stalks form, palatability declines rapidly.  It is an 
indicator of excessive grazing. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in the early spring and continues into 
the summer.  The seedheads generally form by 
mid-July.  In the fall and winter, foliage tangles, mats 
together, and turns a faded straw color.  This species 
grows in colonies.  Slender bluestem is not as shade 
tolerant as many associated grasses.  It is best 
adapted to open or sparsely wooded poorly drained 
soils and is also found on sandy well-drained soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.