Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BIG SACATON 
Sporobolus wrightii  Munro ex 
Scribn.  
Plant Symbol = SPWR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Sporobolus airoides (Torr.) Torr. var. wrightii 
(Munro ex Scribn.) Gould 
 
Uses 
Big sacaton may be used in pure stands or as part of a 
rangeland seeding mix for highly alkaline soils.  It is 
useful for revegetating saline soils throughout the 
Southwest.  It performs well as a grass hedge terrace 
or windstrip for erosion control.  It helps stabilize 
watershed structures, stream banks and flood plain 
areas.  Big sacaton is also useful for wildlife cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Big sacaton ( Sporobolus wrightii ) is a native, warm-
season grass that forms dense clumps.  It is a coarse, 
upright bunch grass that can grow from 3 to 8 feet 
tall.  Leaves are anywhere from 1 to 2½ inches wide 
and up to 1 foot long.  The pale flowers of big 
sacaton form in stiff, upright  clusters 1 to 2 feet long.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Big sacaton grows primarily on heavier soils in 
lowland or wetland sites.  It is tolerant of highly 
alkaline and saline soil, and can tolerate poorly 
drained soils and seasonally flooded areas.  The plant 
is also found on open areas such as rocky slopes, 
plateaus, and mesas. 
 
Big sacaton is distributed th roughout the Southwest.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
or where there is minimal cool-season weeds, big 
sacaton can also be planted in the fall. 
 
Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by either tillage 
or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture. ©  W.L. Wagner 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Big sacaton seed can be drilled or broadcast.  Seed 
should be planted at 1/8 to 1/4 inch depth.  It is better 
to plant too shallow than too deep.  A seeding rate of 
1/2 to 1 pound of pure live seed per acre is 
recommended.  Plants can also be grown in small 
paper containers and then transplanted for 
establishment of grass hedges and wind barriers.  On 
saline soils, weed-free mulch can be used to improve 
establishment.  Establishment is highly dependent on 
good rainfall or irrigation. 
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine salinity levels and necessary levels of 
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.  Nitrogen 
should not be applied until the stand is established.  
Evaluate the stand after 60 days.  If 1 plant per square 
foot is present than the pl anting has been successful.

Management 
Big sacaton should not be grazed the first year.  After 
stands are established, eith er continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used.  It is recommended that a 
minimum 12-inch stubble height be maintained under 
continuous grazing.  For rotational grazing, forage 
height should be utilized between 8 to 16 inches.  Big 
sacaton will benefit from an  annual mowing at an 18-
24 inch height when used as a grass hedge or wind 
barrier. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The Falfurrias Germplasm release of big sacaton was 
chosen because of its ability to produce abundant 
forage, especially on droughty, alkaline and saline 
sites.  It also produces nutritious, green forage 
throughout the winter months in south Texas.  This 
selected collection came from Falfurrias, TX.  It was 
evaluated at both the Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center and the Knox City Plant Materials 
Center. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
TX 
 Edited: 06Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.