Plant Fact Sheet     
 
BURROGRASS 
Scleropogon brevifolius Phil. 
Plant symbol = SCBR2 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
burro grass 
 
Uses 
Burrograss is grazed by  cattle, horses, and sheep. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Burrograss is a native, 
warm-season, weak, stoloniferous perennial.  The 
height ranges from 4 to 8 inches.  The leaf blade is 
flat and narrow with sharp pointed leaves.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded, shorter than internodes, and mostly  basal.  Seedheads have a raceme inflorescence, 
staminate (male) spikelets, awnless pistillate (female) 
spikelets, and numerous long awns. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Cattle and horses seldom overgraze this grass, 
because it grows so close to the ground.  Sheep can 
graze it close enough to kill it.  Sheep should graze 
this grass only in spring before the seed matures and 
in the late fall and winter after seed dissemination to 
prevent awns from collecting in their wool and 
causing eye irritation. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in May or June and the seedheads 
appear 3 to 4 weeks later.  Burrograss is a low forage 
producer.  It reproduces from seed and from stolons.  
Generally it grows in pure stands.  Because it is 
shallowly rooted, this grass cannot compete with 
taller, deeper-rooted grasses.  Mature female 
spikelets with awns break  off and form tumbleweeds 
that are moved around by the wind.  It grows on 
calcareous clay and clay loam soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.