Plant Fact Sheet     
 
SAND DROPSEED 
Sporobolus cryptandrus  (Torr.) 
Gray 
Plant symbol = SPCR  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Uses 
Sand dropseed produces considerable forage that is 
fairly palatable to all livestock. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Sand dropseed is a 
warm-season, weak, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 2 to 3 feet.  The leaf blade is flat 
and about 1/8 inch wide; tapering toward tip and 
rolling inward as the plant matures.  The leaf sheath  is longer than the internodes and the upper sheath 
partly or entirely encloses seedhead.  The ligule is a 
conspicuous tuft of long white hair.  The seedhead is 
a open panicle densely flowered and often in pairs, 
sometimes hairy at axial of branch and stem; 
spikelets less than 1/8 inch long, lead colored and one 
glume twice as long as the other. 
 
Management 
This grass increases on ranges that are closely grazed 
during summer. 
 
Establishment 
It grows best in association with other grasses but 
may grow in pure stands.  Sand dropseed usually 
produces an abundant seed crop.  Many seeds are 
held between the stem and sheath until the plant 
deteriorates.  Because seeds remain viable for many 
years, this grass re-seeds itself readily on ranges 
following overgrazing or drought.  It grows best on 
sandy soils at lower elevations of its range.  Also, it 
grows on coarse, gravelly soils and at elevations to 
8,000 feet. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.
 
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 © Robert Soreng Smithsonian Institution-Botany @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.