Plant Fact Sheet
CANADA 
GOLDENROD  
Solidago canadensis  L.  
Plant Symbol = SOCA6  
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA  
  Solidago canadensis.  www.discoverlife.org  
 
Alternate Names 
Canadian goldenrod, meadow goldenrod, common 
goldenrod, giant goldenrod, tall goldenrod, shorthair 
goldenrod ( S. canadensis var.  gilvocanescens ), Hager’s 
goldenrod ( S. canadensis  var.  hargeri ), rough goldenrod 
( S. canadensis var.  salebrosa). 
 
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital sources 
of pollen and nectar for bees and other insects in the late 
summer and fall throughout North America.  
 
Rangeland revegetation: Canada  goldenrod can be used 
for revegetation of disturbed areas, for mine  spoil 
reclamation, and  soil stabilization . 
  Forage:
  This plant is grazed by cattle, sheep, horses, and 
whitetail deer.    
 
Ethnobotanical:   The Iroquois, Okanagan- Colville, 
Potowatomi, Sh uswap, Zuni, Gosiute and Navajo utilized 
Canada goldenrod for various medical purposes.   
 
Ornamental:  Canada goldenrod is not typically planted in 
a landscaped setting due to its spreading  rhizomatous 
growth.  However, it is  possible to manage plants by 
planting in a pot submersed in the ground, or by removing 
new growth each year.  Seed dispersal can be controlled 
by removing flower heads prior to seed ripening.  
 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
o f Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to thei r 
aggressive rhizomatous growth.   However, in stable 
rangeland environments  they seldom achieve densitie s 
that are problematic .  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agri culture 
department regarding this plant’s stat us and management.   
Description  and Adaptation 
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
canadensis  is a native, warm -season,  long-lived perennial  
that spreads by rhizomes and forms large, dense patches.  
Stems are  mostly smooth, covered with fin e hairs at the 
top  and are 1 to 7 ft  tall.  Leaves are sharply toothed, 
lance -shaped, covered with fine hairs, triple- nerved and 2 
to 5 inches long.  Flower panicles occur at the end of each 
stem, and when open, are 10 inches wide.  Inflorescences 
occur mo stly on one side of l ong, drooping panicle 
branches , have 10 to 17 ray flowers,  and  bloom July 
through  October.  P ollination typically occurs by the aid 
of insects. Seeds are small and dry with sparse hairs and 
numerous pale bristles at the tip.  
 
Solidago  canadensis  can be distinguished from S. 
missouriensis  by its taller stature and its  larger, more 
branched,  open flower panicles.  S. canadensis can be 
distinguished from S. giganteus by  its hairs on the stems 
and yellow bracts.  
 
Canada goldenrod is adapte d to areas receiving full sun or 
part shade and 16 to 60 in of annual precipitation.  Plants 
typically grow  in moist soil with medium texture and 
moderate levels of organic matter.   They are found in