Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SANDBAR WILLOW 
Salix interior Rowlee 
Plant Symbol = SAIN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 Herman, D.E., et al. 1996.  North Dakota tree handbook . USDA 
NRCS ND State Soil Conservation Committee 
 
Alternate Names 
narrowleaf willow 
 
Uses 
Erosion control
:  Sandbar willow is used for 
streambank and lake shore stabilization and riparian 
area development or restora tion.  It is recommended 
for deep wet lowland, overflow areas, wet meadow 
sites, streambanks, lake shores, and other areas with a 
high water table.   
Wildlife
:  This plant is provides wood and shelter for 
many game birds and forage for deer.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.   Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Salix interior.,  sandbar willow, is a common native 
suckering shrub 3 to 20 feet high found throughout 
the Northern Great Plains and the Northeast US.  It 
quickly forms thickets on sand or gravel deposits 
along streams, roadside ditches, sloughs, and other 
places frequent to flooding.  Branchlets are reddish 
brown, smooth or nearly so.  Leaves are 2 to 5 inches 
long, narrowly lance-shaped, and pointed at both 
ends, with margins that have shallow, widely spaced 
teeth; they are green and smooth on both surfaces or 
sometimes silvery-silky.   Leafstalks are very short 
and stipules, if present, are very small. This shrub is 
dioecious, so male and female flowers are produced 
by separate plants.   
Sandbar willow leaves are very narrow with serrated 
leaf edges.  The leaf edges of purpleosier willow are 
not serrated, and the leaf width is greater.  Also, 
purpleosier willow does not form thickets.   
Note: sandbar willow is an aggressive spreader and 
this should be considered when selecting materials 
for a given site.  It can spread off of the streambank 
to other sites under favorable circumstances. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Sandbar willow is adapted to sandy soils in stream, 
river, and shoreline sites, it is not well adapted to 
other sites. 
 
Sandbar willow is distributed primarily throughout 
the West.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Planting 1-0 rooted cuttings or unrooted cuttings are 
both effective planting methods.  The un-rooted 
cuttings should be used where moisture conditions 
are good.  On droughty sites, the rooted cuttings are 
preferred.  Plant rooted cuttings using techniques that 
are common to bare root seedlings.  Un-rooted 
cuttings should be at least 12 inches long, with the 
lower 10 inches buried vertically in the sand.  Plant 
spacing of 2x2 to 4x4 works well. 
 
Sandbar willow is also planted in soil bioengineering 
systems.  It should be planted in mixtures with other

species such as ‘Streamco’ and ‘Bankers’ willows 
and ‘Ruby’ dogwood for live fascines, brush layers 
and brush mattress.   
Under-seeding with a cool season grass mixture is 
recommended. 
 
Management  
Once sandbar willow is planted, it requires little care.  
Blowouts along the stream should be addressed when 
they occur and repaired. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This willow is susceptible to twig cankers, tar spot, 
aphids, willow galls, and scale insects. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘ Greenbank’ is the only Northeastern cultivar.  It was 
released for commercial production by the Big Flats 
PMC in 1996.  ‘Greenbank’ is a male clone.  It was 
selected from field testing of several clones, and 
provided stronger growth over a wide range of 
conditions.  
 
The cultivar ‘Silver Sands’ was released by the 
Bismarck (ND) PMC for use in the Northern Great 
Plains. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp; 090309 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.