Plant Fact Sheet
TEXAS DROPSEED 
Sporobolus texanus Vasey   
Plant Symbol = SPTE5  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas   
 
USDA NRCS 2009  
 
Uses   
Revegetation:   Texas dropseed has the ability to tolerate 
higher levels of salinity and alkalinity in the soil.  It can 
be used to revegetate areas such as oil well pads and on 
other saline soils.    
   
Erosion Control:   Texas dropseed is a bunchgrass with 
very thick vegetation near the soil surface which can be 
used to stabilize soils that have a tendency to erode.  
   
Wildlife:   Texas dropseed provides dense cover for birds 
and small mammals.  The foliage is browsed by deer and 
small mammals.  The seed can be eaten by bi rds and 
small mammals.  
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state  noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Weediness    
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available  from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
.  Please consult this and 
Related Web Sites and view  the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
   
Description    
Texas dropseed is a warm -season perennial bunchgrass 
that grows close to the soil surface.  The culms of the 
plant range from twelve to twenty inches long.  The leaf 
blades range from 1 ½ to 5 inches long and less than 1 ½ 
inches wide.  They are smooth on the bottom side, but 
scabrous on the top.  The seed head is a panicle -type with 
many spreading branches and branchlets.  The seed head 
is between four to twelve inches long and al most the same 
wide.  Once the seed matures, from June to August, the 
seed head breaks away from the plant.   
   
Adaptation   
Texas dropseed is found from Texas north to Nebraska, 
and west from Utah to Arizona.  The plant is adapted to 
soils with higher saline  and alkaline levels.   
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Texas dropseed should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast  seeding.  Seed is planted less than ½ inch deep 
at a rate of 1.0 lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre.  When 
planting this as a component of a seed mixture, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired percent of 
the mix. Soil samples should be taken b efore planting to 
determine the amount of fertilizer needed to bring the 
fertility level up to a medium range.     
   
Management   
Texas dropseed is used as a component in seed mixtures 
for ranges and pastures.  Stands of Texas dropseed should 
be well establi shed before livestock is permitted to graze.  
Proper management is required to ensure the plant is not 
overgrazed or over utilized by livestock or wildlife.  
Consult your local NRCS Field Office for assistance with 
planning and applying prescribed grazing