Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PRAIRIE 
CORDGRASS 
Spartina pectinata  Bosc ex 
Link 
Plant Symbol = SPPE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control: Prairie cordgrass has a stiff stem 
and vigorous rhizomes that enable it to provide good 
shoreline cover, and contribute to wave energy 
dissipation.  It has proven useful in preventing 
erosion on earthfill dams, spillways and drainage 
channels.  
 
Restoration: This species could be used to restore or 
reconstruct wetlands where prolonged flooding does 
not occur. 
 
Wildlife : Prairie cordgrass forms thick stands around 
marshes, providing good cover for game birds, song 
birds and small mammals.  
 
Ethnobotanic : Native Americans and pioneers used 
prairie cordgrass for thatching lodges. 
 
This grass is not a forage resource. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Prairie cordgrass is a tall  (6-8 feet), robust, native 
grass.  Strong rhizomes with the ability to grow 5-10 
feet per year separate this grass from the other 
desirable native warm season grasses. An easy 
characteristic to look for is  the sharp, serrated edges 
of the leaf blade.  Seedheads are composed of 10 to 
20 spikes attached to the main stem.  Each spike has 
up to 40 spikelets, all growing in two rows on the 
side of the spike away from the stem.  The seed 
typically matures within a week or two of frost, and 
is flat, paper-like with barbed  awns that attach firmly 
to fur or fabric.  There are 197,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Prairie cordgrass grows throughout the Northeast, 
Great Lakes and Midwest states as well as most other 
states in the country.  It is typically found on lower, 
poorly drained soils along roadsides, ditches, streams, 
marshes and potholes.  It also occurs in floodplains, 
wet meadows and back dune areas.  Prairie cordgrass 
grows well on seasonally dry sites, tolerates alkaline 
conditions and high water tables but is intolerant of 
prolonged flooding.  Seedlings are not shade tolerant.  
The rapid seedling development of this species 
enables it to avoid frost-heaving problems on wetter 
soils. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1989 
Midwestern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Prairie cordgrass should be seeded as early in the 
spring as possible. It should be planted with other 
warm season grasses to add variety to the cover. 
Native grass drills such as the Truax, Great Plains, or 
Tye are the best units for planting this seed as they 
have positive feed mechanisms for chaffy seed and 
double disk furrow opener s. If a suitable drill is not

available or cannot be used due to terrain, then 
broadcasting the seed and tracking it in with a 
bulldozer is also an excellent planting method. 
Mulches are avoided with warm season grass 
plantings unless absolutely necessary to control 
erosion--then use 1500 pounds per acre of straw as a 
maximum rate. 
 
No nitrogen fertilizer should be applied during the 
seeding year. Phosphorus and potassium should be at 
medium levels, and the pH should be 6.0 or better. 
 
Management 
Prairie cordgrass has few management needs except 
to avoid mowing. Cutting this grass more than once 
per season will reduce its vigor. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Red River Natural Germplasm has been released by 
the NRCS North Dakota PMC, Bismarck, ND.  
Releases are pending from the NRCS Plant Materials 
Centers at Big Flats, New York and Manhattan, 
Kansas. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Tony Bush, USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Cente, East Lansing, Michigan 
 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.