Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SALTMEADOW CORDGRASS 
Spartina patens (Ait.) Muhl.  
Plant Symbol = SPPA 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Marshhay cordgrass 
 
Uses 
Saltmeadow cordgrass is used for shoreline 
protection and tidal marsh restorations, and is often 
utilized for levee stabilization and dune stabilization 
plantings near coastal beaches and on barrier islands.  
Saltmeadow cordgrass is an effective stabilizer used 
on interior mud flats, dredge fill sites, and other areas 
of loose and unconsolidated  soils associated with 
marsh restoration. In its natural state on the tidal 
marshes, dense stands of this grass cause suspended 
solids to settle out of floodwaters and take up 
available nutrients.  Saltmeadow cordgrass also 
provides food and cover too many terrestrial and 
aquatic species of wildlife and is considered an 
important forage species to livestock producers along 
the gulf coast.  This species is the primary component  of salt hay, which is utilized in the landscape and 
vegetable trade industry as weed seed free mulch. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
This warm season, native, perennial grows from 1 to 
4 feet tall, and spreads extensively by long slender 
rhizomes.  Dark green stems emerge from the 
rhizomes.  The rolled leaf blades are typically 1/2 to 
1 foot long, and 0.1 to 0.2 inches wide.  Leaf blades 
are shiny, dark green on the upper surface and rough 
with prominent veins on the lower surface.  Leaves 
are drooping and wiry in a ppearance.  From late June 
to October an inflorescence emerges at the end of the 
stem, which is composed of 2 to 10 two-inch-long 
spikelets.  The numerous flor ets are 0.3 to 0.4 inches 
long and arranged in an overlapping scale-like 
fashion on each spikelet.  The flowers are wind 
pollinated. 
Curtis Sharp 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Saltmeadow cordgrass is commonly found growing 
in saline to brackish marshes, sandy beaches and low 
dunes, tidal flats and marsh ridges from normal high 
tide to about 13 feet above sea level, from 
Newfoundland to Quebec, south to Florida and along 
the Gulf Coast into south Texas; it can also be found 
along the shores of the Great Lakes.  This grass is 
adapted to a wide range of soils from coarse sands to 
silty clay sediments with pHs ranging from 3.7 to 7.9.  
Saltmeadow cordgrass will tolerate irregular 
inundations with 0 to 35 parts per thousand salinity. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.

Establishment 
Due to sparse seed production, saltmeadow cordgrass 
is usually propagated by vegetative stem divisions.  
Depending on the energy effecting the planting site, 
either containerized (high impact sites) or bare root 
(mild impact sites) plants can be utilized.  Bare root 
material should contain 3 to 5 stems per planting unit, 
while containers should have at least 5 to 8 healthy 
stems.  Bare root plugs are generally limited to 
planting sites that are exposed to little or no wave 
energy.  Since most marsh sites are irregular and 
difficult to access, hand planting is normally 
employed, using spades, dibbles, or planting bars.  If 
site conditions are right, planting can be carried out 
with a mechanical, tractor  drawn transplanter.  Plant 
spacing should be between 18 and 36 inches; up to 2 
feet of lateral spread can be expected annually. 
 
In nursery rows, plants of saltmeadow cordgrass 
should be spaced 6 to 12 inches apart.  Under ideal 
nursery conditions, each planting unit should be able 
to yield up to 50 stems in a single growing season.  
Effective weed control is essential to producing 
quality plants. 
 
Management  
Stems and rhizomes of this grass respond well to 
applications of well balanced commercial fertilizers. 
Plants propagated under nursery conditions may need 
to be irrigated if the site is not moist year round to 
encourage good growth and spread.  Plants in 
production are usually placed  on sandy textured soils 
and allowed to spread by rh izomes for 1 to 3 years, 
after which they are under-cut and uplifted for 
distribution. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no detrimental pe sts documented to impact 
this species.  Non-threat ening rust-like funguses 
(orange fruiting bodies on leaves) are commonly 
found on  S. patens plants. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are several named cultivars available on the 
commercial market.  In 1986, ‘Avalon’ (New Jersey) 
saltmeadow cordgrass was released for use in the 
coastal area north of the  Carolinas by the Cape May 
Plant Material Center (PMC), in Cape May Court 
House, New Jersey.  Soon after, ‘Flageo’ (North 
Carolina) was released by the Americus, Georgia and 
Brooksville, Florida PMCs for use on southern 
Atlantic and Gulf coasts.  ‘Sharp’ (Louisiana) was 
released in 1994 by the Florida and Georgia PMCs  for coastal back dune stabilization in the southern 
Atlantic and Gulf coast counties from Florida to 
Texas.  It is also suited for use in inland areas from 
southern Georgia to southern Arkansas to stabilize 
shorelines, gullies, road banks, mine spoils, saline oil 
seep areas, and for nutrient reclamation in 
agricultural and municipal waste water irrigated 
fields.  In 2003, ‘Gulf Coast’ marshhay cordgrass 
was released from the Golden Meadow PMC near 
Galliano, Louisiana for marsh restoration, shoreline 
and levee stabilization, stabilizing dredge fill sites, 
and restoration of coastal beaches and dunes. ‘Gulf 
Coast’ is found to be adapted to the coastal areas of 
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas. 
 
Prepared By 
Tony Bush
, USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
Morris Houck , USDA NRCS Louisi ana State Office, 
Alexandria, Louisiana (additions 2008) 
 
Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Tony Bush , USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp; 15jun07 jmg; 29jun07 jsp; 080913mjh; 
080916jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.