Plant Fact Sheet
MEADOW 
CHECKERBLOOM  
Sidalcea campestris Greene  
Plant Symbol = SICA 2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis  Plant  Materials 
C enter , Oregon  
 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2009  
Alternative Names  
Alternate  Common Names:  meadow checker-mallow , tall 
wild  hollyhock, tall wild checkermallow  
Alternate  Scientific Names: Sidalcea  sylvestris A. Nelson  
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: M eadow checkerbloom  attracts  a wide 
array of  native bees,  wasps, flies, beetles, and butterflies .  
The flowers are  a high- quality  nectar source for the 
Oregon  endangered Fender’s  blue butterfly (Plebejus 
icarioides fenderi ), and a possible butterfly  host plant for 
the  West Coast l ady (Vanessa annabella), common 
checkered s kipper (Pyrgus communis ), painted lady 
( Vanessa cardui ), gray hairstreak ( Strymon melinus ), and 
American l ady ( Vanessa virginiensis ).  There is also a 
species of native bee ( Diadasia nigrifrons ) that is a 
specialist  on the three  Sidalcea  species in the Willamette 
Valley, so this bee’s survival  is  closely linked  to the 
presence  of its rare  host/forage species.  
Ornamental : This plant makes a tall, showy addition to a 
butterfly meadow or wildflower  garden.   It can be used 
along b ed borders, fences, driveways,  roadsides, and 
hedgerow edges.   Status
 
Sidalcea  campestris  is listed as a Candidate species by the 
State of Oregon and is on the  Oregon Natural Heritage 
Program List 4 (of conservation concern but not currently 
threatened or endangered) .  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status ( e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
De scription  and Adaptation 
Meadow checkerbloom is an uncommon, native, 
herbaceous perennial wildflower in the mallow family 
(Malvaceae).   A clump of stout, upright, hairy,  hollow,  
branched stems originates from a thick tap root or short 
rhizome  and grow s 1½  t o 6 ft tall.   The gray-green , 
alternate  leaves have hairy stems 4 to 8 inches long and 
are  2 to 6 inches broad and deeply  palmately divided into 
7 to 9 thin,  hairy,  toothed  lobes with sharply pointed tips.   
The white to pale -pink , cup -shaped  flowers have f ive 
petals  that are  about ¾ inch  long.  The flowers are borne 
on short stalks, arranged in a simple or somewhat 
branched, elongated, open inflorescence, and mature from 
the bottom upward.   There are both bisexual and female 
plants; the female flowers are s maller and lack anthers 
(see photo below) .    
 
Meadow checkerbloom flowering stalks: bisexual flowers on the left and 
female flowers on the right. Photo by S teven Gisler, June 2001 .