Plant Fact Sheet
MISSOURI 
GOLDENROD  
Solidago missouriensis  Nutt.  
Plant Symbol = SOMI2  
 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA  
 
  Solidago  missouriensis .  Rod Gilbert, University of Washington 
Burke Herbarium  
 
Alternate Names 
Prairie goldenrod, Tolmie’s goldenrod ( S. missouriensis 
var.  tolmieana )  
 
Uses  
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital sources 
of pollen and nectar for bees and other insects in the late 
summer and fall throughout North America.  
 
Rangeland revegetation: Missouri  goldenrod can be used 
for revegetation of disturbed areas, for mine  spoil 
reclamation, and  soil stabilization .   
Forage:
  This plant has poor forage va lue, however may 
be grazed by sheep, cattle, deer and antelope.   
 
Ethnobotanical:   Native Americans chewed leaves and 
flowers of this plant to relieve sore throats, and chewed 
roots to relieve toothache (Stubbendieck et al. 2003).  
 
Ornamental:  Missouri go ldenrod is not typically planted 
in a landscaped setting due to its spreading  rhizomatous 
growth.  However, it is  possible to manage plants by 
planting in a pot submersed in the ground, or by removing 
new growth each year.  Seed dispersal can be controlled  
by removing flower heads prior to seed ripening.  
 
Status  
Missouri goldenrod is the state flower of Nebraska, and is 
listed as threatened in Michigan.  Consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current stat us (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to thei r 
aggressive rhizomatous growth.   However, in stable 
rangeland environments  they seldom  achieve densitie s 
that are problematic .  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agri culture 
department regarding this plant’s status and management .   
Description  and Adaptat ion 
General :  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
missouriensis  is a native, warm -season, short -lived 
perennial.  Stems grow singularly or in group from a 
woody base or creeping rhizome .  Stems are reddish-
green, smooth, slender, erect and are 8 to 36  inches tall. 
Leaves are alternate, triple -nerved and have entire or 
sparsely serrated edges.  Basal leaves are up to 12 inches 
long and 1 inch wide, and have short petioles. Upper 
leaves are smaller and sessile.  Numerous inflorescences 
form on curved pan icle branches.  Inflorescences have 7 
to 13 yellow disc flowers and 8 to 13 yellow ray flowers, 
and bloom July through October.  Seeds are brown , 
cylindrical,  smooth or hairy, and have white bristly 
pappus.   
 
Missouri goldenrod is adapted to areas receivin g 12 to 35 
inches of annual precipitation at elevations up to 10,600 
feet.  Plants grow well in sandy loam to clay loam soils, 
and poorly in gravel or dense clay.  Plants are tolerant of 
weakly acidic to moderately basic and weakly saline soil.