Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLEOSIER WILLOW 
Salix purpurea  L. 
Plant Symbol = SAPU2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS New York State Office 
 
Uses 
Purpleosier willow is used extensively in soil 
bioengineering systems and to control erosion along 
streambanks resulting from flood and ice damage.  Its 
fast growth, resilient stems, and ability to recover 
from mechanical damage make it an ideal plant for 
this use.  When used in this manner, it provides cover 
for small animals and browse for deer, beaver and 
rabbits and exceptional nesting sites for birds.  The 
whips are useful in vineyards for tying up grapevines 
and also for basket making.  This species was 
brought to North America by the Europeans and 
grown for these purposes. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Purpleosier willow is a medium to tall introduced 
shrub growing 10 to 20 feet high, with smooth, 
slender, tough, resilient branches, purplish at first but 
later changing to gray or olive-gray.  The leaves arise  in pairs but not quite oppositely, are smooth tongue-
shaped, finely-toothed near the tip only, 2 to 4 inches 
long, bluish-green above and pale below.  The 
catkins are small, arise in 
almost opposite pairs, and 
mature in spring before the leaves come out.  Male 
and female flowers are borne on separate plants.  
Purpleosier willow is a solitary shrub, sending up 
many branches from the base.  Growth is rapid, 
reaching from 2 to 8 feet in  two years; often to full 
height of 15-20 feet in five years.  On nutrient-rich 
sites it can grow to 25 feet. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Purpleosier willow is climatically adapted to all the 
northeastern states.  We ll-drained to imperfectly-
drained soils are most suitable for this species.  It can 
be used on soils of any texture, but makes best 
growth on silt loams. 
 
Purpleosier willow is distributed primarily 
throughout the Northeast.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
Martin van der Grinten 
Big Flats Plant Materials Center 
Big Flats, New York 
 
Establishment 
Purpleosier willow is susceptible to severe browsing 
by livestock and cannot be established without 
protection.  Banks that are eroded and undercut to a 
steep unplantable slope require grading prior to 
planting. 
 
Cuttings:   Plant as one year old rooted cuttings, or 
dormant hardwood cuttings.  If dormant cuttings are 
used, they should be 3/8 to 1/2 inch at the thick end, 
12 to 15 inches long, and made before the leaves 
emerge.  Dormant cuttings should be planted 
vertically with only an inch or two protruding.  If 
they cannot be pushed in the soil by hand, use a rod 
to make a hole but be sure the cutting is tamped in 
well with the heel to avoid leaving any air spaces.  If 
the soil is too stony to for this technique, the cutting 
may be buried horizontally about one inch deep in 
damp soil.  Rooted cuttings should be planted in a 
hole dug big enough to accommodate the root system 
when well-spread.  On difficult streambanks, it is 
sometimes necessary to mulch the planting with 
coarse plant material, even wiring and staking the 
mulch down in some cases.  Plant at 2 to 3 foot 
spacing from just above water's edge or rip-rap, to the 
top of the bank.

Soil Bioengineering Uses:  'Streamco' purpleosier 
willow is the premier source of materials for these 
practices.  'Streamco' provides the best combination 
of growth, stem density, flexibility, and toughness of 
any willow tested for these uses.  Dormant whips are 
very useful when bundled into wattles (live fascines) 
or for brush layering and ma ttressing systems.  Stem 
sections work well in live staking systems, and larger 
diameter (1 1/2-2 inches) older stems are useful in 
pole applications.  ‘Streamco’ willow can be 
produced in the nursery to  specification to meet all 
the above uses.  Planting methods for soil 
bioengineering are regionally varied.  Consult with 
the Plant Materials Specialist for planting 
recommendations.  Other species can be added to 
plantings of "Streamco' to create diversity. 
 
Living Snow Fence  'Streamco' willow is an excellent 
choice for creating living snow fence due to its stem 
density.  With Streamco, a single row snow fence 
will begin to trap snow in the second year, and 
become very effective in three to four years.   
 
Management  
Purpleosier willow used on streambanks may 
experience mechanical damage.  The site should be 
inspected annually in spring, after heavy run-off has 
subsided, for needed repairs.  Gaps should be filled in 
by replanting, or laying down and covering branches 
of nearby plants.  Any mechanical measures used to 
protect the bank toe, such as stone rip-rap, must be 
kept in repair as well. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Purpleosier willow is relished by livestock and 
planting sites must be protected for this reason.  
Beaver can also have a big impact on this species.  
Gypsy moths will defoliate purpleosier willow, and 
twig galls are created from attacks by willow midges, 
however these attacks are not fatal.  The most severe 
pest is willow blight which is a fatal disease complex 
brought on by two fungi affecting leaves and stems. 
Fungicides and cultural management can be used to 
combat this disease.  Purp leosier willow plants that 
have been damaged by summer hailstorms are prime 
candidates for willow blight. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
A cultivar of purpleosier willow, ‘Streamco,’ was 
released by the Big Flats Plant Materials Center in 
1975.  ‘Streamco’ is a male  clone and does not root 
sucker, so it does not spread.  Rooted and unrooted 
cuttings, whips, branches, live stakes, and wattles can  be purchased from a variety of nurseries in the 
Northeast. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Dickerson
 (retired), USDA NRCS New York 
State Office, Syracuse, New York  
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.