Plant Fact Sheet
COM PASSPLANT  
Silphium laciniatum  L . 
Plant Symbol = SILA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 
Alan Shadow , NRCS,  East Texas PMC , Nacogdoches , TX  
 
Alternate Names  
Rosinweed, gum weed, cut -leaf silphium, or turpentine 
plant  
 
Uses  
Livestock:  It is reported that compass plant is palatable 
and nutritious and grazed by livestock especially in its 
juvenile state. It will decrease in heavily grazed pastures 
and eventually be removed from the site i n continuously 
grazed situations.   
Native Americans : The powdered root of compass plant 
was used by the Pawnees to make a tea for individuals 
with general debility. The Indian children of several tribes 
used the resinous sap as a chewing gum to cleanse their 
teeth and sweeten their breath .  
Wildlife : Small mammals and birds eat the seed of 
compass plant. In grasslands the compass plant provides a 
sturdy perch for prairie song birds. The eastern kingbirds 
use the compass plant as a perch to locate and captur e 
grassland insects.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  Description
 and Adaptation  
General : Compass plant is a long lived, perennial member 
of the sunflower family. Its basal leaves and stems all 
arise from an underground crown. A large reddish brown 
tap root 1 to 2 inches in diameter is located just below the 
crown. The tap root rapidly looses diameter as it descends 
up to 16 feet into the prairie soil. The large basal leaves 
can be 15 to 24 inches long and are deeply cut like a giant 
pin  oak leaf. The rigid, sand paper  like leaves orient 
themselves in a north to  south direction to avoid the direct 
rays of the midday sun, thus leading to the  plants common 
name, compass plant. Stems are erect and number from 
one to several with an overall height of from 3 to 10 feet. 
The simple leaves are alternately arranged on the stem 
and are les s divided, smaller and have direct attachment 
higher up on the stem.  Leaves are leathery and stiff with 
rough surfaces and hairs occurring on the leaf main veins.  
Large yellow flower heads from 2 to 4 inches across are 
conspicuous on the upper half to two thirds of the stem in 
small clusters. Flowering begins in late June and proceeds 
through August. Flower heads begin opening at the top of 
the stem first. There are 15 to 34 narrow yellow petal 
flowers (ray florets) that are 1 to 2 inches long. The center 
o f the flower contains the numerous disk florets with 
yellow corollas.   The fruit is a flattened achene about ½ 
inch long with a notched tip. Achenes develop on the 
outside of the head since the ray florets are the only fertile 
seed producing units on the f lower. 
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  Compass plant grows 
in the eastern half of Kansas. It is found in the eastern 
section of the Great Plains from North Dakota to Texas 
and east to Ohio and  Alabama.   
 
Establishment  
The easiest way to propagate compass plant is by planting 
stratified seed in the spring or unstratified seed in the fall. 
Moist stratification (60 days at 40 degrees F) and 
scarification will promote germination of this species. T o 
scarify the seed, nick the seed coat with a sharp knife 
prior to planting. The initial year the seedling will exist as 
a single leaf, and it will normally take two to three years 
for the plant to mature and reproduce sexually. Much of 
the plants energy a nd carbon are invested in extensive 
root production the first few years.  
    
Management  
Seed heads can be harvested from production fields in late 
August or September. The seed heads can be run through 
a hammer mill to break out the seed units and release t he 
achenes. Then the ache nes can be run through a two 
screen  cleaner to increase purity of the product. The seed