Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN ELDER 
Sambucus nigra L. ssp. 
canadensis  (L.) R. Boli  
Plant Symbol = SANIC4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Warning: New growth of American elder 
contains a glucoside than can be fatal to 
livestock. 
 
Alternate Names 
Sambucus canadensis  L., common elderberry 
 
Uses 
At least 50 species of songbirds, upland game birds, 
and small mammals relish the fruit of American elder 
during summer and early fall.  White-tailed deer 
browse the twigs, foliage and fruit during the 
summer. American elder is outstanding as nesting 
cover for small birds. During summer, the partial 
shade under American elder promotes a dense ground 
cover of grasses and forbs that offers good loafing or 
feeding areas for broods of young pheasants and 
quail. 
 
American elder can be used for erosion control on 
moist sites.  It pioneers on some strip-mine spoils and 
may occasionally be useful  for reclamation planting.  
It is very decorative when in bloom; elder flowers  later than most shrubs. 
 Elderberries are also 
attractive to makers of pies, jellies and wine. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
The American elder is an erect, thicket-forming, 
somewhat woody shrub, 4-12 feet tall, with smooth 
yellowish-gray branchlets and white pith.  Compound 
leaves are set oppositely in pairs in a feather-like 
arrangement.  The leaf surface is bright green.  The 
oval to lance-shaped leaflets are up to 6" long and 2 
1/2" wide, with finely serrated margins.  They are 
abruptly narrowed at the tip and lopsidedly narrowed 
or rounded at the base.  Leaflets are usually held on 
short stalks; the terminal leaflet is on a longer stalk. 
Numerous 1/4" fragrant white flowers, emerge from 
late June into August.  The terminal clusters of 
flowers, measuring 4"-10" across, are broad, flat or 
slightly rounded and long-stalked.  Flowers usually 
develop in the second-year on older canes, and are 
arranged in branched clusters of 5. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA, NRCS 1989 
Midwest Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Fruits ripen from late July into September.  They are 
round, slightly bitter, edible  purple-black berries with 
crimson juice.  Each is less  than 1/4" across, borne in 
large clusters.  Each berry  contains 3-5 small seeds.  
Seed dispersal occurs from July to October, usually 
through vigorous ingestion by birds and mammals.  
There are about 230,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
American elder occupies we ll-drained, slightly acid 
soil bordering streams, and in the adjacent 
bottomlands, but also grows on gray forest soils and 
muck.  This shrub is widespread and abundant.  
American elder grows best in full sunlight.  Once 
established, elders soon outdistance herbaceous 
competition.  Thickets of elder are replaced by more 
shade-tolerant species during  the later stages of forest 
succession, but individual plants and small runners 
will persist under a forest canopy. 
 
American elder is distributed primarily throughout 
the eastern and midwestern  United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant

Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 
Establishment 
American elder naturally reproduces from seeds, 
sprouts, layers, and root suckers.  Variable degrees of 
hard-seededness and embryo dormancy are exhibited.  
Prior to spring or fall planting, the seed should be 
scarified with sulfuric acid, also stratification at 36-
40 degrees F for two months is required for spring 
planting.  Seedling growth is rather slow during the 
first year. 
 
Elders can also be prop agated from 10” to 18” 
hardwood cuttings taken from vigorous one-year-old 
canes, each must include three sets of buds.  Cuttings 
may be taken while dormant, placed in moist peat or 
sphagnum moss, and held in cold storage at 
approximately 40 degrees F for spring planting.  One-
year-old seedlings or rooted cuttings are usually large 
enough for field planting. 
 
Management  
Mulching around each plant will improve seedling 
survival.  Annual pruning  will considerably improve 
fruit yield.  Removal of terminal shoots and dead 
canes will reduce winter-kill and help control elder 
borers. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings or rooted cuttings are available 
commercially.  Horticultural selections or local and 
regional ecotypes are marketed by nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.