Plant Fact Sheet
SPIKE DROPSEED  
Sporobolus contractus  Hitchc.   
Plant Symbol = SPCO4  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas   
 
USDA/NRCS   
 
Uses   
Erosion Control:   Spike dropseed  may be used as a 
component of a seeding mixture for critical area plantings 
and conservation cover.  It is a bunchgrass with very thick 
vegetation near the soil surface which can be used to 
stabilize sandy eroding soils.   
   
Wildlife:   Spike dropseed is ut ilized as a food source by 
various wildlife species.  Particularly, upland birds feed 
on the mature seed that is produced.  It also provides good 
cover for birds and small mammals.   
   
Livestock:   Many species of livestock will graze on spike 
dropseed.  It  has a nutritional value of fair. The species 
has the ability to recover and reseed itself if heavy grazing 
occurs.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Nat ural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
   
Weediness    
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state  natural resource, or state agricult
ure department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
    .  Please consult this and 
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
Desc ription    
Spike dropseed is a native, perennial, warm season 
bunchgrass with erect stems that grow 3 feet tall.  It 
begins growing in the spring when moisture levels 
increase and matures to produce seed in October.  The 
leaf blades grow to about 1.5 feet l ong and ½ inch wide.  
The leaves are flat when the plant is actively growing, but 
as the plant begins to dry, they become V -shaped.  The 
sheaths of the leaves are hairy along the margins.  The 
seedhead is ½ inch wide and six inches to approximately 
1.5 fee t long.    
   
Adaptation   
Spike dropseed is adapted to a large portion of the 
southwest United States.  It is found from Texas to 
California, and as far north as Nevada and Colorado.  
Spike dropseed is adapted to a wide range of soil types, 
but performs bes t on loamy fine, silty and sandy loam 
soils.   
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Spike dropseed should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a g rass drill or 
broadcast seeding, but grass drills are the most successful 
method of planting.  Seed should be placed less than 1/8 
inch deep on fine textured and  ½ inch on sandy soils.  
Spike dropseed should be planted at a rate of 1.0 lb pure 
live seed ( pls) per acre. When planting spike dropseed as 
a component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percent of the mix. Soil samples 
should be taken before planting to determine the amount 
of fertilizer needed to bring the fert ility level up to a 
medium range.  Nitrogen should be limited to less than 
ten pounds per acre until a stand is evident.    
   
Management   
Spike dropseed is commonly found as a component in 
seed mixtures for range and pastures.  Stands of spike 
dropseed  should be well established before livestock 
grazing is permitted.  Once the stand is established, spike 
dropseed should never be grazed or cut below five to six 
inches.  Grazing can begin the first winter after planting 
on well established areas.  Spike d ropseed can reseed