Plant Fact Sheet
ROSE SPIREA 
Spiraea douglasii Hook  
Plant Symbol = SPDO 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS P lant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 
Photo by Dale Darris   
 
Alternate names  
There are two botanical varieties, var. douglasii  and var. 
menziesii , with the latter referred to as Menzies’ spirea. 
Other common names include Douglas spirea, Western 
spirea, hardhack, steeplebush, meadowsweet, and pink 
spirea.   
   
Uses   
Rose spirea is useful for stabilization of stream -banks and 
shorelines as well as the restoration of wetlands including 
marshes, bogs, and open swamps. Limbs are suitable for 
branch packing, fascines, and other soil bioengineering 
practices.  In some cases  this species should be planted 
sparingly at best because of its ability to spread and 
dominate favorable sites. Rose spirea withstands 
competition from wetland grasses better than certain other 
woody species.  If not severely shaded when young, it 
may als o compete well with exotic reed canarygrass.   
   
Rose spirea provides good cover for birds and small 
mammals. Grouse apparently eat the dried spikes and 
other wildlife consume the seed filled capsules.  The 
flowers are a source of nectar for hummingbirds, 
b utterflies, and other pollinator insects.  Although 
occasionally browsed by deer and livestock, it is 
considered poor forage and little mention is made 
concerning its nutritional value and palatability. Native 
Americans made minor use of this plant. At lea st one tribe 
used the seeds to make a tea for the treatment of diarrhea. 
The branches were used to spread and cook salmon, hang 
salmon for drying and smoking, and make brooms.  With  its attractive and fragrant flower clusters, rose spirea is 
used for natur
alistic landscaping, ponds, hedges, and 
screens. The canes and dry flower heads provide visual 
interest in winter.  
   
Description   
Rose spirea is a deciduous shrub in the Rose family that 
grows 2 to 7 ft tall, has upright slender limbs, and spreads 
by suck ers (under -ground shoots) to form dense thickets. 
The leaves are oblong to elliptical in shape, 1 to 3 in. 
long, lighter and sometimes wooly beneath, and toothed 
along the upper half of the margins. Tiny, fragrant reddish 
pink flowers are borne in dense, elongate clusters at the 
end of shoots. The clusters appear ‘fuzzy’ from the 
abundance of long stamens. Flowering occurs from June 
to September. The fruit is a smooth, dry follicle that 
persists in winter. This species hybridizes in the wild with 
white spir ea (Spiraea betulifolia).   
   
Status   
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status, such as state noxious and wetland indicator values.  
   
Adaptation   
Rose spirea  grows best in full sun to dappled shade and in 
a wide range of soils (gravelly sandy loams to heavy 
clays) that range from acidic to neutral (pH 4.5 -7.5) and 
from moist well drained to wet and poorly drained 
(hydric). The species tolerates extended period s of 
flooding and perpetually water -logged soils. Only the 
most severe fires will eliminate regrowth from basal 
portions and suckers.   
   
Distribution - Rose spirea occurs naturally from southern 
Alaska south to northern California and east to western 
Montan a. The elevation range is sea -level to 6,500 ft in 
the mountains.  Habitat includes damp meadows, riparian 
zones, bogs, marshes, open swamps, and the margins of 
ponds and lakes. It is a member of many willow, alder, 
freshwater marsh, moist coniferous fores t, scrub shrub 
and semi -aquatic plant communities.  
 
Limitations or environmental concerns  
Rose spirea may be susceptible to fire blight disease 
which causes dieback of tips and scorched looking leaves.  
It is host to several insect pests including aphids,  leaf 
rollers, and scales. This species can become invasive, as it 
spreads readily by suckers and seedlings, especially on 
flat, moist to wet sites in full sun.  Dense thickets can 
become nearly impenetrable and too competitive for other 
desirable
 plant sp ecies.  It may not be suitable for small 
areas without regular management.  The species is a mild