Plant Fact Sheet
AROMATIC ASTER 
Symphyotrichum oblongifolium 
(Nutt.) G.L. Nesom 
Plant Symbol = SYOB 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD      
 
Clarence A. Rechenthin @ USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database  
 
Alternate Names  
Aromatic American aster  
Fall aster  
Wild blue aster  
Shale barren aster  
Aster oblongifolius L.  
 
Uses  
Conservation:  Aromatic aster is an adaptable, easy to 
grow ground cover for dry , sunny locations.  It is a native 
plant and can be part of a good wildlife seed mixture 
where native grasses and wildflowers are seeded together.  
Ethno  botanical:  A tea made from the roots of Asters has  
been used to treat fevers.  
Landscaping and wildlife : Aromatic aster creates showy 
mounds of blooms in fall and is excellent for native 
landscape gardens.  Asters  will grow on disturbed sites 
and can be used for  wildlife habitat restoration.  Aromatic 
aster is attractive to pollinators  including:  long-tongu ed 
bees, short -tongued bees, small to medium -sized 
butterflies and skippers.   Many kinds of insects feed on 
the foliage and other parts of asters, including the 
caterpillars of the butterfly Chlosyne nycteis  (Silvery 
Checkerspot) and ma ny moth species.  Wi ld Turkey and 
other upland game  birds eat the seeds and foliage to a 
limited extent
.  Mammalian herbivores occasionally eat 
the foliage of asters, even though their food value is low.   
 
Status 
Aromatic aster is listed as rare in Indiana and as 
threatened i n Ohio.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g . threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  
 
Description and Adaptation  
Aromatic as ter is a native perennial  wildflower that grows 
from 1 –3 feet tal l.  The aster’s rigid stems branch out  
from the base and give off a balsam -like scent when 
crushed.  The oblong leaves are .5 –3 inches long, simple 
(not made up of multiple leaflets), and alt ernate 
(progressing singly up the stem).  The flowers are 
c omposite  with purple ray flowers along their edges and 
yellow  disk flowers within the center. Ray flowers usually 
have a petal which radiates outward from the composite 
flower's center .  There are  approximately  30 purple or 
violet ray florets per flower.  The bracts  ( a modified leaf 
that arises from the stem at the point where the flower or 
flower cluster develops ) are glandular with long, green, 
loose or spreading tips.   Flowers appear in fall 
(Se ptember -Nov ember ) and give way to flat, hairy 
achenes (dry fruits).  Aromatic aster spreads by  stolons 
(horizontal stems that produce new plants from buds).  
 
Distribution:  Aromatic aster grows in  well-drained  moist 
to dry soils in full sun to partial shade .  It is widely 
distributed from New York west to Montana and south to 
North Carolina and Texas (USDA plant  cold hardiness 
zones 4 –  7).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
Habitat :  Aromatic aster is very adaptable as it grows in 
rocky  and sandy soils such as those found in prairies and 
bluffs  as well as  in moist woodland habitats.