Plant Fact Sheet

PLAINS 

BRISTLEGRASS

Setaria vulpiseta (Lam.) 

Roemer & J.A. Sc hultes

Plant Symbol = SEVU2 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
Alternate Names 
Setaria macrostachya 
Uses 
Livestock: Plains bristlegrass makes up an 
appreciable part of the forage on southwestern 
ranges.  It provides moderate to high quality forage 
for all types of grazing livestock. 
Wildlife:  Plains bristlegrass provides fair to good 
forage for wildlife.  It is a good seed producer, and its 
seeds can provide a source of food for wildlife.  This 
species shows promise as a plant for both wildlife 
and range use. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
Plains bristlegrass is a native, warm season, perennial 
bunchgrass that can grow up to three feet in height. 
Setaria leucopila (streambed bristlegrass) and Setaria 
texana (Texas bristlegrass) are sometimes included 
under the common name, ‘plains bristlegrass’, as 
well. It is suspected that all three species, along with 
S. scheelei, may hybridize. 
It should be noted when ordering plains bristlegrass 
seed, that the seed may belong to any of the three 
species formerly included under the common name, 
as much of the seed industry still uses the common 
name plains bristlegrass to include Setaria 
macrostachya, S. leucopila, and S. texana. There are 
notable morphological differences between the three 
species, which may affect the suitability of the plants 
for a specific site or project. 
Adaptation 
Plains bristlegrass is native from South Texas to New 
Mexico, Colorado and Arizona, and down into 
central Mexico.  Plains bristlegrass is found on open 
dry ground, in dry woods, and on well drained soils 
along gullies, stream courses, and other areas 
occasionally with abundant moisture.  It can often be 
found on clay to clay loam soils as an early 
successional plant on disturbed prairie sites along the 
mid to lower Texas Gulf Coast. 
Known Distribution 
Please consult the PLANTS database for the current 
distribution of this species. 
Establishment 
Establishment of plains bristlegrass is most easily 
done from seed.  A 1998 germination study with 
ninety-six accessions of plains bristlegrass seed 
obtained germination as high as 70 % at temperatures 
between 50-85º F. However, germination with this 
species tends to be inconsistent, often due to poor 
seed fill.  Viable seeds do tend to have a long shelf 
life, however, as we have been able to germinate 
plains bristlegrass seed that was more than 25 years 
old. 
For South Texas we recommend seeding plains 
bristlegrass in the fall, if there will not be a lot of 
competition from cool season weeds.  However, you 
can seed in late winter or early spring, but be sure to 
allow new seedlings time to establish a good root 
system before the summer heat arrives. Plains 
bristlegrass averages 1,300,000 seeds per pound and 
can produce as much as 214 pounds of seed per acre.   
Seeds should be planted on a clean, weed-free 
seedbed. Seeds may be planted to a ½” depth at a 
rate of one pound of pure live seed per acre, using a 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>

native grass drill.   They can also be broadcast at a 
rate of one and a quarter pounds of pure live seeds 
per acre, and covered to a maximum depth of ½”. 
Seeding rates should be adjusted proportionally when 
used as part of a seeding mix.   
Management 
Plains bristlegrass can be grown irrigated or dryland.  
It is drought hardy. We have not had any insect or 
disease problems with this grass.   Fertilize according 
to current soil test results, once plants are established. 
It is recommended that plains bristlegrass be given a 
year to establish a good root system before grazing. 
Once established, the grass can be grazed on a 
continual or rotational basis.  For continual grazing, 
the recommended stubble height is a six inch 
minimum.  For rotational grazing, a forage height 
between four to ten inches is recommended. Allow 
at least a month and a half between rotations.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
For seed production, producers may wish to irrigate. 
Plains bristlegrass tends to have poor seed production 
under droughty conditions.   Seed size and fill for 
plains bristlegrass appear to be strongly affected by 
site conditions.  Seed retention can also be a problem. 
Seed producers should monitor the plants carefully 
for optimum harvest time, in order to minimize loss 
to shatter.  Plains bristlegrass can yield up to 214 
pounds of seed per acre for the smaller seeded 
Setaria machrostachya, and up to 369 pounds per 
acre for the larger seeded S. leucopila. 
For additional assistance regarding the production 
and establishment of plains bristlegrass, please 
contact the Plant Material Center at (361) 595-1313. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher, Research Assistant 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas 
Edited: 01Oct2002 SDM; 3nov05 jsp; 060817 jsp 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA&#39;s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.