Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GULF CORDGRASS 
Spartina spartinae (Trin.) 
Merr. ex A.S. Hitchc.  
Plant Symbol = SPSP 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 
 
 
USDA NRCS Kika de la Gar za Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, TX 
Alternate Names 
sacahuista, Vilfa spartinae  Trin.  
 
Uses 
Erosion:  Gulf cordgrass ( Spartina spartinae ) is a 
good plant for coastal restor ation projects.  Its large 
dense clumps cause it to catch and hold soil, which is 
beneficial in shoreline stabilization.   
 
Wildlife:   Gulf cordgrass can  provide good bird 
nesting habitat and wildlife cover for wetland margin 
species.  Geese and sandhill cranes are among the 
species that make use of gulf cordgrass stands.  
Mottled ducks are also known to nest in dense 
clumps.   
 
Forage:   Gulf cordgrass can al so be a good source of 
cattle and geese forage when managed properly.  
Domestic livestock do not eat unburned gulf 
cordgrass, but will graze it heavily following a  prescribed burn.  The new, young shoots are tender, 
but older mature plants are too tough even for horses. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Gulf cordgrass is a stout, native, perennial grass that 
grows in dense clumps.  It has a non-rhizomatous 
base, although occasionally it can be sub-rhizomatous 
towards the outer edges of the clump.  Also called 
sacahuista, the tips of this  grass’s leaf blades are 
sharp and spine-like.  It  flowers in spring, summer, 
and rarely in the fall.  It is moderately saline tolerant 
(0-18 ppt.), and does well in mesic areas.  It can even 
grow in soils that are occa sionally submerged, but are 
above sea level most of the time. 
 
The genus name comes from the Greek word 
“spartine’, meaning cord from spartes or  Spartium 
junceum.   The genus name probably was given 
because the leaf blades are tough, like cords; hence, 
the common name cordgrass.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Gulf cordgrass grows along the Gulf Coast from 
Florida to Texas, and South into Eastern Mexico.  
More rarely, gulf cordgrass grows inland in marshes, 
swamps, and moist prairies.  It can also be found 
along the Caribbean coasts, and inland in Argentina 
and Paraguay.  
 
In Texas, it can be found along the gulf coast on 
coastal flats and around brackish marshes.  It is 
occasionally found in inland marshes and salt flats in 
the Post Oak Savannah, Rio Grande Plains, and 
Edwards Plateau Regions.   Gulf cordgrass grows 
mostly on clayey soils, but  at the Plant Material 
Center, we have had success growing it on sandier 
soils as well.  Physical and chemical soil properties 
do not seem to influence the occurrence of gulf 
cordgrass, but elevation in relation to inundation is a 
key factor.   
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.

Establishment 
Gulf cordgrass is best reproduced vegetatively for 
coastal shoreline projects by dividing large clumps 
into several smaller ones.  The success rate at the 
Plant Materials Center has been 75-80%.  Use of a 
rooting hormone is recommended, but is not a 
necessity.  We recommend placing containers (we 
use trays of 1”x 1”x 6” or 2”x 2”x 6” paper bands or 
cone-tainers) with new cuttings in a trough with 
water about 1” up from the bottom of the containers, 
so that soil stays wet from the bottom up.  
 
 After about four to six weeks, remove the containers 
from the water bath and begin to harden plants off 
prior to planting.  The potted cuttings can be 
transplanted six to eight weeks after they are started.  
Plants can be maintained in the greenhouse longer if 
necessary, and older plants can be resplit to start new 
ones.  Larger vegetative clumps can be transplanted 
to new sites successfully.   
 
Restoration of coastal sites by seeding may also be 
successful.  Currently the Kika de la Garza PMC is 
evaluating the seed potential of gulf cordgrass.  Two 
accessions have had over 30%  seed germination over 
two successive years.  Seed yeild has averaged 330 
pounds per acre, with approximately 454,000 seeds 
per pound. 
   
In 1997-98, Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
staff used gulf cordgrass transplants in a coastal 
shoreline stabilization project  that they worked on in 
partnership with the San Patricio (Texas) Soil and 
Water Conservation District.  Gulf cordgrass had a 
97% survival rate, and was found to be best adapted  
to planting sites 2 feet above the mean tide level.   
 
Management 
Gulf cordgrass should be burned periodically to 
increase forage palatability and wildlife utilization.  
Once burned, it should be grazed continuously to 
maintain tender regrowth.   
 
Gulf cordgrass requires little management otherwise.  
It appears to be fairly drought tolerant and does not 
require irrigation except when establishing new 
transplants.  Any weeds can easily be removed when 
processing plants. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley , Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher , Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 1Oct2003 SDM; Edited 05Nov2003 jlk; 24may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.