Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html>
 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED ELDERBERRY  
Sambucus racemosa L. 
Plant Symbol = SARA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
 
 ©William S. Justice. Courtesy of  Smithsonian Institution, Dept. of Systematic Biology, Botany. 
 
Alternate Names:  Other scientific names include 
Sambucus  callicarpa , Sambucus  microbotrys , 
Sambucus  pubens , Sambucus  pubens . var. 
arborescens , Sambucus racemosa  var. racemosa, 
Sambucus  racemosa  ssp. pubens   and Sambucus  
racemosa  var. pubens . Alternate common names 
include scarlet elder, stinking elderberry, stinking 
elder, red-berried elder, bunchberry elder, and red 
elder. 
 
Warning: Red elderberry fruit may be toxic when 
taken internally without sufficient preparation. 
 
Uses:  The dense roots and rhizomes of red elderberry 
make it useful for soil stabilization and erosion  control on moist sites including streambanks.  It 
provides fair to good food and cover for birds plus 
small and large mammals. Hummingbirds collect 
nectar from the flowers.  With fair energy and low 
protein values, this variety is rated fair to good as 
browse for livestock and game animals.  The fruit is 
high in ascorbic acid.  Stems, bark, leaves and roots 
contain cyanide-producing toxins but berries may be 
consumed as jelly or wine after cooking.  This 
versatile plant can also be used to make dye, 
insecticide, medicine, and musical instruments.  The 
colorful fruit attracts birds and several cultivars have 
been developed for ornamental applications. 
 
Legal Status: 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current stat us (e.g. threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Description:  Red elderberry is a large deciduous 
shrub or small tree of the Honeysuckle family that 
grows 10-20 ft tall with a broad arching form. Older 
specimens have large, multiple trunks with coarse 
bark.  Red elderberry begins growth early in spring 
and produces abundant, sm all, creamy white flowers 
in large, conical or pyramidal shaped clusters 
between April and July.  La rge clusters of small, 
bright red, fleshy berries appear in summer bearing 2-
5 seeds per fruit.  Opposite leaves are divided into 5-
7 pointed, oval to oblong or lance shaped 5-10 cm 
long leaflets with finely toothed margins.  The foliage 
has a strong, distinctive odor.  Twigs are pithy and 
light weight, dark red or purple to reddish-brown in 
color, and covered with numerous small bumps 
(raised pores).  Dead terminal twigs are common. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution:  Red elderberry is an 
early to mid seral species in the west and a 
component of climax deciduous forests in the eastern 
U. S.  It inhabits streambanks, ravines, swamps, 
moist forest clearings and higher ground near 
wetlands from sea level to 9500 ft in elevation.  It is 
shade tolerant but prefers a sunny exposure.  Red 
elderberry is found on a wide variety of soils but 
favors deeper, loamy sands and silts and nutrient rich 
sites with good drainage, ample moisture and a pH of 
5.0 to 8.0.  This species  is circumpolar in northern 
temperate zones extending south in cooler areas 
along the California coast and  at higher elevations in 
the Rocky and Appalachian Mountains.  Red 
elderberry is widespread throughout its range and is 
occasionally dominant or co -dominant in moist areas.  
It is still common but less dense on upland sites.

Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 1913. Illustrated flora of the northern 
states and Canada . Vol. 3: 268. 
 
Establishment:  Red elderberry may be propagated 
vegetatively by dormant hardwood cuttings taken in 
late fall or winter, by softwood cuttings taken in the 
spring or summer, and by root or rhizome cuttings. 
Stem cuttings require at least 2 nodes (joints) with the 
basal cut just below the lower node. Stem cuttings 
may benefit from the use of a rooting hormone 
solution like IBA or IBA-talc. Layering is another 
means of propagation.  Sturdy, unrooted dormant 
cuttings taken in late fall or winter can be planted 
directly on moist streambanks as “live stakes”.      
 
Due to seed coat and embryo  dormancy, dry or fresh  
seed requires 30-60 days warm, moist (20-30°C) 
stratification followed by at least 90-150 days cold 
stratification (5°C) [cold, moist chilling], or 5-15 min 
sulfuric acid plus 2 months cold, moist chilling at 1-
4°C for good germination.  Others suggest that after 
pulp removal, fresh seed can be sown immediately in 
late summer to provide both warm (fall) and cold 
(winter) periods for conditioning.  There are about 
200,000 – 300,000 clean seeds per pound. Red 
elderberry consistently produces abundant fruit and 
seed.  Container and bare root nursery stock may be 
planted using standard practices.  Fall planting is 
recommended over winter and spring if material is 
available at this time.  
  Management: 
Nursery plantings of red elderberry 
can be as dense as 700 plants per acre in soil at least 
24 in. deep.  Consider supplemental irrigation during 
establishment year or years with low rainfall.  Red 
elderberry will re-sprout from both roots and the seed 
bank following fire. Severe pruning will prevent a 
spindly growth habit in ornamental applications. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems:  Viral cankers can 
girdle and kill the stems.  Bacterial and fungal leaf 
spots, powdery mildew and cane borers are usually 
not serious.  
 
Environmental Concerns:  Red elderberry spreads 
slowly either by seed or by root sprouting.  In moist 
forests of the Pacific Nort hwest this species (var. 
racemosa ) can inhibit tree regeneration following 
fire, but it is not considered a primary competitor.  
Although little effect has been discerned in the field, 
plants may have some allelopathic potential as they 
inhibited germination and growth of Douglas-fir 
( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) and other species under 
experimental conditions. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin): Red elderberry is routinely available 
in containers or bare-root from west coast native 
plant nurseries.  ‘Plumosa Aurea’ is an ornamental 
cultivar with cut leaves and yellow foliage. 
 
Prepared by:  Pete Gonzalves and Dale Darris. 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  Pete Gonzalves. USDA NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 070716 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about
 Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service