Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SAND CORDGRASS 
Spartina bakeri Merr. 
Plant Symbol = SPBA  
 
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Uses 
Sand cordgrass, burned in early fall, provides 
fair-quality grazing for cattle during winter and 
spring.  It is tough and unpalatable during summer 
months. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Sand cordgrass is a 
warm-season, robust bunch grass, native to the U.S.  
The height ranges from 3 to  5 feet.  Leaf blade is flat 
and rolls inward when drying; 1/4 inch wide; upper 
surface is dark green, lower light green and coarse 
ridges on upper  surface.  Leaf sheath is rounded.  
Seedhead has 5 to 12 spikes, each 1-1/4 to 2-1/2 
inches long, lying close to stem; spikelets grow on 
one side of rachis and seedhead 2 to 8 inches long. 
 
Management 
This grass increases on ranges that are grazed 
continuously. 
 
Establishment 
Makes its major growth during spring.  Seeds form 
during late May and June in most ranges, later in the 
northern parts.  Vegetative growth continues until  fall.  Some basal leaves remain green during winter 
in south Florida.  Mature plants often form bunches 
18 to 20 inches in diameter.  Adapted to margins of 
sand ponds and fresh marshes throughout range.  
During growing season, tolerates periodic flooding.  
Will not grow on saline soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov 
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.
 
 
References 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 14june02 ahv; aug03 ahv, 19sep05jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.