Plant Fact Sheet
AWNLESS 
BUSHSUNFLOWER  
Simsia calva (Engelm. & A. Gray) 
A. Gray  
Plant Symbol = SICA7  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas   
 
Texas A&M University System   
 
Uses  
Wildlife:   Awnless bushsunflower provides a high protein 
browse for deer, as well as seed which is eaten by 
songbirds.   
   
Livestock:  Awnless bushsunflower  is a good source of 
protein that is easily digested by both sheep and goats.    
   
Erosion Control:   Awnless Bushsunflower is used as a 
component of seed mixtures to prevent soil erosion.  It is 
commonly used in revegetation of surface mined lands.   
   
Status   
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(
http://plants.usda.gov) and your  State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
    Weediness  
 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may d isplace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also availa ble 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
    .  Please consult this and 
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
Description    
Awnless bushsunflower is a native, perennial warm -
season forb that grows 1½ to 3 feet tall.  The plant stands 
upright with multi -branches and a large woody or fleshy 
taproot.  The leaves of the awnless bushsunflower have an 
arrowhead appearance with jagged edges.  Older leaves at 
the bottom of the plant measure about two inches long 
while the newer leaves at the top are much shorter.  The 
stem splits into three separate stalks, each with its own 
flower.  Each flower is 1 to 1½ inches wide with yellow 
petals and a yellowish center.  
   
Adaptation   
Awnless bushsunflower is pr imarily adapted to the 
Edwards Plateau, but it also performs well in the western 
Gulf Coast Prairies, Rio Grande Plain, and Central 
Rolling Red and Grand Prairies.  It desires full sun, well -
drained soils like sandy or clay loams.  Awnless 
bushsunflower does not tolerate salinity, deep sands, 
heavy clays or wet bottomlands.  
   
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
   
Establishment   
Awnless bushsunflower should be planted in the spring on 
a clean, firm s eedbed.  Seed should be placed ¼ to ½ inch 
deep, but never covered more than ½ inch.  Fertilizer 
applications will vary depending on individual soil 
samples.  Nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus should be 
added to attain a medium fertility level.  A soil s ample 
should always be taken before applying fertilizer.  
Awnless bushsunflower should be planted at a rate of 2.6 
lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre. When planting this as a 
component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired pe rcent of the mix. 
 
Management   
Awnless bushsunflower is rarely planted as a monoculture 
planting but as a component of a range seeding mixture.  
At a minimum, one full growing season of grazing