Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD SENNA 
Senna hebecarpa (Fern.) Irwin 
& Barneby  
Plant Symbol = SEHE3   
 
Contributed by: National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD  
 
  George H. Bruso 
 
Alternate Names 
Cassia hebecarpa, American senna, and partridge 
tree 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical:  Several senna species are purgatives 
or laxatives depending on the dose.  The leaves and 
pods of the wild senna contain compounds called 
anthraquinones, which are powerful laxatives.  For 
this reason cattle and other herbivores avoid grazing 
the plants.   
 
Landscaping and Wildlife:  This is a stunning plant in 
bloom and has attractive foliage.  It is popular for 
meadow plantings and in native landscape gardens.  
The seed are eaten by some game birds, including 
quail.  The flowers are  primarily attractive to 
bumblebees and halcid bees.  The extra-floral 
nectaries are attractive to ants, and other insects 
including ladybird beetles.  It’s thought that these 
insects protect the plant from  other insects that would  attack the foliage.  The caterpillars of some Sulfur 
butterflies rely on wild senna foliage as a food 
source.  
 
Status 
In the Northeast U.S. wild senna is state listed as 
threatened or endangered due primarily to habitat 
loss.  The Pennsylvania Biological Survey considers 
wild senna to be endangered. 
   Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Wild senna is a large, long-lived, herbaceous 
perennial, legume, .5 – 2 meters tall.  The stout, 
central stem is light green, and slightly hairy in the 
upper stem and at the base of the upper compound 
leaves.  The compound leaves are even-pinnate with 
about 10 – 20 leaflets.  The medium to dark green 
leaflets are individually up to 2 - 5 centimeters 
across.  Each leaflet is oblong, with smooth margins 
and a pointed tip.  Near the upper base of a 
compound leaf is a small  club-shaped gland; this 
gland secrets nectar to attract  certain kinds of insects.  
From the axils of the upper compound leaves upright 
racemes of yellow flowers form from July – August.  
Each unscented flower is about 15 millimeters across; 
has 5 pale yellow sepals and petals, 10 stamens with 
black anthers and a conspicuous pistil with long 
white hairs.  The dark brown seedpods are about 10 
centimeters long when fully mature in September – 
October.  The seed pods have 10 – 18 segments and 
split explosively.  There are about 50 seeds/gram.  
 
The root system of wild senna consists of a central 
taproot and rhizomes which often forms vegetative 
colonies.  It is not yet known if the plant has the 
ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen. 
 
Distribution:  Wild senna is widely distributed in the 
eastern U.S. from Ontario, Canada south to Georgia.  
It is generally found on disturbed sites, moist 
meadows, pastures, fields or roadsides in full or 
partial sun.  It often flourishes within the floodplain 
of rivers.  While it prefers moist soils it will also 
grow on dry sites. 
 
Plant Production 
To produce plugs, seed should be sown indoors at 
least 7 weeks before transpla nting seedlings outdoors.

Wild senna, as with many other legumes, has a hard 
seed coat.  Scarify or chip the seed in order for water 
to be absorbed.  Soak the seed in warm water for 
three hours before sowing.  Cold stratification is not 
needed to induce germination.  Germination rates of 
10 – 30% were common from propagation trials 
conducted by the New England Wild Flower Society.  
Wild senna seeds are long-lived when stored under 
optimal conditions.          
   
Establishment 
This species is best planted in the spring or early fall 
from container stock to ensure success.   They should 
be spaced at about 60 – 90 centimeters apart.   
 
For direct sowing, scarified seed may be spring or 
fall planted at a depth of 3 millimeters and will 
germinate the following spring.  
     
As with many other legumes, wild senna plants 
initially send their energy into their root system, 
therefore the top of the plant will be slow to develop
. 
This initial slow top growth  in the first two years is 
normal, especially in the early spring.  Once plants 
have become established  they will grow vigorously 
and are very drought tolerant.   
 
Wild senna should be grown in soil that has good 
drainage in either a sunny or partly shaded location.  
This plant grows naturally in damp, fertile soils and 
under these conditions a height of 7 feet can be 
attained.  In a drier soil the plant will grow to about 3 
feet and tend to be less floppy.   
 
Management  
Wild senna is a hardy plant with relatively few 
problems.  This species is easy to grow and maintain 
with moderate levels of N, P and K.  It forms large 
clonal colonies.  Due to the taproot of this plant it is 
difficult to transplant or divide.    
  
Pests and Potential Problems 
Wild senna is a plant with few pest or disease 
problems.  This plant can become quite tall when the 
soil is fertile and moist; it may flop over while the 
flowers and seedpods are developing.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Wild senna is somewhat 
available as seed of plants from commercial nurseries 
specializing in native plants.   
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt
, USDA NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
Edited: 080702 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.