Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SILVER 
BUFFALOBERRY  
Shepherdia argentea (Pursh) 
Nutt. 
Plant Symbol = SHAR  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Elaeagnus utilis A. Nels., Lepargyrea argentea 
(Pursh) Greene  
 
Uses 
Windbreaks: Plant silver buffaloberry in the outer 
rows of multi-row plantings when supplemental 
moisture is available.  This species has potential for 
single-row plantings where a low, dense barrier is 
desired. 
 
Wildlife: The thorny thickets formed by the shrub 
create ideal cover for nume rous bird and animal 
species.  It is preferred nesting site for many 
songbirds.  Some birds eat the fruit although it is not 
relished by a wide variety of species. 
 
Recreation  and Beautification : The thorns and 
suckering habit of this species must be taken into 
consideration when planning its use in recreation 
areas.  The fruit is highly prized for making jelly. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Shepherdia argentea  (Pursh) Nutt., silver 
buffaloberry, is a deciduous, thorny shrub or small 
tree of 6 to 20 feet in height native to North America.  
It occurs as scattered to frequent plants along 
streams, in bottomlands, and on moist hillsides 
throughout western Wyoming and Colorado at 
elevations to 7,500 feet.  The shrub is winter hardy 
and alkaline tolerant, but has only limited drought 
and shade tolerance.  Under favorable conditions, it 
readily forms thorny thickets. 
 
Fruits are reddish, globe-shaped “berries” (drupes) 
about 1/8 to 1/4 inch across; flowers are brownish-
yellow, small, with male and female flowers borne on 
separate plants in clusters of 1 to 3 at the leaf axils; 
leaves are opposite, silvery-scurfy, oblong and entire, 
up to 2 inches long; stems  are thorny, silvery-scurfy 
when young, brownish in age; roots are shallow and 
much branched, readily sprouting. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD  
Adaptation and Distribution 
This species is adapted to  elevations below 7,500 feet 
and 15 to 20 inches of precipitation equivalent; it 
requires supplemental moisture in low precipitation 
zones. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Prepare a weed free site for planting. 
 
Management  
Planted areas should be kept free of weeds during the 
first 2 years of establishment.  Care should be taken 
to prevent suckers from taking root in unwanted areas 
around homes and agricultural systems.  Over-
sprouting can be controlled mechanically or through 
the use of approved herbicides.

Pests and Potential Problems 
This species may be subject to a heart rot disease 
which can cause serious problems.  There are no 
known serious insect problems. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seedlings of silver buffaloberry are available from 
most hardwood commercial nurseries.  ‘Sakakawea’ 
(Canada) was developed by  the Bismarck, ND Plant 
Materials Center and released in 1984. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.