Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GRAY GOLDENROD 
Solidago nemoralis Aiton 
Plant Symbol = SONE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD    
 
Landscaping and Wildlife:   Grey goldenrod is a 
beautiful plant in flower and  creates an effective 
groundcover in dry, harsh, sunny conditions.  For 
these reasons it is often used in native landscapes, 
rock gardens, butterfly gardens and meadow 
plantings.  It also has potential as a component of 
conservation mixes.  A wide range of insects visit the 
flowers for pollen and nectar, including long-tongued 
bees, short-tongued bees, S phecid and Vespid wasps, 
flies, butterflies, moths and beetles.  Bee pollinators 
include honey bees, Little Carpenter bees, Halictid 
bees and Plasterer bees.  Fly pollinators include 
Syrphid flies, Tachinid flie s, Flesh flies, Blow flies 
and Muscid flies.  The caterpillars of many moths,  including the goldenrod scarlet plant bug, net-veined 
beetle and leaf-footed bug, feed on the foliage and 
other parts of this plant.  
The seeds are also eaten by 
the Eastern Goldfinch to a limited extent.   Ethno 
botanic al:  Native Americans boiled the roots and 
used the liquid to treat jaundice and  kidney disorders. 
The leaves were boiled and the liquid used as a wash 
for burns and skin ulcers. The Navajo burned the 
plant as incense, and the seeds were used for food . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Janet Novak, used with permission 
 
Alternate Names 
Old Field Goldenrod, Pr airie Goldenrod, Dwarf 
Goldenrod 
 
Uses   
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Gray goldenrod is a native pe rennial  wildflower  it is 
one of the smaller species of goldenrod, growing 
from 6 inches and seldom r eaching 2.5 feet tall.  The 
central stem is reddish or grey-green and covered 
with short white hairs, often in lines.  Usually this 
stem has winged leaflets at the axils of the upper 
leaves.  The alternate leaves are up to 4 inches long 
and ¾” across, pubescent (covered with fine short 
hairs) and become smaller as they ascend the stem.  
The leaves taper to a narrow base and have a soft 
scratch feel to them.  The leaf margins are smooth or 
slightly serrate.  Grey goldenrod flowers later than 
most other goldenrods.  The narrow flower is wider 
in the middle and has numerous yellow compound 
flowers that are about ¼”  across.    The blooming 
period occurs during the fall and lasts about a month.  
The flowers occasionally have a slight fragrance.  
After flowering, the  small dry seed  develops with 
tufts of hair and are dispersed by the wind.  The root 
system consists of a branching caudex (a thickened 
root structure that serves  as water storage for the 
plant) and rhizomes.  The  caudex root system is 
especially prevalent on ol der plants.  In suitable 
locations, grey goldenrod has a tendency to form 
groups of plants.   
 
Grey goldenrod is a care free plant that prefers 
growing in full sun and dry soil. This plant thrives in 
sand, clay or gravel soils.  It will also grow in fertile 
soils however it can be short-lived if the site is too 
rich. 
Distribution :  This species is widely distributed from 
Georgia to Texas, north to Nova Scotia and Alberta 
Canada in USDA cold hardiness zones 2 – 9.  
Habitats include: meadows, dry open woods, upland

prairies, pastures, savannas, fallow fields, thickets, 
roadsides, railroads, eroded slopes, and sand dunes  
 
Establishment 
Seed Propagation:   Seed ripens in the autumn and 
should be collected when  the heads are brown and 
become fluffy.  Fresh se ed germinates at low 
percentages without any pretreatment.  Germination 
is improved by 90 days of cold moist pretreatment 
(40 degrees F).  This pretreatment may be 
accomplished artificially in  a refrigerator or by 
sowing the seed in the fall. 
Vegetative Propagation:   Four to six node softwood 
stem cuttings taken in the late spring root nearly 100 
percent. Plants may also be propagated by division of 
mature plants. Make sure each section has a bud and 
a root.  It can also be divided by separating individual 
crowns with a length of rhizome (
horizontal  plant stem 
with  shoots
 above and  roots below)  before growth 
begins in the spring. 
 
Management  
Grey goldenrod is a hardy, pioneer plant with 
relatively few problems.  It is easy to maintain with 
the addition of  low to moderate levels of nitrogen 
(50 lbs. / acre).  Before amending the soil with any 
additional nutrients a soil test is highly 
recommended.  Gray goldenrod will naturalize under 
optimal conditions and can become weedy in moist, 
highly fertile soils, especially in the Western U.S. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Gray goldenrod tends to be  a care-free plant but may 
be affected by spot anthracnose, powdery mildew, 
rust, and fungal spots in moist conditions.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Weediness:  This plan t may become weedy or 
invasive in western states  where it may displace other 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed . 
 
Control  
Gray goldenrod is easily controlled by foliar 
applications broad spectrum herbicides.  Please 
contact your agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in 
your area and how to use it safely.  Always read label 
and safety instructions for each control method.  
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  
USDA NRCS does not guarantee the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
  Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Gray goldenrod may be  
available from commercial nurseries specializing in 
native plants. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Materials 
Center Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Edited: 090112 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.