Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CURTIS’ DROPSEED 
Sporobolus curtissii (Vasey ex 
Beal) Small ex Scribn.  
Plant Symbol = SPCU 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
Curtis dropseed 
 
Uses 
Curtis’ dropseed is grazed readily by cattle during the 
winter and spring. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Curtis’ dropseed is a native, 
cool-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranged from 1 to 2 feet.   The leaf blade is mostly 
basal, flat, narrow, 6 to 10 inches long, and the upper 
surface near the base is hairy.  The leaf sheath is 
shorter than the internodes and the basal sheaths are 
hairy at the throat.  The s eedhead has an open panicle 
6 to 8 inches long and straw-colored glumes that 
remain after the seeds disseminate. 
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
For better grazing conditions, if vegetative growth 
accumulates after winter deferments of 2 or more 
years, ranges should be burned in late winter and 
grazing deferred for 3 to 4 weeks or until fall. 
 
Establishment 
This species makes considerable growth during the 
winter.  It produces seeds in early May and June.  
Sometimes it remains green during the summer and 
early fall.  A few seed st alks are produced from a 
single plant.  It is primarily adapted to moist sandy 
soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all

prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.