Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMALL BURNET 
Sanguisorba minor Scop. 
Plant Symbol = SAMI3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Grazing/rangeland: Small burnet is noted to have 
good to excellent forage value for livestock and 
wildlife during all seasons.  It stays green throughout 
the growing season and into winter until heavy snow 
cover occurs, providing forage and seed to livestock 
and wildlife.  It provides excellent diversity to the 
seeded plant community. 
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Small burnet is noted 
for value in mixes for erosion control and 
beautification values. 
 
Wildlife : Small burnet is considered very desirable 
forage for elk, deer, antelope and birds either as 
herbage or seed.  Birds use the seed in fall, winter 
and spring. It also provides cover for selected small 
bird species.  It provides diversity to the plant 
community. 
 
The leaves of small burnet can be added to salads, ice 
drinks, vinegar, butter, and cream cheese to add a 
fresh, pleasant, cucumber-like flavor. 
 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Small burnet ( Sanguisorba minor  Scop.) is a hardy, 
relatively long-lived, evergreen, introduced, perennial 
forb.  It is usually a branched caudex (thick base of 
stems) with a prominent tap root and sometimes 
weakly rhizomatous.  Small burnet plants have 
alternate pinnately compound leaves.  Leaflets are 
mostly 9 to 17, oval to oblong, 4 inches long and 
coarsely toothed.  Total height varies from 6 inches 
on droughty sites to approximately 25 inches on 
irrigated sites.  The flowers are closely packed in 
headlike to elongate spikes 3 to 8 inches long.  The 
flowers are mostly imperfect, the lower ones male 
and the upper ones female with no petals and about 
12 stamens.  Native burnet species have 2 to 4 
stamens.  The seed is an achene, oblong, about 4 to 5 
mm long, woody and warty, between and along 
rather prominent ridges which are 4 in number. 
Joe F. Duft 
USDA NRCS 1992 
Western Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Small burnet does best on well drained soils and 
infertile to disturbed soils.  It can be planted and will 
establish in 12 inches or more rainfall areas, but 
generally does not persist below 14 inches.  It has 
excellent cold winter and drought tolerance.  It 
tolerates weakly saline to weakly acidic sites.  Small 
burnet is not tolerant of poor drainage, flooding or 
high water tables.  It is usually used in open areas, 
but will tolerate minor semi-shaded conditions.  It is 
considered fire resistant due to leaves and stems 
staying green with relatively high moisture content 
during the fire season. 
 
Small burnet is distributed primarily throughout the 
West and Northeast.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Small burnet should be seeded with a drill at a depth 
of 1/4 to 3/4 inch into a firm seedbed or broadcast 
using seed dribblers or aerial applications.  Small 
burnet is not recommended for single species 
seedings.  The full seeding rate (not recommended)

for this forb is 20 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre or 20 PLS per square foot.  When used as a 
component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  
In most cases a rate of 2 to 5 pounds per acre would 
be adequate in mixtures with other species.  For 
mined lands and other harsh critical areas, double the 
seeding rate component of small burnet.  The best 
seeding results are obtained from seeding in late fall 
to very early spring (because of grass component of 
mix) on heavy to medium textured soils and in late 
fall on medium to light textured soils.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seeding is not 
recommended unless site is irrigated.  Mulching, 
irrigation and weed control all benefit stand 
establishment.  Seedling vigor is excellent, but the 
plant establishes slowly.  Germination normally 
occurs the first growing season if adequate moisture 
is available.  Full flowering should not be expected 
until at least the second growing season. 
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment.  Because small burnet is a broadleaf, 
use of 2,4-D is not recommended.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage.  New stands may also be 
damaged by grasshoppers and other insects and 
pesticides may be needed. 
 
Management  
Growth of small burnet begins in early spring and 
flowers appear in late Ma y through June.  The plant 
establishes slowly and should not be grazed until at 
least the second growing season.  Small burnet plants 
have been known to persist for more than 20 years on 
western rangelands.  As with other species, the life of 
the plant can be prolonged if it is permitted to set 
seed on a rotational basis.  Weed control and removal 
of very competitive species may improve 
establishment.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Damage from wildlife and rodents may occur and 
they may need to be cont rolled.  Disease problems 
are minimal with small burnet. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Small burnet establishes and spread relatively quickly 
via seed distribution.  It is not considered "weedy" or 
an invasive species, but can spread into adjoining 
vegetative communities unde r ideal climatic and 
environmental conditions.  It coexists with other 
species and adds biodiversity to those plant 
communities. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
'Delar' small burnet ( Sanguisorba minor Scop.) is a 
selected release from seed  originating from European 
sources.  The name 'Delar' denotes pleasing or 
alluring after the attractive  green lush appearance of 
the plant.  'Delar' was selected by Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center for outstanding seed and forage 
production, good cold tolerance and palatability for 
both livestock and wildlife.  It was released in 1981 
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service and 
the University of Idaho Agricultural Experiment 
Station.  'Delar' is a hardy, relatively long-lived, 
evergreen, non-leguminous,  introduced, perennial 
forb from 6 inches tall on droughty sites to 
approximately 25 inches tall on irrigated sites.  It is 
well adapted to sunny flatlands to open slopes, well 
drained soils from moderately basic to weakly acidic, 
12 to 18 inch rainfall areas, at 1,000 to 6,000 feet 
elevation.  It will easily establish at the lower rainfall 
zones, but may not persist below 14 inches.  It is not 
tolerant of shade, poor drainage, flooding or high 
water tables.  It does well seeded in mixtures with 
other species.  Its intended uses are erosion control, 
reclamation, rangeland improvement, wildlife forage, 
and site diversity.  Certified seed is readily available 
through commercial sources  and breeder seed is 
maintained by Aberdeen  Plant Materials Center.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Daniel G. Ogle 
USDA NRCS Plant Material s Program, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.