Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DWARF WILLOW 
Salix x cotteti Kerner  
Plant Symbol = SACO28  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternative Names 
Cottet willow 
 
Uses 
Dwarf willow is recommended for erosion control 
plantings along small stream channels.  It can be 
incorporated into soil bioengineering systems to 
control erosion along streambanks resulting from 
flood and ice damage.  Fast growth, resilient stems, 
and ability to recover from mechanical damage make 
it an ideal plant for this use.  When used in this 
manner, it provides cover for small animals and 
browse for deer, beaver, and rabbits and exceptional 
nesting sites for birds.  
 
This willow is also suitable for use as a living snow 
fence and/or a farmstead windbreak where moisture 
is adequate. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Dwarf willow is a small to medium sized shrub 
growing only 6 to 8 feet high, with smooth, slender, 
tough, resilient branches that are lime green at first 
but later change to a darker green.  The cultivar, 
‘Bankers’ was introduced from the alpine region of 
West Germany in the mid-1960s.  This selection is a 
natural hybrid between  Salix retusa L. and Salix 
myrsinifolia Salisb.  It is a sterile hybrid, therefore it 
produces no seed. 
 
‘Bankers’ is a semiprostrate shrub, sending up many 
branches from the roots to form a dense surface 
cover.  The roots themselves form an interlocking 
network to tie the soil together.  It rarely spreads by 
layering of branches.  Growth is rapid from cuttings, 
with plants reaching full height in 3 to 5 years.  
Plantings made on 2-foot centers can produce solid 
stands in 2 to 3 years. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Dwarf willow grows best on moist sites that are 
subject to periodic flooding and overflow.  It can be 
used on soils of any texture.  Dwarf willow competes 
well with herbaceous plants  that are less than 2 feet 
tall.  The cultivar ‘Bankers’ is climatically adapted 
throughout the Appalachian region from New York 
to Alabama, and has also been used successfully in 
Oregon and Washington west  of the Cascade Range. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Dwarf willow is susceptible to severe browsing by 
livestock and cannot be established without 
protection. Banks that are eroded and undercut to a 
steep unplantable slope require grading prior to 
planting.   
Cuttings: Plant as one year old rooted cuttings, or 
dormant hardwood cuttings.  If dormant cuttings are 
used, they should be 3/8 to 1/2 inch at the thick end, 
12 to 15 inches long, and made before the leaves 
emerge.  Dormant cuttings should be planted 
vertically with only an inch or two protruding.  If 
they cannot be pushed in the soil by hand, use a rod 
to make a hole but be sure the cutting is tamped in 
well with the heel to avoid leaving any air spaces.  If 
the soil is too stony to for this technique, the cutting

may be buried horizontally about two inches deep in 
damp soil.  Rooted cuttings should be planted in a 
hole dug big enough to accommodate the root system 
when well-spread.  On difficult streambanks, it is 
sometimes necessary to mulch the planting with 
coarse plant material, even wiring and staking the 
mulch down in some cases.  Plant at two to three foot 
spacing from just above water's edge or rip-rap, to the 
top of the bank. 
Soil Bioengineering Uses: Dormant whips are very 
useful when bundled into wattles (live fascines) or 
for brush layering and mattressing systems.  
‘Bankers' willow can be produced in the nursery to 
specification to meet all  the above uses.  Planting 
methods for soil bioengineering are regionally varied.  
Consult with the Plant Materials Specialist for 
planting recommendations. 
 
Management  
Dwarf willow used on streambanks is subject to 
considerable mechanical damage.  The site should be 
inspected annually in spring, after heavy run-off has 
subsided, for needed repairs.  Gaps should be filled in 
by replanting, or laying down and covering branches 
of nearby plants.  Any mechanical measures used to 
control the bank, such as stone rip-rap, must be kept 
in repair as well. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests or diseases of dwarf 
willow. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
A variety of dwarf willow, 'Bankers' (Germany), was 
released by the Quicksand, Kentucky Plant Materials 
Center in 1983.  Rooted and unrooted cuttings, 
whips, and wattles can be purchased from a variety of 
nurseries in the Northeast. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program  information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina
tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.