Plant Fact Sheet     
 
COMPOSITE DROPSEED  
Sporobolus compositus  (Poir.) 
Merr. var.  compositus 
Plant symbol = SPCOC2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
  
Alternate names 
rough dropseed, meadow dropseed, tall droopseed, 
and dropseeed 
 
Uses 
Composite dropseed is tough and wiry and is not 
grazed as readily as tall or hairy dropseed.  Cattle and 
horses graze it in winter wh en associated grasses are 
dormant. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Composite dropseed is a 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranges from 2 to 4 feet.  The leaf blade is flat and 
narrow; at least 20 inches long and rolls inward, and 
becomes threadlike at the 
tip.  The leaf sheath is 
shorter than internodes.  The upper sheath, often 
inflated, encloses seedhead.  The ligule has a short 
and hairy membrane.  The seedhead is narrow 
purplish panicle usually 3 to 8 inches long; spikelets 
1-flowered and wedge shaped. 
 
Management 
This grass increases on ranges that are grazed only in 
summer because associated grasses are more 
palatable.  If it is the key management species during 
the winter grazing season, no  more than 50 percent of 
current year's growth by we ight should be grazed off. 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in late winter or early spring.  
Seedheads form in August.  Some leaves remain 
green in the dense bunches through winter.  It is best 
adapted to deep clay soils that is intermittently wet 
and dry.  It does not grow on soils with a high water 
table or on deep sandy soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee   
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Britton & Brown 1913 @ plants.usda.gov

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS fiel d office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)  prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, col or, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability,  political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohib ited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who requi re alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET  Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, wr ite USDA, Director, Office of Civil Right s, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or  TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.