Plant Fact Sheet
SNOWBERRY 
Symphoricarpos albus (L.) Blake  
Plant Symbol = SYAL 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center  
  Brother Alfred Brousseau  
© Saint Mary's College   
@ CalPhotos   
Alternative Names  
Common Alternate Names:   white coralberry, common 
snowberry  
Scientific Alternate Names:  None  
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic : Some southern groups made brooms out of 
the br anches and the Gitksan hollowed out the twigs to 
make pipe -stems (MacKinnon, Pojar, & Coupe´ 1992). 
One or two of the berries were eaten by the Stl’atl’imx to 
settle the stomach after too much fatty food (Pojar & 
MacKinnon 1994). An infusion of the fruit w as used as 
eyewash for sore eyes and the berries were rubbed on the 
skin as treatment for burns, rashes, and sores (Moerman 
1998). A decoction of the roots and stems was used in the 
treatment of the inability to urinate, venereal diseases, 
tuberculosis and  the fevers associated with teething 
sickness (Ibid.). A tea made from the roots of this species 
was used to clear up afterbirth (Fielder 1975).   Wildlife
: Snowberry is an important browse for many 
types of livestock and wildlife. It is important for shelter 
and food for various birds and small mammals.   
 
Status   
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status, such as, state noxious status and wetland indicator 
values.   
 
Description   
General : Honeysuckle family (Caprifoliaceae). 
Snowberry ( Symphoricarpos albus ) is a shrub or small 
tree that grows up to six meters tall. The leaves are large, 
opposite, divided into five to seven leaflets, and toothed 
or irregularly lobed. The fruits are white, berry like 
drupes, and one to one and a half centimeters in diameter. 
The flowers are small, white to creamy, with a strong 
unpleasant odor; numerous in a rounded or pyramidal 
parasol -like cluster (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994); blooming 
from mid May to July. The fruits are roundish, dull -white 
berries about 3/8 inch in diameter, soon becoming 
blackish, ripening August or September (Grimm 1993).   
Distribution : Snowberry inhabits slopes and valley 
bottoms of the foothills of the Coast Ranges, the Sierra 
Nevada, and the mountains of southern California 
(McMinn 1939). It extends northward to British Columbia 
and eastward to Pennsylvania and the New England states 
(Ibid.).   
 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation   
Symphoricarpos albus is found along stream banks, in 
swampy thickets, moist clearings and open forests at sea 
level to middle elevations (Pojar & MacKinnon 1994). It 
tolerates soil types but grows best in heavy clay soils. 
Snowberry gr ows well in sun or shade.  
 
Establishment   
Propagation by Seed:  Symphoricarpos albus seeds are 
best sown in the fall after maturity. Dormancy of this 
species is caused by hard seed coat and immature embryo, 
which can be broken by stratification in sand and peat for 
90 days at 77º, plus 180 days at 41ºF. When the seedlings 
are large enough to handle, place them into individual 
pots and grow them in the greenhouse for their first 
winter. Plant seedlings into their permanent positions in 
late spring or early su mmer. 
Management

Management  
Snowberry fruit contains low concentrations of a bitter 
principle, saponin, which foams in water. It is very poorly 
absorbed by the body and can be broken down by 
thoroughly cooking the fruit. Saponin is  much more toxic 
to some creatures, such as fish, if eaten in large quantities.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)   
Commonly available through native plant nurseries, 
except in the south.   
 
References   
Carter, J.C. 1997. Trees and shrubs of New Mexico.   
     Mimbres Publishing.  
Dirr, M.A. & M.W. Heuser 1987. The reference manual   
     of woody plant propagation. Varsity Press, Athens,   
     Georgia.   
Fielder, M. 1975. Plant medicine and folklore .  
     Winchester Press, New York, New York.  
Glea son, H.A. & A. Cronquist 1991. Manual of vascular   
     plants of northeastern United States and Canada. 2
nd   
     
ed. New York Botanical Garden, New York, New York.   
Grimm, W.C. 1993. The illustrated book of wildflowers   
     and shrubs . Stackpole Books, Mechanisburb,  
     Pennsylvania.   
Guard, J.B. 1995. Wetland plants of Oregon and   
     Washington. Lone Pine Publishing, Redmond,  
     Washington.   
Hickman, J.C. 1993. The Jepson manual: higher plants of   
     California . University of California press, Berkeley,   
     California.   
MacKinnon, A, J. Po jar, & R. Coupe´ 1992. Plants of   
     northern British Columbia. Lone Pine Publishing,  
     Redmond, Washington.  
McMinn, H.E. 1939. An illustarted manual of California   
     shrubs . University of California Press, Berkeley,  
     California.   
Moerman, D. 1998. Native American ethnobotany .  
      Timber Press, Portland, Oregon.   
Pojar, J. & A. MacKinnon 1994. Plants of the Pacific   
     Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, British      
     Columbia, and Alaska. Lone Pine Publishing,   
     Redmond, Washington.  
Vines, R.A. 1960. Trees, shrubs and woody vine s of the  
     southwest . University of Texas Press, Austin, Press.  
  Prepared By: 
 
Jammie Favorite  
Formerly, USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center   
Baton Rouge, Louisiana   
 
Species Coordinator  
Lincoln M. Moore  
Formerly  USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center   
Baton Rouge, Louisiana   
Citation  
Favorite, J. , L . Moore.2008 . Plant  fact sheet for 
snowberry  [Symphoricarpos albus  (L.) Blake.] . USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, National Plant 
Data Center, Greensboro, NC 27401   
Published  April 2008  
Edited: 08apr02 ahv   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Prog ram Web site <
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER