Plant Fact Sheet
SAGO PONDWEED 
Stuckenia pectinata (L.) Böerner  
Plant Symbol = STPE15  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  
 
Figure 1. Sago pondweed. Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA NRCS. 1992. 
Western wetland flora: Field office guide to plant species. West Region, 
Sacramento. Courtesy of USDA NRCS Wetland Science Institute.  
Alternate Names 
Previously known  as Pot amogeton pectinat us and 
Stuckenia pectinatus,  the currently accepted name  is 
Stuckenia pectinata.  
 
  Coleogeton pectinatus ; Pota mogeton interruptus ; 
Pot amogeton latifolius ; Pota mogeton flabellatus ; 
Pota mogeton columbianus ; broadleaf  pondweed; duck 
grass; eelgrass, fennel pondweed; foxtail; Indian grass, 
old -fashioned bay grass;
 pondgrass; potato moss; wild 
celery; fennel -leaved water
 milfoile; poker grass; pochard 
grass; string weed  
 
  Uses
 
Wildlife : Waterfowl extensively use and rely on sago 
pondweed as a food source.  The whole plant can be 
consumed, and parts are utilized by diving, dabbling, 
whistling ducks, many types of geese, swans, coots and 
the long -billed dowitchers.  
 
Bioremediation  and bioindication: May be used to 
suppress phytoplankton blooms by taking up phosphorus 
from the water and to monitor heavy metal pollution in 
rivers.  
 
Erosion control : The wave dampening action of sago 
pondweed can be used for erosion control of shores and 
dams.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Sago 
pondweed is an obligate wetland sp ecies. 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agr iculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.   Sago pondweed is considered a nuisance 
weed or noxious weed in some waters that are used for 
recreational purposes  and in irrigation canals.  
Description  and Adaptation 
General : Pondweed Family (Pota mogetonaceae).  Sago 
pondweed is an aquatic herbaceous plant up to 3 feet tall.  
Sago pondweed is generally completely submersed except 
the reproductive stalk  that peaks above the water that 
flowers June –  September.  It is nearly un -branched at the 
base, becoming f reely branched towards the top.  The 
leaves are ¾  -4.5 inches long and up to ½ inch wide.  The 
flower stalk can be up to 2 inches long.   Fruits are 
yellowish to brown.  
Sago pondweed occurs nearly worldwide and is found 
submerged in semi -permanent to permanently  flooded 
areas where the water is less than 8 feet deep.  It can be 
found from sea level to almost 16,000 feet above sea 
level.  Sago pondweed can grow in nearly all bottom

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 
substrates and can tolerate high salinity, pH, and alkaline 
water.
 
 
 
Figure  2. Sago pondweed distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database  
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Sago pondweed can be cultured in liquid media for 
exp erimental purposes from drupelets, turions, rhizomes, 
leafy tops, or cuttings.  Drupelets can be stored in wet or 
dry conditions.  Turions can be harvested and stored for a 
period of up to fou r years, if dipped in paraffin .  Turions 
can also be stored in w ater at low temperatures or packed 
in layers of straw or moss.  
Management  
Managers have tried to manipulate populations of sago 
pondweed for use by waterfowl and wildlife by adjusting 
the water levels.  However, results from these trials are 
variable and depend on water chemistry, water levels, 
geography, and other plant competitors .   
Pests and Potential Problems  
Although not conclusive, there are bacteria and fungi that 
may cause diseases in sago pondweed and could be 
responsible for a decline in sago populations or 
deformities of the plants.     Environmental Concerns
 
Sago pondw eed has been considered a noxious weed in 
waters used for recreational purposes and irrigation. 
Dense formations of sago beds may also limit movement 
of predator fish and inhibit fishing.  
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  U SDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.   
Many chemical, biological, and physical methods have 
been used to attempt to control growth or numbers of sago 
pondweed.   
Cultiva rs, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Theses plant materials are somewhat readily available 
from commercial sources.  There are no known cultivars, 
improved, or selected materials at this time.  
Prepared By   
P. Allen Casey, USDA NRCS Pla nt Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas  
Citation  
Casey, P.A. 2010. Plant Fact Sheet for Sago Pondweed 
( Stuckenia pectinata  (L.) Böerner ). USDA -Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Kansas Plant Materials 
Center. Manhattan, KS 66502.  
 
Published  November  2010 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District  <
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site  <
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <
http://plant -
materials.nrcs.usda.gov