Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SHORTBEARD PLUMEGRASS  
Saccharum bervibarbe  
(Michx.) Pers. var.  contortum 
(Ell.) R. Webster 
Plant Symbol = SABRC3  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Name 
Erianthus contortus, bent-awn plumegrass 
 
Uses 
Cattle and horses graze this grass. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  This plumegrass is a native, 
warm-season
, robust, perennial bunch grass.  The 
average height is 4  to 7 feet.  The leaf blade is wide 
and flat with strong midrib.  The leaf sheath has few 
hairs, especially at upper  end, and is shorter than 
internodes.  The stem is large and rigid and 3/8 to 1/2 
inches in diameter at base .  The nodes are smooth or 
covered with short white hairs.  Seedheads are open 
panicles, brownish at maturity with hairs as long as 
spikelets at its base.  The glume has an awn 3/8 to 1/2 
inched long spirally coiled at  the base of the spikelet. 
 From Britton & Brown (1913) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Management 
This grass is easily overgrazed.  A season-long 
grazing deferment every 2 to 3 years maintains 
healthy, vigorous plants. 
 
Establishment 
New growth comes from auxillary buds at the basal 
nodes each year about April or May.  It also 
reproduces from seed.  It grows in large bunches 8 to 
10 inches in diameter and the seedheads appear in 
September and October.  It grows mostly on moist 
sandy to sandy loam soils high in natural fertility. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all

prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.