Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials  Program  < http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov/>  
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page < http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html
> 
National Plant Data Center < http://npdc.usda.gov
> 
 
SEASIDE GOLDENROD  
Solidago sempervirens L.   
Plant Symbol = SOSE  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Cape May, New Jersey  
  William Skaradek , USDA NRCS 
Uses 
Dune  Restoration :  Seaside goldenrod  is a beneficial 
native perennial that may be used to add biodiversity to 
dune  restoration projects.   
Wildlife Habitat:   Seaside goldenrod provides benefits 
for native wildlife such as butterflies, birds, and small 
mammals.  It is a major food source for the fall 
migrating monarch butterfly.  
Ornamental:   With showy bright yellow  flowers 
blooming late August to early October, seaside 
goldenrod is an excellent addition to pollinator  gardens , 
butterfly gardens  and ornamental flower beds.  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indi cator values). 
Description  and Adaptation 
Seaside goldenrod  is a perennial forb that is a member 
of the Aster family.  The plant may grow  up to six feet 
tall at maturity .   The plants alternately arranged leaves 
are f leshy, dark green, oblong, lance shaped  and  are 
produced the entire length of the stem .  The leaves at 
the base of the plant are the largest, up to 20 inches, and 
become smaller up the stem of the plant.  Seaside 
goldenrod derives its name from the numerous bright  golden
 yellow flowers it produces from August through 
October.  
Seaside goldenrod is native and well adapted to coastal 
habitats including the backside of primary dunes, low 
secondary  dunes and edges of salt marshes.   It has some 
tolerance for drought allowing it  to survive in the dry 
conditions  of the dunes. Seaside goldenrod often occurs 
with other native dune plants such as switchgrass, salt 
meadow  cordgrass and  American beachgrass.  The 
range of seaside goldenrod extends from Quebec south 
to Florida and Texas.  
 Seaside goldenrod distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
For  updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant 
Profile page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
Seaside goldenrod may be  grown from seed or division  
of vegetative parts .  Transplants  are used for 
establishing seed production plots  and dune restoration 
plantings .  Transplants should be planted  in late winter 
to early spring.    
Management  
Little maintenance is needed for seaside goldenrod.  It  
is  ab le t o withstand hot and dry conditions minimiz ing 
the need for irrigation.  In the  first  growing  season 
irrigation may be need in extended dry periods.  
Fertilization  may increase vigor of seaside goldenrod, 
but is not a  necessary for survival.  
Pests and Poten tial Problems 
There are no known pests or problems associated with 
seaside goldenrod.

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with seaside goldenrod.  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Monarch Germplasm  developed  from native mid -
Atlantic  populations  was released by the USDA NRCS , 
Cape May Plant Materials Center in  2010.  
Prepared By   
Scott C. Snell ; Cape  May, New Jersey . 
Citation  
Snell , S . 2010. Plant fact s heet for Seaside G oldenrod 
( Solidago sempervirens ). USDA- Natural R esources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center . Cape 
May , NJ . 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District  
<
http:// www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site  
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://plant -materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination 
in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital statu s, 
familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic 
information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an 
individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all pr ograms.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720 -2600 (voice and TDD).   
To file a complaint of discrimination  write to USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 
20250 -9410 or call (800) 795 -3272 (voice) or (202) 720 -6382 (TDD). 
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer."  
Read about 
Civil Righ ts at the Natural Resources Cons ervation Service.