Plant Fact Sheet 
 
SEASHORE DROPSEED  
Sporobolus virginicus (L.) 
Kunth 
Plant Symbol = SPVI3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Hawaii PMC and 
National Plant Data Center 
 
Forest & Kim Starr, Keomoku Beach Lanai, Hawaii 
From  www.hear.org, Plants of Hawaii 
 
Alternate Names 
Aki aki, aki, mahiki, mahikihiki, manienie, manienie 
aki aki, manienie mahikihiki, manienie maoli, 
seashore rushgrass, marshgrass, crabgrass, beach 
dropseed. 
 
Uses 
Conservation: 
Sporobolus virginicus  does very well as a dune 
stabilizer.  It has potential for stream bank 
stabilization and also roadside slope stabilization.   
 
Cultural: 
In some places  S. virginicus is medicinally used to 
relieve urinary irritation and throat irritation. 
 
Wildlife: 
Many native seabirds find shelter and build nests in 
coastal stands of  S. virginicus.  It also provides 
excellent winter food for wild geese. 
 
Forage: 
S. virginicus has high protein and mineral content and 
is readily grazed by cattle.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Sporobolus virginicus  is a low-growing vigorous 
perennial grass that spreads by rhizomes.  The height 
ranges from 4 to 8 inches tall.   Roots can grow down 
to 18” deep.  Leaves are  1-4” long and 0.04-0.12” 
wide  with distinctly two-ranked and salt crystals 
common on leaves and stems.  The leaf sheath is 
overlapping and hairy at the throat.   Its inflorescence 
is dense and spike-like.  The panicle, 3” long, is 
shorter than other Sporobolus species.   
  
Adaptation and Distribution 
S. virginicus is commonly found in coastal dune 
habitats and it does best if sea water level fluctuates 
from 2 inches above soil su rface to 6 inches below.  
It also does well in a variety of different soils from 
clays to sands.    Being a plant that is adapted to low 
rainfall and high salinity,  S. virginicus is fairly wide 
spread throughout the tropical regions and is native to 
the Pacific Islands Region as well as the continental 
United States.  It also occurs in Africa, western 
seaboard of India, Sri Lanka, and Australia. 
 
Establishment 
Although  S. virginicus  does produce seed, very little 
of it is viable.  The only  practical way to propagate it 
is by vegetative rhizomatous slips.  Actively growing 
slips should be selected for propagation.  Cut back 
increase-plots to initiate active growth.  Cut 
rhizomatous slips 3-4’ long and plant in sterile, well 
drained medium such as Sunshine4
TM potting mix 
which has worked well.  Place propagules under 50% 
shade and keep planting medium moist.  Once the 
slips begin to take, it is recommended that time-

release fertilizer supplements be added.  After 2 
months, place propagules in full sunlight to harden 
off.  Propagules should be ready to plant within 3-4 
months. 
 Britton & Brown (1913); from plants.usda.gov 
 
Management  
Sporobolus virginicus  is a low maintenance 
conservation plant.  Because it is very drought 
tolerant, water requirements are relatively low.  It is 
recommended, though, that irrigation be applied 
during the first 1-2 months after transplanting to help 
establish plots.   S. virginicus is also adapted to low 
fertility soils, although nutrient amendments 
according to soil tests would  be beneficial for rapid 
establishment.   
 
If forage production is desired, no more than half of 
the growth should be removed by grazing.  Summer 
grazing deferments of at least 120 days are important 
to maintain good vigor.  Controlled burning of this 
grass will result in lush, tender forage for winter 
grazing.  Burning should be done no more than every 
2 years. Allow 4  inches of re-growth after burning 
before grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Despite its wide range throughout subtropical and 
tropical regions of the world,  S. virginicus it believed 
to be pest free. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 
  Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
None available at this time.  No known commercial 
source. 
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett,
 & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By: 
David Duvauchelle , USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant 
Materials Center, Hoolahua, Hawaii and  Percy 
Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator: 
David Duvauchelle , USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant 
Materials Center, Hoolahua, Hawaii 
 
Edited: may02 ahv; jul03 a hv; sep05 jsp; jan07 jsp;  
aug07 D. Duvauchelle; 070810 jsp 
 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.