Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
DUCK POTATO 
Sagittaria latifolia  Willd. 
Plant Symbol = SALA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
wapato, broadleaf arrowhead 
 
Uses 
This is a multipurpose emergent plant, however the 
greatest value this species offers is as food and cover 
for aquatic animal life.  The seed and tubers of duck 
potato are readily consumed by waterfowl, songbirds, 
wading birds, muskrats, and beaver.  The emergent 
foliage of this species provides cover to the same 
animals with the addition of fish and aquatic insects.  
During the growing season notable amounts of 
nutrients and metals are extracted by  Sagittaria 
latifolia  from sediments and water. Turbidity and 
wave energy is reduced by adequately stocked and 
healthy stands. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s  current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Duck potato is a highly rhizomatous perennial 
broadleaf emergent capable of attaining heights of 4 
feet.  The terminal hastate or sagittate leaves are 4 to 
12 inches long and acute.  Each leaf lobe has an 
equally distinct vein radiating to it from the leaf base.  
Vegetative production peaks in July, but by mid fall 
the emergent plant parts annually die back to the root 
crown.  Prior to the annual die back, nutrients and 
carbohydrates are translocated to subterranean tubers 
(root storage organs). 
 
Duck potato exhibits both dioecious and moenecious 
reproductive character in its  northern and southern 
ranges respectfully.  Between July and September 
one or two tapering cylindrical flowering stalks 
(scapes) emerge holding 2 to 15 whorls of white, 
three petaled flowers with yellow reproductive parts.  
Each stalk is taller than the leaves.  From August to 
October round clusters of seed (achenes) develop; 
with yields up to 20,000 viable achenes produced per 
plant.  Each achene contains a flattened ovate green 
nutlet.  
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1992 
Western Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Duck potato has a native range which extends from 
New Brunswick to British Columbia, south to 
Florida, California and Mexico.  This broadleaf 
emergent thrives in finely textured unconsolidated 
organic and silty wet soils.  Such conditions are 
typically found in marshes,  swamps, forested seeps, 
ditches, and in the shallows of streams, lakes and 
ponds. Duck potato thrives in fresh water 6 to 12 
inches deep, full sun exposure, with pH ranging from 
6.0 to 6.5, but is tolerant of less adequate conditions. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Duck potato can be successfully established 
vegetatively, with tubers, bare-root or potted stock.  
As a general rule tubers should be placed on sites 
with less than one foot of permanent inundation, 
while the leaves of transplants should never be 
submerged.  For large plantings tubers are most 
efficiently used, but on critical sites the use of bare-
rooted and potted stock is more reliable.  A single

plant can annually yield up to 40 tubers, with each 
tuber capable of vegetatively producing 3 to 5 
planting units.  Site quality will dictate plant spacing.  
Under ideal site conditions plants can be spread up to 
6 feet apart and still attain stand closure within one 
growing season.  On degraded or critical sites it is 
advisable to reduce plant spacing to 1 to 2 feet.  
Utilizing seed in greenhouse and nursery production 
is reliable and highly recommended to maintain 
genetic diversity.  Field seeding techniques have not 
been refined to attain predictable results.  The 
achenes are easily harvested, cleaned, and broadcast 
sown.  Prior to spring sowing, the seeds need a three 
month moist stratification treatment. Sow on to well 
worked, saturated soils. Ge rmination occurs under 
direct sunlight with temperatures ranging from 80° to 
90° F. Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 
Management  
Stand growth and health is sustained on fertile 
unconsolidated soils, with adequate hydric regimes 
(6-12 in.).  Winter draw-down periods are necessary 
to encourage voluntary reseeding; otherwise tubers 
will be relied on for re-growth. Nutrient rich water 
sources or applications of commercial fertilizers 
stimulate additional bio-mass production.  The 
gradual acclimation to a pa rticular effluent is 
necessary to utilize the plant’s maximum pollution 
extraction potential. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No known varieties are available, but wetland plant 
nurseries carry local or regional ecotypes. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.