Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INDIANGRASS 
Sorghastrum nutans L. 
Plant Symbol = SONU2 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Indiangrass can be used on critical-
area seeding, for roadside cover, and on areas subject 
to wind erosion. 
 
Livestock : Indiangrass can be used singly or in 
mixtures for livestock forage on rangeland, 
pastureland, and hayland. 
 
Wildlife : Indiangrass is excellent for wildlife habitat 
and food for deer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable  vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.
 
 
Description 
Sorghastrum  nutans  ( L). Nash, indiangrass, is a 
native, perennial, warm-season grass, and a major 
component of the tall grass vegetation which once 
dominated the prairies of the central and eastern 
United States.  Indiangrass grows 3 to 5 feet tall.  
Even as a young plant, it can be distinguished from 
other native grass species by the “rifle-sight” ligule at 
the point where the leaf a ttaches to the stem.  The 
leaf blade also narrows at the point of attachment.  
The seed head is a single, narrow, plume-like panicle 
of a golden brown color.  The seed is light and fluffy 
with small awns attached.   There are about 175,000 
seeds per pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Indiangrass is adapted to th e Northeast west to Texas 
and North Dakota.  It grows best in deep, well-
drained floodplain soils.  However, it is highly 
tolerant of poorly to excessively well-drained soils, 
acid to alkaline conditions, and textures ranging from 
sand to clay. 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1991. Southern Wetland Flora 
@USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Indiangrass and other warm-season grasses require a 
soil temperature above  50°F for satisfactory 
germination.  Dormant seedings have not been 
successful.  The optimum time  to plant is from early 
May to late June. 
 
The seed is light and has small awns attached.  
Debearding the seed removes the awns to produce a 
free-flowing product.  The planting site should be 
free of perennial or noxious weeds.  A moist, firm 
seedbed is essential.  Firming the soil with a roller 
packer before seeding helps to ensure that the seed is 
placed at the recommended seeding depth of ½ to ¾ 
inch. 
 
If seed is drilled for solid stands, use 6 to 8 pounds 
per acre rate PLS (pure live seed).  For broadcast

seedings, the rate should be between 12 and 15 
pounds per acre. Seeding depth is ¼ inch.  If seed is 
broadcast or hydroseeded, it is important to 
“incorporate” the seed by tracking with a heavy 
machine to improve the seed to soil contact.  
Indiangrass has strong seedling vigor, but stands are 
slow to develop where competition from broadleaf 
weeds and cool-season grasses are heavy.  New 
seedings into fine-textured soils where weeds are 
persistent may require no-till establishment to 
minimize the amount of exposed weed seeds.  The 
cool-season grasses must be controlled with a contact 
herbicide before seeding.  Also, indiangrass shows 
tolerance to most broadleaf herbicides.  
It is 
important to follow label instructions for application 
amounts and grazing requirements. 
 
The most common cause of failure of warm-season 
grasses is a loose seedbed.  Conventionally-tilled 
seedbeds should be packed before and especially 
after seeding.  The seedbed should be firm enough to 
show only a light imprint when stepped on.  When 
using a no-till drill, be sure the coulter furrows are 
closed to avoid seed exposure and drying.  This can 
be accomplished by cultipacking after the drilling  
operation.  
 
Management  
Fertilization to moderate levels of phosphorus and 
potassium are recommended for establishment.  
Nitrogen applications are not recommended until the 
grass is established and well above the competing 
weeds.  Fertilizer may be applied late in the first 
summer of establishment at a rate of 20 to 40 pounds 
per acre of phosphorus and potassium or in the early 
summer of the second year  at 40 to 80 pounds per 
acre rate.  In future years fertilize as needed to 
enhance vigor and production of forage.  For critical 
area seedings, no additional fertilization is necessary. 
 
If well-established stands of  indiangrass are properly 
managed and maintained, they should not require 
replanting.  Poor stands can be rejuvenated by using 
proper management practices, such as controlled 
grazing, the application of recommended rates of 
herbicides and fertilizer,  and prescribed burning, 
where permitted, before the beginning of spring 
growth.  Nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
fertilizer should be applied according to soil tests. 
 
In rotational grazing systems, remove no more than 
½ the above ground growth (no shorter than 8 to 12 
inches).  With care, the stand will last indefinitely.  
Forage quality will remain high until the seed head 
emerges.  Grazing should begin from mid to late June 
when grasses reach 12 to 16 inches in height.   Overgrazing can damage the stand and should be 
stopped when the plants are grazed to within 6 inches 
of the ground.  If regrowth of more than 12 inches 
takes place, the plants can be regrazed to 6 to 12 
inches.  Leaving this much stubble before frost 
allows the plants to store carbohydrates and ensures 
the production of vigorous plant growth in the spring. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known serious pests of indiangrass. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local
 agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Holt’ (NE), ‘Llano’ (NM), ‘Lometa’ (TX), ‘Osage’ 
(KS and OK), ‘Oto’ (NE and KS), ‘Rumsey’ (IL), 
‘Tomahawk’ (ND and SD); Cheyenne (informal 
release, OK); source identified releases from 
northern, central, and southern Iowa, and northern 
and western Missouri.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.