Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SMOOTH 
CORDGRASS 
Spartina alterniflora  Loisel. 
Plant Symbol = SPAL  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Saltmarsh cordgrass, oystergrass, and saltwater 
cordgrass 
 
Uses 
Smooth cordgrass is the dominant emergent grass 
species found growing along tidal salt marshes of the 
Atlantic and Gulf coasts.  It is utilized extensively for 
erosion control along shorelines, canal banks, levees, 
and other areas of soil water interface. Smooth 
cordgrass is an effective soil stabilizer used on 
interior tidal mudflats, dredge-fill sites, and other 
areas of loose and unconso lidated soils associated 
with marsh restoration. Under natural conditions on 
tidal marshes, vigorous stands of this grass will 
absorb wave energy and screen suspended solids 
from intertidal waters, while uptaking available  nutrients in the sediments.  As sediments accumulate, 
this plant will spread away from the bank.  It will 
tolerate petroleum contaminated soils.  Smooth 
cordgrass provides food and cover to a number of 
marsh birds and mammals and is recognized as an 
important forage species for livestock producers 
along the central gulf coast. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This species is not native to the west coast of the 
U.S., where it may become  weedy or invasive in 
some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, st ate natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.  Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants .usda.gov.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description 
This long-lived, warm season perennial typically 
grows from 2 to 7 feet tall, and spreads extensively 
by long hollow rhizomes.  So ft, spongy stems up to ½ 
inch in diameter emerge fr om the rhizomes.  The flat 
leaf blades are typically 12 to 20 inches long, 
tapering to a long inward-rolled tip.   
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
In September and October seedheads which are 10 to 
12 inches long emerge at the end of the stem.  Each 
spike will hold from twelve to fifteen 2 or 3 inch long 
spikelets.  The flowers are  wind pollinated.  There are 
approximately 175,000 seeds per pound.   
Adaptation and Distribution 
Smooth cordgrass colonies tend to grow parallel to 
and continuous along shorelines; the width and 
thickness of vegetative colonies are controlled by a 
number of site specific conditions such as elevation, 
shoreline slope, and frequency, depth and duration of 
flooding. It is commonly found growing on open 
coastal marshes between high and low tides from 
Newfoundland south to Florida and Texas.  This 
grass can be found growing on sandy aerobic or 
anaerobic soils with pHs ranging from 3.7 to 7.9.

Smooth cordgrass will tolerate regular inundations 
with 0 to 35 parts per thousand salinity.  
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.  It is not native along the U.S. west coast. 
 
Establishment 
Due to sparse and irregular seed production, smooth 
cordgrass is usually propagated by vegetative stem 
divisions.  Depending on the energy effecting the 
planting site, either containerized (for high impact 
sites) or bare root (for mild impact sites) plants can 
be utilized.  Since most marsh sites are irregular and 
difficult to access, hand planting is normally 
employed, using spades, dibbles, or planting bars.  If 
site conditions are adequate, planting can be carried 
out with a mechanical, tractor drawn transplanter.  
Plant spacing should be between 18 and 72 inches; 2 
to 10 feet of lateral spread can be expected annually.  
Smooth cordgrass grows at elevations ranging from 
mean high tide and above.   Planting at an excessively 
low elevation will result in failure due to drowning 
and/or uprooting where wave energy is too high. 
Plantings in deeper water have been successful, but 
plants are slow to anchor and vegetative cover is 
sparse.  Optimum water depths for establishing plants 
are 1 to 18 inches. 
 
Shoreline plantings are typically planted as a single 
or double row running parallel to the shoreline.  
Transplants should be planted at the mid-point 
between the high and low tide elevation.  Plant 
spacing within th e row will vary according to the size 
of the transplant materials being used and the rate at 
which full coverage is desired. 
 
Open water area plantings across mudflats and 
dredge fill sites should be designed to provide the 
greatest reduction in fetch length.  Rows can be 
placed across shallow water exchange points to create 
a passive hydrologic barrier that will slow tidal 
exchange and trap suspended sediments.   
 
In nursery rows, plants of smooth cordgrass should 
be spaced 12 to 24 inches apart.  Under ideal nursery 
conditions, each planting unit will establish stands 
containing 25 culms per square foot.  Extensive weed 
control is essential to producing quality nursery 
grown plants.   
Management 
Stem and rhizome growth of this grass respond well 
to applications of a well balanced commercial 
fertilizers.  The addition of  300-500 lbs/acre of 10-
10-10 fertilizer to a planting site or nursery bed is  adequate to stimulate growth and development.  High 
nitrogen slow-release fertilizer tables may be used 
with container grown plants and bare root transplants.  
Plants propagated under nursery conditions are easily 
under cut and uplifted for distribution.   
 
On field sites there are a number of site-specific 
elements that should be considered when working 
with smooth cordgrass. This include; plant 
smothering from floating debris; herbivore grazing 
damage; poor water circulation; soil load bearing 
properties; and shoreline configuration.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Non-threatening rust-like fungi (orange fruiting 
bodies on leaves) are commonly found on smooth 
cordgrass.  Flower beetles may limit seed production.  
The sugar cane borer can cause the decline and death 
of stems. 
 
In areas where nutria ( Myocaster coypus) is a 
problem new planting may need to be protected from 
predation. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are 2 named varieties available on the 
commercial market.  In 1992 , ‘Bayshore’ (Maryland) 
smooth cordgrass was released for use on Atlantic 
coastal areas by the Cape May Plant Material Center, 
in Cape May Court House, New Jersey.  In 1989 
‘Vermilion’ (Louisiana) was  selected and released by 
the Golden Meadows Plan t Materials Center in 
Galliano, Louisiana for use in the Gulf coastal areas.  
Other sources of local ecotypes are available from 
commercial nurseries.   
Prepared By 
Tony Bush , USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
Morris Houck , USDA NRCS, Alexandria, Louisiana 
(additions 2008)   
Species Coordinator 
Tony Bush , USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan 
 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 24may06jsp; 060817 jsp; 080917 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political

beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.