Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GULF BLUESTEM 
Schizachyrium maritimum 
(Chapman) Nash   
Plant symbol = SCMA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center, Galliano, Louisiana  
 
 Photo provided by Gary Fine, NRCS ACES Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Seacoast bluestem; Andropogon maritimus  
 
Uses 
Conservation plant material for coastal beach dune 
enhancement and stabilization.  Habitat for small 
mammals, shorebirds, and migratory birds. 
 
Status 
This species is ranked on the Rare, Threatened, and 
Endangered Species state heri tage conservation status 
lists in Alabama and Louisiana as an S1 (extensive 
rarity and factors which make it especially vulnerable 
to extirpation), and a global ranking by 
NatureServe.org of G3 (very rare and local 
throughout its range). 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Gulf bluestem is a native, warm-season, perennial 
grass that spreads by seed and short rhizomes.  Plants 
are rhizomatous and colonial, stems usually  decumbent, glaucous, reddish, and flattened at the 
base, terminal inflorescences with stalked spikelets.  
Found native to coastal and offshore islands of the 
Florida panhandle west to Louisiana.    
 
Adaptation 
 Establishment 
Gulf bluestem can be successfully established using 
container grown or bareroot plant materials.   
Vegetative propagules from plant division or lower 
stem nodal tissue are used for nursery production.   
Container grown or bareroot propagules should be 
planted on 2-5 foot centers on the primary dune ridge 
and back side and the more stable dune and swale 
areas behind the primary dune.  Interspacing with 
other desirable dune species enhances habitat 
diversity and conservation effectiveness.  Apply a 
blended fertilizer broadcast or slow release tablet or 
packet with each 
plant when planting.  Gulf bluestem 
produces viable seed.  The potential establishment of 
gulf bluestem by seed is being evaluated at the 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center in Galliano, 
Louisiana.

Management 
No special management strategy is needed other than 
restricting traffic during the first year of 
establishment.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no pests of concern associated with this 
species. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Timbalier Germplasm Gulf Bluestem is a tested pre-
varietal plant materials release available from the 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center in Galliano, 
Louisiana.   
 
Prepared By:  Gary Fine, NRCS Retired, NRCS 
ACES Program 
 
Species Coordinator:   Dr. Richard Neill, USDA, 
NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, 
Galliano, Louisiana 
 Edited:  Joel L. Douglas, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA-NRCS, 
Central National Technology Support  Center, Fort Worth, Texas; 
060823 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should cont act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of 
discrimination write to USDA, Di rector, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 
or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is 
an equal opportunity provider and employer."
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation Service.