Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LITTLE BLUESTEM 
Schizachyrium scoparium  
(Michx.) Nash  
Plant Symbol = SCSC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternative Names 
Andropogon scoparius 
 
Uses 
Pasture/range/hayland : Little bluestem is a fair 
forage species and is readily grazed by livestock, 
deer, and elk.  It is  also suitable for hay. 
 
Erosion control: Because of its growth habit and 
adaptability to a wide range of soil conditions, little 
bluestem is useful as a component of revegetation 
mixes.  It is especially well-suited for use on thin 
upland range sites.  
 
Wildlife : Little bluestem seed is eaten by songbirds 
and upland gamebirds.  The plant provides cover for 
ground birds and small mammals. 
 
Landscaping : With its blue-green leaves during the 
growing season and attractive rusty color with white 
fluffy seedheads in the fall, little bluestem is useful in 
ornamental plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Little bluestem is a medium height grass with coarse 
stems and basal leaves.  As a warm season grass it 
begins growth in late spring and continues through 
the hot summer period until the first killing frost.  It 
is easily mistaken for common broomsedge.  Little 
bluestem has very flat bluish basal shoots.  Plants are 
green, but often purplish at base of stem and the 
entire plant has a reddish cast after frost.  Leaves are 
smooth, but frequently are covered with hair at the 
base next to the sheath.  Leaves tend to fold with 
maturity.  Seed head clusters about three inches long.  
The cluster stems are hairy.  Plant height varies from 
18 inches on droughty sites to 3 feet on deep, fertile 
soils.  There are 255,000 seeds per pound. 
 
Broomsedge ( Andropogon virginicus ) has a straight 
awn and has two or more stalked seed clusters per 
branch.  Little bluestem has a twisted, bent awn and a 
single cluster of seeds per branch.  Seacoast bluestem 
( Schizachyrium scoparium  var. littorale ) occurs only 
in the coastal plain region.  It is very similar to little 
bluestem but can be distinguished by the bent stems 
at the base, whereas little bluestem stems are erect. L. Glasscock 
USDA NRCS 1991 
Southern Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Little bluestem is one of the most widely distributed 
native grasses in North America.  It will grow on a 
wide variety of soils but is very well adapted to well-
drained, medium to dry, infertile soils.  The plant has 
excellent drought and fair shade tolerance, and fair to 
poor flood tolerance.  It grows preferentially on sites 
with pH 7.0 and slightly higher. 
 
Little bluestem is distributed throughout the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website.

Establishment 
Little bluestem should be seeded as early in the 
spring as possible.  Where no-till is used due to slope, 
stoniness, or other  reasons, sod  control should be 
performed in the fall to permit early spring planting.  
The seeding rate for establishing a pure stand with 
broadcast or no-till methods should be 7 to 12 pounds 
PLS per acre.  When drills are used to plant, 
debearded seed must be utilized unless the drill has a 
chaffy seed box.  When the seed is broadcast, a 
packer should  be utilized to firm the seedbed  and 
incorporate the seed 1/4 to 1/2 inch (3/4 inch on very 
droughty sites).  No nitrogen fertilizer should be 
applied during the establishment year unless no weed 
competition is expected.  If pH is below 5.5, lime is 
recommended during site preparation or the fall prior 
to no-till plantings. 
 
For critical area seeding,  the preferred method of 
planting is drilling, but if this is not possible, an 
acceptable alternative method is broadcasting the 
seed (typically in a mix with other warm season 
grasses) and ‘tracking’ it in with a bulldozer.  The 
dozer moves up and down slope, off-setting each pass 
until the entire area is covered with tracks.  Seedings 
should be made as early as possible in the spring on 
sands and gravels, without mulching.  Moderate 
levels of N, P, and K are sufficient for establishment, 
and soil pH should be 5.5 to 6.0.  Cultipacker-type 
planters are not suitable for this species. 
 
Management  
Control of competition is necessary for successful 
stand establishment.  High mowing (above the 
bluestem seedlings) is a common method of  weed 
control.  Once established, poor stands can be 
rehabilitated by using proper management practices, 
such as controlled grazing, application of 
recommended rates of herbicides and fertilizer, and 
prescribed spring burning, where permitted.   
 
Do not graze a forage planting during the year of 
establishment.  During subsequent growing seasons, 
harvesting by controlled grazing or haying is possible 
on good stands.  Do not remove more than 50% of 
the current year’s growth from plants.  No cropping 
should occur below 8 inches or within 1 month of 
anticipated frosts.  Grazing  of competing cool season 
grasses after frost in the fall and before the little 
bluestem is 1 inch tall in the spring is desirable. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests of little bluestem. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Aldous’ (Kansas), ‘Camper’ (Nebraska, Kansas), 
‘Cimmaron’ (Kansas, Oklahoma), ‘Pastura’ (New 
Mexico) and ‘Blaze’ (Nebra ska, Kansas) are cultivars 
that have been developed.  There are also local 
ecotypes of little bluestem available from seed 
companies. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, Maryland 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.