Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
LYRELEAF SAGE 
Salvia lyrata L. 
Plant Symbol = SALY2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center 
   Clarence Rechenthin   Courtesy of NRCS Texas State Office   @ PLANTS 
 
Uses 
This plant is used mainly for landscape 
beautification.  It has potential for use in cultivated 
garden situations, in natu ralized prairie or meadow 
plantings, and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.   Weed information is al
so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Lyreleaf sage is a perennial herb with quadrangular 
flowering stems extending upright from a basal 
rosette of leaves.  The basal leaves are elongated, 
elliptic, dark green to slightly purplish, and are often 
lobed or dissected.  The light blue to violet flowers 
are clustered at the top of the stem.  Flowering occurs 
from April to May or June.  The seeds are round, 
dark brown, and held loosely in a cup-like structure. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Lyreleaf sage can grow in full sun and light to 
medium shade.  Native stands  are found on roadsides, 
and in fields and open woodlands.  It will grow on 
many types of soil. 
 
Lyreleaf sage is distributed primarily throughout the 
East and lower Midwest.  For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
A firm seedbed is required.  Seed may be planted into 
a closely mowed, chemically-killed, or burned sod 
area with a light disking or harrowing that scratches 
the soil surface.  When seed is sown on a clean-tilled 
site, cultipacking the soil before planting is 
recommended.  A thick layer of plant residue on the 
soil surface can in terfere with seed germination.  
Broadcast or shallowly drill 4 to 6 grams of seed per 
100 square feet (4 to 6 lb/acre).  Planting depth 
should range from at the so il surface to 1/8 inch deep.  
Cultipacking after planting is recommended.  Seed 
germination should occur by fall, and the plants will 
remain as a small, low-growing rosette throughout 
the winter.  Often it takes  2 or 3 years for lyreleaf 
sage to produce a dense stand on the planting site. 
 
Management  
Apply fertilizer according to soil test 
recommendations.  If not available, a rate of 3.5 to 
5.5 oz per 100 square feet (100 to 150 lb/acre) of 13-
13-13 should be applied after the seedlings are 
established and annually thereafter.  Because of its 
low-growing nature, mowing to limit competition 
from other plants is crucial to maintain a stand of 
lyreleaf sage.  The initial mowing should be delayed 
until mid to late May (after seed matures).  Plants can 
tolerate regular close mowing during the summer and

fall.  If allowed to re-grow after the initial mowing, 
plants often produce additional seed during the 
summer, but showy flowers will not be produced.  
However, on sites where competing vegetation 
provides dense cover, stands should be mowed 
regularly, because the small amount of additional 
seed produced during the summer will not justify the 
detrimental effects on the lyreleaf sage stand.  Fall 
mowing is always recommended. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This section is under development. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no cultivars recommended at this time. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, Mississippi
 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.