Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NEW ENGLAND ASTER  
Symphyotrichum novae-
angliae  (L.) Nesom  
Plant Symbol = SYNO2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 
  
Alternate Names 
Aster, starwort, first flower 
 
Uses 
New England aster can be used for roadside 
plantings, prairie restoratio n, wildlife cover, prairie 
landscaping and wetland situations. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
New England aster is a native perennial forb which 
grows from 2 ½ to 6.0 feet tall with hairy stems and 
leaves.  The alternate leaves are up to 4 inches long 
and 1 inch wide, with broad, clasping bases and 
pointed tips.  The individually stalked flower heads 
are in an open, rounded cluster at the tops of the main 
stem branches.  The flower stalks and bracts at the 
base of each flower head are covered with gland-
tipped hairs.  Each head is about 1 ½ inches wide, 
with 40 or more bright pu rple, petal-like ray flowers 
surrounding a central yello w disk.  The ray flowers 
are sometimes pinkish purple or pale lavender in 
color.  New England aster is the showiest of the 
genus, and stand out on roadside shoulders and 
ditches from August through late October  
 USDA NRCS Elsberry Pl ant Materials Center 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
New England aster grows in prairie swales, wet 
meadows, alluvial soils and thickets, low fields in 
valleys, and moist ground along streams.  It ranges 
from Quebec to Alberta, south to North Carolina, 
Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Colorado, Wyoming, 
and New Mexico. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.    
 
Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing or using chemical  weed control.  Firm the 
seedbed by cultipacking.  Seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow seed to be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch 
deep. The seed of New England aster needs cold 
stratification for maximum germination if seeded in 
spring or summer (34-40 degrees Fahrenheit for 30-
40 days).  Use a planter that insures proper seeding 
depth and good seed and soil contact like a brillion 
roller that is capable of handling and placing seed in 
a uniform manner.  There are approximately 
1,100,000 seeds in a pound of New England aster.   
 
Seeding rates for New England aster: 
 
For seed production:  
Solid stand – 40 pure live seed (PLS) in a  
36-inch row; - .53 pounds PLS/acre. 
 
Prairie planting:  mixture – 1 – 5 PLS per square foot 
(0.04 to 0.20) pound PLS per acre.

Use no fertilizer the establishment year unless soil 
test indicates a low deficiency of less than 15 PPM of 
phosphorus and or less than 90 PPM of potassium.  
Use no nitrogen during the  establishment year as this 
can encourage weed competition.  
 
Management  
Reduce weed competition by mowing over the height 
of the New England aster plants or cultivating 
between the rows.  Use a non- selective contact 
herbicide while dormant or a pre emergent herbicide 
to control annuals after the New England aster is 
established.   Remove dead plant material in the 
spring for faster green-up by shredding.  Burning of 
dead plant refuge can weaken the plants unless done 
before it has broken dormancy. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The most destructive diseases in the cultivation of 
asters are various forms of stem-rot.  They are of 
fungus origin and are induced by allowing the plants 
to remain moist too long at a time.   
 
The infection usually takes  place in the seed-row, but 
often no effect is noticed until the plants are nearly 
full-grown, when they suddenly wilt and die.  The 
“yellow disease” causes the plants to have a bleached 
appearance and to make a spindling growth.  
Thorough cultivation of the soil is the best 
preventive. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
New England aster is not known to invade in areas 
where this species does not naturally occur. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
According to the publication entitled ‘Improved 
Conservation Plants Materials Released by NRCS 
and Cooperators through September 2001’, there are 
no cultivars, source identified, selected or tested class 
releases of New England aster from the Plant 
Materials Program. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Steven Bruckerhoff , Jerry Kaiser, Jimmy Henry , 
Elsberry Plant Materials  Center, Elsberry, Missouri 
 Edited: 21nov2003 jlk; 060817 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.