Plant Fact Sheet
CROOKED-STEM 
ASTER 
Symphyotrichum prenanthoides 
(Muhl. ex Willd.) G.L. Nesom 
Plant Symbol = SYPR6 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD      
 
 
Randall Roden, Prairie Nursery Inc. 
 
Alternate Names  
Crooked stem aster  
Zigzag aster  
Aster prenanthoides  L.  
 
Uses  
Crooked stem aster is an adaptable, easy to grow ground 
cover for dry, sunny locations.  It is a native plant and can 
be part of a good wildlife seed mixture where native 
grasses and wildflowers are seeded together.  Ethno 
botanical:  A  tea made from the ro ots of crooked- stem 
aster has been used to treat fevers in babies and colds and 
kidney ailments in adults.      
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  Crooked- stem aster creates 
showy mounds of blooms in summer and is excellent for  native landscape gardens.  Asters wil
l grow on disturbed 
sites and can be used for wildlife habitat restoration.  
Crooked stem aster is attractive to pollinators , including 
long -tongued bees, short -tongued bees, small to medium -
sized butterflies, and skippers.   Many kinds of insects 
feed on t he foliage and other parts of asters, including the 
caterpillars of the butterfly Chlosyne nycteis  (Silvery 
Checkerspot) and ma ny moth species.
  Wild Turkey, 
other upland game  birds  and m ammalian herbivores 
occasionally eat the seeds and  foliage of asters, even 
though their food value is low.   
 
Status  
Crooked- stem aster is listed as a special concern in 
Connecticut and as threatened in Massachusetts.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current  status (e.g . 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation  
Crooked- stem aster is a native, perennial wildflower that 
grows from 1 –  4 feet tall.  The aster’s rigid stems are 
much -branched from the base. The leaves are .5 –  3 
inches long, simple (not made up of multiple leaflets), and 
alternate (progressing singly up the stem).  The flowers 
are fragrant with approximately 30 blue ray florets per 
flower.  The disk florets are yellow and the bracts are 
glandular with long, green, loose or spreading tips.  
Flowers appear in summer and give way to flat, brown, 
hairy ach enes (dry fruits).  Crooked -stem aster spreads 
through stolons (horizontal stems that produce new plants 
from buds).  
 
Distribution:  Crooked- stem aster grows in moist, loamy 
soils, full sun to partial shade in riparian and forest edge 
habitats.  It is distr ibuted from Ontario south to North 
Carolina and Tennessee (USDA cold hardiness zones 4 –  
7).