Plant Fact Sheet  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
       
     PITCHER SAGE 
Salvia azurea  Michx. ex Lam. 
var.  grandiflora  Benth. 
Plant Symbol = SAAZG  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
 Alan Shadow, East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, 
Texas.  
 
Alternate Names 
azure blue sage, blue salvia, blue sage, pitcher salvia, 
and wild blue sage 
 
Uses 
Pitcher sage is a readily eaten forb, which is 
especially sought out by liv estock in the early spring 
when protein levels are high and palatability is good. 
Pitcher sage numbers will decrease in native pastures 
that are over grazed or over  stocked with livestock. 
The flowers, which are deep blue and attractive to 
pollinators such as bumble bees and hummingbirds, 
have a persistent, long bloom period late into the fall 
when little else is blooming. The plants are also 
attractive to migrating monarch butterflies and other 
insects.  
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
  Description and Adaptation 
General: 
The Mint family (Lamiaceae). Pitcher sage 
is a long-lived, warm-season, herbaceous, native 
perennial species. The common name Pitcher sage 
comes from the name of Doctor Zina Pitcher, a 19
th 
century U.S. Army field surgeon and amateur 
botanist. Each plant has one major stem or a few 
stems growing in a clump. It grows from 2 to 5 feet 
tall and the foliage is gray-green. The root system is 
branched and grows up to 8 feet deep. John Weaver, 
prairie ecologist, reported that pitcher sage could 
double its rooting depth as a response to extreme 
drought. Each stem is simple or may be branched 
near its terminal point. The stems, like those of many 
other mints, are square in cross section with opposite 
leaves. The foliage has a mint fragrance, but is much 
milder than many of the members of the mint family. 
The leaves are lance shaped  and three to four inches 
long on the lower stem and become smaller as they 
ascend the stem. Lower leaves can be shed early in 
the growing season. Pitcher sage begins blooming in 
July and may bloom until early October. Light blue 
two-lipped flowers are born e in a series of dense 
clusters with 2 to 8 flowers in a cluster. Only a few 
flowers in a cluster are in  bloom at any one time. The 
flower corollas are 1/2 to 1 inch in length. The 
enlarged, drooping lower lip of the flower is covered 
at the base by a short, stiff, upper lip or hood. A bee 
will land on the lower lip and force its way under the 
hood to reach the nectar gl ands at the base of the 
flower tube. As is common in other species of 
flowers, the anthers mature  before the stigma is 
receptive to pollen, thus en suring cross fertilization. 
The pollen bearing anther is on one end of a slender 
filament and a sterile anther  is located on the other 
end. When the bee enters the flower tube, its head 
will push on the sterile anther. The filament, just like 
a seesaw, will pivot and dust the bees back with 
pollen from the fertile anth er. The bee then visits 
other flowers, that are more mature, and pollinates a 
receptive stigma completing the act of cross 
pollination. The resulting fruits consist of one or two 
light brown, resin-dotted nutlets borne at the bottom 
of the persistent calyx tube. The nutletts are elliptical, 
flattened and approximately 1/8 inch long.  
 
Adaptation : Pitcher sage  is easy to grow in a wide 
range of soil types that have dry to medium amounts 
of moisture. It prefers sandy to gravelly soils, and the 
number one consideration is for soils to be well 
drained, otherwise the roots are subject to root rot. 
This species tolerates heat, humidity and drought 
very well. Full sun is required for this plant to thrive,

but some shade is tolerated. A study conducted in 
central Nebraska found that Ratibida pinnata and 
Salvia azurea  had the highest survival rating of 16 
wildflowers planted in blue grama and buffalo grass 
plots after ten years. 
 
Distribution : Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. Pitcher sage 
grows in the eastern 3/4 of Kansas. This species is 
also found in parts of Oklahoma, Nebraska, Missouri 
and the panhandle of Texas. The species ranges east 
to South Carolina and Florida.  
 
Establishment 
Unstratified seed can be planted in the fall or 
stratified seed can be planted in the field in the 
spring. With no cold, moist stratification 
approximately 40 percent of the seed will germinate. 
Pretreatment of cold, moist stratification for 4 to 8 
weeks will increase total germination to around 80 
percent. 
 
Management 
When  Salvia azurea  is grown without competition, in 
a monoculture for seed production, it tends to become 
taller than it should and sprawl out or lodges. This 
leads to what some describe as a disorderly plant. 
However, moderate clipping early in the growing 
season will allow the plant to maintain a better, more 
upright form. This plant flowers over an extended 
period of time which makes it good for landscape 
purposes, but bad when trying to time a seed 
production harvest. With a protracted flowering 
season the plant will contain all stages of seed 
maturity at the same time making harvest more 
difficult. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious insect  or disease problems of 
any consequence with this member of the Lamiaceae 
family. However, rust and leaf spots can occur on the 
foliage. It does tend to grow tall and will lodge under 
certain circumstances. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no real environmental concerns regarding 
this plant species. It is commonly used in prairie 
restoration plantings where it is not considered a 
weed problem. Pitcher sage is known to volunteer 
from seed, but does not spread aggressively. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
 
‘Nekan’ Pitcher Sage is a cooperative release by 
USDA-NRCS; Manhattan Plant Materials Center in  Manhattan, KS and the Nebraska Agriculture 
Experiment Station in Lincoln, NE. Initial evaluation 
of accessions from Kansas, Nebraska, and South 
Dakota revealed that the accession from Marion 
County, Kansas had overall better performance and 
was selected for further evaluation. This selection 
was tested as PMK-1408 and was rated excellent for 
vigor and stand establishment. Growth of PMK-1408 
was uniform with respect to plant height and spread. 
It was released and named ‘Nekan’ in 1977 and is 
commercially available in th
e wildflower seed trade. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Richard Wynia , USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 
 
Edited: 090226 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.