Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CALIFORNIA BULRUSH 
Schoenoplectus californicus  (C.A. Mey.) Palla 
Plant Symbol = SCCA11  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center 
USDA  NRCS Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center  
 
Alternate Names 
Scirpus californicus (C.A. Mey.) Steud; bullwhip, 
giant rush 
 
Uses 
California bulrush is used effectively to control 
shoreline erosion along streams, bayous, levee banks, 
canals and other places where land and water meet.  
Additionally, this species will form a vegetative 
barrier across open water reducing wave energy 
impacting shorelines.  California bulrush is being 
used extensively in marsh restoration.   Many forms 
of wildlife will utilize the plants for food and cover. 
 
Status 
Please consult the Plants website and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current statue (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values) 
 
Description 
California bulrush is a native, herbaceous, 
rhizomatous perennial which forms dense colonies on 
mud flats, in open water and at shore water interface.  
The stems are remarkable in their length of five to ten  feet.  The stems are slightly angled with drooping 
branched terminal inflorescences. 
 
Adaptation 
California bulrush is an obligate wet site species 
found in coastal fresh water wetlands.  Bulrush will 
tolerate only slight salinity (0-5 part per thousand), 
but will tolerate periodic short pulses of more saline 
water.   This species can grow in water up to 36 
inches or more.  Plants tend to grow in a continuous 
colony parallel to the shore. Where competition with 
other species is not limiting, colonies grow in 
somewhat circular stands. 
 
Establishment 
California bulrush is best established with plugs or 
potted plants derived from divisions of the rhizomes.  
Production of viable seed has proven unreliable for 
commercial purposes. 
 
Planting success is optimal in 12 inches of water but 
can be successful in one to 24 inches of water. 
Spacing depends on the si
ze of the plant.  Trade 
gallons can be planted on spacing of five to ten feet, 
while smaller plants should be closer.  Planting in 
rows parallel to the shore is most effective.  In zones 
of high wave energy, plantings should be anchored in 
the hole by stakes or pins until the plant establishes 
itself. 
 
Management   
California bulrush will thrive in a wide variety of 
marsh sites from mud flats to open water.  Water 
management is critical during establishment and 
through the life of the wetland.  Changes in water 
levels can influence species composition and plant 
communities.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Nutria is the greatest cause of problems in California 
bulrush establishment.  Nutria will excavate plants to 
feed on the roots.  Where nutria are a problem, well 
anchored wire cages are required to allow plants to 
become established.   
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin 
The USDA NRCS Plant Mate rials Centers have one 
released variety:

‘Restorer’ is a cultivar of S. californicus released by 
the USDA, NRCS Jimmy Carter Plant Materials 
Center, Americus, Georgia 
 
Bayou Lafourche Germplasm is a pre-varietal select 
release of  S. californicus  from the USDA, NRCS 
Golden Meadow Plant Materials Center, Galliano, 
Louisiana.   
 
Commercial varieties of California bulrush are 
available from local nurseries.  Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conser vation Service office for 
more information.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Richard H. Neill , USDA NRCS Louisiana Plant 
Materials Center, Galliano, Louisiana 
 
Edited:  01feb2007 mjh; 080930 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.