Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MARSH 
BRISTLEGRASS  
Setaria parviflora (Poir.) 
Kerguelen  
Plant Symbol = SEPA10  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Alternate Names 
knotroot bristlegrass, yello w bristlegrass, knotroot 
foxtail, marsh bristle grass  
 
Uses 
Marsh bristlegrass is grazed moderately by livestock, 
usually during the spring and summer.  It becomes 
unpalatable in the fall and provides poor forage after 
maturity.  When grazed for roughage, it should be 
supplemented with a mineral  and protein concentrate.  
Birds readily eat the seeds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Marsh bristlegrass is a 
warm-season , weak, rhizomatous perennial.  The 
height ranges from  1  to 3 feet.  The leaf blade is flat, 
about 6 to 10 inches long, 1/4 inch wide, prominent 
midrib, and upper surface covered with soft hair.  The 
leaf sheath is  rounded with generally shorter than 
average internodes and often purple tinged.  The 
ligule is  a fringe of short hair.  The seedhead is a  
spikelike panicle, 1 to 2 inches long, and yellowish in 
color with each spikelet surrounded by 5 or more 
yellow or purple bristles. 
 
 Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Management 
This grass is seldom abundant enough to be a key 
management species.  For maximum production, no 
more than 50 percent of  current year's growth by 
weight should be removed during growing season.  
Summer grazing deferments of  at least 90 days every 
2 to 3 years improve plant vigor.  This grass can 
withstand controlled burning if done after September. 
 
Establishment 
It grows from late March or early April until fall 
from short, knotty, branching rhizomes.  Foliage is a 
distinctive whitish green.  The base of the plant is 
slender and wiry.  It produces two and sometimes 
three seed crops during one growing season-the first 
one during May or June.  Bristles are left along the 
seed stalk after the seeds disseminate.  It grows best 
on moist or wet sites.  In Florida, it grows on wet 
sandy soils, sloughs, and acid flatwoods.  In Texas 
and Louisiana, it grows well on salty prairie sites; 
also grows on salt marshes if water level is relatively 
low. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC.

Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.