Plant Fact Sheet
BLACK WILLOW 
SALIX NIGRA Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = SANI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State University, Forestry  
Research  
 
Phot o Courtesy of Philip Barbour, Wildlife Biologist, USDA NRCS, 
Madison, Mississi ppi 
 
Alternate Names  
American, Brittle, Champlain, Dudley, Gooding, gulf 
black,  puzzle, rough American, scythe -lea f, scythe -
leaved, southwestern black, swamp, tall black, Texas 
black, and  western black  willow;  sauce, saule, saule noir, 
sauz,  swamp  walnut ,  weide, wilg, willow , and willow 
catkins  
   
The name willow derives from the Old English wilwe.   
The botanical name  Salix was the name given by the 
ancient Romans.  
 
Uses  
Ethnobotanic : The ancient Greeks knew the therapeutic 
values of willow.   Tea made from willow bark was used 
for stiff joints and rheumatic pains.   
By the 1840’s, chemists had isolated salicylic acid from 
willow and found it produced marked antipyretic (fever -
reducing) and analgesic (pain -killing) effects and  “striking relief of acute articula
r rheumatism.”  Modern 
aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is a synthetic product.  
Salicylic acid got its name from Salix.  
 
Industry : Most black willow lumber is used for shipping 
boxes.   
 
Wildlife : The willows are among the first plants to 
provide honey bees,  after long winters, with nectar and 
pollen.  Domestic grazing animals browse in willow 
thickets.  Elk and beaver browse on willow leaves in the 
summer and willow twigs in the winter.   
 
Ornamental:  Black willow can be planted as an 
ornamental where a fine- textured shade tree is desired.  It 
will tolerate dry soils with reduced vigor.  
 
Conservation:   One of the greatest services of the willows 
is as a soil -binder.  Growing along the banks of countless 
streams, their fibrous roots help to prevent the soil fr om 
being washed away.    
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values.  
 
Description  and A daptation  
A member of the Willow Family (Salicaceae) , black 
willow is a small to medium -sized tree 30 to 60 ft high 
and about 14 inche s in diameter with a broad, irregular 
crown and  a superficial root system .   
 
Leaves are simple, alternate, deciduous , narrow, lance -
shaped, with tapered bases, rounded base, finely toothed 
margin, blade yellow -green on both sides, with a few 
small hairs on the lower surface; petiole slender.   Flowers 
of black willow:  male and female catkins on separate 
trees.  Catkins are 4 -5  cm long, on ends of leafy shoots, 
many small, yellow -green flowers without petals.   T wigs 
are light -red, slender, and flexible.  Buds narrow, conical, 
orange -brown; leaf scars narrow, crescent shaped; broad, 
flat, often shaggy ridges; pith pale brown, small.   The 
bark is dark gray- brown to nearly blackish, divided into 
deep fissures separating  thick, interlacing, sometimes 
scaly ridges . 
 
Black willow is adapted wherever ample soil moisture is 
found.   Black willow grows best where the average 
annual rainfall  is 51 inches, of which 20 inches falls 
during the growing season, April through August.