Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PINEYWOODS DROPSEED  
Sporobolus junceus  (Beauv.) 
Kunth  
Plant Symbol = SPJU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
 
Center 
 
 Uses  
Forage
: Pineywoods dropseed is grazed mostly by 
livestock and deer during the spring.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Pineywoods dropseed is a 
native, warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The 
height ranges from 2 to 3 feet.  The leaf blade is 
primarily basal, less than 1/6 inch wide, and 8 to 15 
inches long with a distinc tive blue green color.  A 
few hairs occur at the base and the upper blade rolls 
inward, resembling a long pine needle.  The leaf  sheath is rounded and longer than the internodes.  
The seedhead has an open panicle that is bronze to 
purple in color and 4 to 6 inches long with branches 
in regular whorls around the stem.  1 to 3 seed stalks 
are produced from each bunch. 
 
Distribution
: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Management 
Studies in central Louisiana show that this grass 
makes up only one percent of plant composition and 
provides only 3 to 5 percent of the livestock diet on 
well-managed ranges.  It increases, however, when 
more palatable associated gr asses are grazed out.  An 
abundance of this grass indicates a deteriorating 
range.  It is not easily damaged by fire. 
From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov
 
Establishment 
It grows during the late winter and spring.  
Vegetative growth is generally completed when the 
seedheads appear in late  April and May.  It grows 
mostly in shaded areas and is adapted to fairly well-
drained sandy loam soils.  It seldom grows on wet or 
flooded sites. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.