Plant Fact Sheet
POWDERY THALIA 
Thalia dealbata Fraser ex Roscoe  
Plant Symbol = THDE  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS  
 
Figure  1 Powdery thalia in flower.  
 
Alternate Names 
Other common names: p owdery alligator-flag  or water 
canna . 
Uses  
Powdery thalia is  recommended for use in backyard 
ponds as an  aquatic ornamental  and  constructed wetlands 
for  home septic systems.  It may have some benefit as a 
waterfowl food because ducks will eat the seed.   
Status  
Powdery thalia is listed as endangered in Illinois.  This 
plant is considered an obligate wetland indicator species.  
Please  consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status ( e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
Powdery thalia  is a rhizomatous, herbaceous perennial 
with a bluish, glaucous coating on leaves, flower stalks, 
and flowers. The
 3 -4  foot tall leaves arise from the base of the  plant 
with  a stout petiole and a large,  elongated leaf blade. The 
attractive purple to  bluish  flower clusters are produced at 
the top of  a stalk extending 2 -3  feet above the foliage.  
Each fruit consists of a bladdery, paper -like  covering 
loosely surrounding a single seed. The  seed are round to 
oval and dark brown speckled  with tan when mature.   
Fl owers  are produced  from late May to  September with 
fruit maturing  throughout the summer. There are about 
1275  seeds per pound.   Powdery thalia is usually found 
growing in wet ditches and along the margins of ponds on 
sites where the soil often contains a  high level of organic 
matter. The nutrient loading capacity for sewage effluent 
has  not been determined; however, powdery t halia will 
tolerate those levels normally found in a single residence 
septic system. It can tolerate water depths up to 1.5 feet 
duri ng the growing season with deeper flooding tolerated 
during the dormant season.    The species occurs in  the 
Coastal Plain from South Carolina to Texas  and also in 
Oklahoma and Missouri .  
 
 
Powdery thalia distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
For updated  distribution, p lease consult the Plant Profile 
page  for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
Establishment  
To ensure survival in a wetland site, vegetative  
propagules are required.  Planting can be done throughout 
the year in the southeastern states. Planting pieces should 
consist of a 4 -6 inch section of rhizome with several 
growing points.  If the plants are actively growing, the 
shoots should not be cut sh orter than 6-8 inches.  A two -
foot spacing will allow the plants to easily fill in the 
planting area in  one growing season.