Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE TRIDENS 
Tridens albescens (Vasey) 
Woot. & Standl.  
Plant Symbol = TRAL2  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
  
Uses 
Cattle and horses graze white  tridens.  Birds eat the 
large seed. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Wh ite tridens is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranges from 1 to 3 feet.  The leaf blade is long, 
narrow, and rolls inward when drying.  The leaf 
sheath is a rounded, open, and basal sheath shorter 
than the internodes.  The ligule is a row of hairs.  The 
stem is swollen at the base and white to purple.  The  seedhead is a dense panicle th
at is distinctly green to 
purple before maturity. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Because this grass never makes up a large percentage 
of the plant composition, it is seldom a key 
management species.  It is generally less palatable 
than associated grasses; ther efore, requires no special 
management.  White tridens increases on most sites.  
Its abundance indicates fair range condition. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Establishment 
Growth starts in late spring and the seedheads start to 
form about 5 to 6 weeks later.  The seeds are fairly 
large and the plants often have a sour odor.  It grows 
best along drainageways and sites that overflow 
occasionally.  It is best  adapted to sandy to sandy 
loam soils, but grows on clay soils if moisture is 
adequate. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.