Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WHITE CLOVER 
Trifolium repens L. 
Plant Symbol = TRRE3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Forage: White clover is the most important pasture 
legume.  It is highly palatable, nutritious forage for 
all classes of livestock. White clover is commonly 
planted with orchardgrass, ryegrass, or tall fescue.  
‘Ladino’ planted with  orchardgrass produces the 
premier forage combination for intensive grazing 
systems in the Northeast.  ‘Ladino’ grows tall enough 
to be harvested for hay, silage, and green chop.  
Common white clover seldom grows tall enough to 
be harvested for hay or silage. 
 
Beautification : White clover is seeded at 2 pounds 
per acre with grass for stabilization on moist soils.  
On dry sites it usually establishes only on wet or 
moist areas. 
 
Wildlife : White clover is a choice food for deer and 
elk. 
 
Erosion control : Grass seedings benefit from the 
nitrogen produced by white clover included in the 
seed mixture.  Solid stands of white clover form a 
good erosion controlling cover on moist fertile soils, 
but stands may be sparse or spotty on dry sites. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
©William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Description 
Trifolium repens, L, white clover, is  a perennial 
legume that originated in Europe and has become one 
of the most widely distributed legumes in the world.  
It has a prostrate, stoloniferous growth habit.  The 
leaves are composed of th ree leaflets, which may or 
may not have a “crescent” or “water mark” on the 
upper surface.  Leaves and roots develop along the 
stolon at the nodes. 
 
The flower heads, each consisting of 40 to 100 
florets, are borne on long stalks from the leaf axils.  
Florets are white but may have a pink hue. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
White clover thrives best in a cool, moist climate in 
soils with ample lime, phosphate, and potash.  In 
general, white clover is best adapted to clay and silt 
soils in humid and irrigated areas.  It grows 
successfully on sandy soils wi th a high water table or 
irrigated droughty soils when adequately fertilized.  
White clover seldom roots deeper than 2 feet, which 
makes it adapted to shallow soils when adequate 
moisture is available. 
 
White clover is distributed throughout the United 
States.   For a current dist ribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
The standard seeding rate is two pounds per acre.  
For pasture establishment, seeds are drilled into a 
well-prepared seedbed that has been plowed, 
harrowed, and compacted to produce a firm seedbed.

The seeds are inoculated before seeding.  For 
stabilization use, seeds are broadcast on roadside cuts 
and fills by cyclone seeders, hydroseeders, or blower-
type equipment. 
 
The proper time of seeding  is determined by seasonal 
and moisture conditions.  This may vary from April 
to May.  Late summer and fall seedings should be 
conducted while adequate moisture is still in the soil 
to assure establishment before freezing. 
 
Management  
Management for forage is aimed at maintaining 40% 
to 50% clover.  Close grazing (2 inch stubble height) 
favors clover, whereas light grazing favors grass.  
Well-fertilized grass will outgrow clover in fall and 
winter and could smother the clover. 
 
Spring applications of nitrogen will stimulate grass 
and provide early feed, but excessive rates are 
detrimental to the clover stand.  Phosphate 
applications are broadcast in fall or spring according 
to soil tests.  Sulfur, boron, or magnesium may be 
needed for maximum production on some soils in the 
western part of white clover’s range. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests  of white clover; however, 
in the South, white clover is susceptible to a number 
of insect pests, as well as leaf and root diseases. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
The three general types of white clover usually 
recognized are (1) large, (2) intermediate, and (3) 
small. 
 
Large type: ‘Ladino’ is the recommended cultivar of 
the large type.  It is two to four times as large as 
common white clover.  It is very well suited to the 
interior areas of wester n Oregon, away from the 
coast.  It will winter kill under dry winter conditions, 
and is susceptible to slug damage.  It requires a high 
soil phosphate level and good management for 
maximum production.  ‘Pilgrim’ and ‘Merit’ have 
been developed for winter hardiness. 
 
Intermediate type : ‘Grassland Huia’ is representative 
of the intermediate type.  It was formerly designated 
‘New Zealand’.  It is very well adapted to locations 
along the coast and interior western Oregon where 
slugs are a problem. 
 
Small type : “New York’ wild white clover is an 
example of the small type, which is adapted to higher  elevations and colder areas.
  It is the most drought-
resistant type.  It is very persistent in pastures, 
withstands close grazing, and is the least productive 
of the white clovers.  ‘Kent Wild’ white clover is also 
a small type. 
 
White clover seeds are available at most commercial 
seed stores. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.