Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
EASTERN 
GAMAGRASS  
Tripsacum dactyloides  L. 
Plant Symbol = TRDA3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 Britton and Brown 1913 Illustrated flora of the northern states and Canada. 
 
Uses 
The primary uses of eastern gamagrass are for 
producing hay and haylage.  It is more productive, 
palatable, and nutritious than the other native 
perennial warm season grasses.  Gamagrass may be 
used as an alternative to annual silage crops, or as a 
pasture forage where intensive rotational grazing is 
well managed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Tripsacum dactyloides  L., eastern gamagrass, is a 
native, warm season, perennial, sod-forming grass  that is a distant relative of corn.  This plant can reach 
a height of up to 8 feet.  Seed is produced from June 
to September.  The seed heads are 6 to 10 inches long 
and are made up of one to 
several spikes.  The leaves 
can be 3/8 to 3/4 inch wide and 12 to 24 inches long.  
They also have a well defined midrib. 
 
Adaptation 
Gamagrass is native to the eastern half of the United 
States.  It does best in moderately well drained to 
somewhat poorly drained soils.  Lowlands, 
subirrigated, or irrigated areas that are not alkaline 
will also support this species well. It will tolerate 
extended periods of flooding. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Site selection must be made carefully before planting.  
Gamagrass may be seeded with conventional 
equipment into a thoroughly prepared seedbed if the 
site has good weed control history.  Sites formerly in 
cool season pastures or hayland should be sown 
without tillage to avoid exposing weed seeds to good 
germination conditions. 
 
The seeds must first be stratified (exposed to cold, 
wet conditions) for 8 weeks before spring sowing.  
Seed may  be purchased stratified from commercial 
growers.  To stratify artificially, place the seeds in a 
burlap bag until the bag is about 1/2 full.  Soak this in 
a 1% solution of fungicide for 10-12 hours.  
Afterwards, drain the seeds and seal them, along with 
the sack, in a plastic bag.  Store them this way for 8 
weeks at 35-45  °F.  Stratification may also be 
achieved by planting in the fall after November 1, but 
before frost is in the soil. 
 
The planting site must also  be prepared.  Do this as 
you would for corn.  Planting should be done when 
the soil is at least 55  °F; early corn planting season is 
preferred.  If planting gamagrass with corn, plant the 
corn first and sow the gra ss between the corn rows. 
 
In the Northeast, gamagrass is prone to frost heaving 
over the first winter after planting on some soils.  The 
use of moderately well drained or well drained soils 
makes this possibility less likely.  On soils with 
somewhat poor drainage, use all strategies to produce 
the largest possible plants by the end of the first

season.  Plants with 15 to 20 culms seem to be very 
resistant to frost heaving, while those with less than 
10 culms are vulnerable. 
 
Management 
To control weeds in pure stands of gamagrass, 
cultivation works the best with care taken not to bury 
the seedlings. If the grass is planted with corn, 
cultivation should not be used.  In this case, good 
pre-emergent weed control measures should have 
been taken.  To control perennial cool-season grasses 
in established stands, woody competition, and some 
diseases, a controlled burn may be done in the early 
spring when the grass is about 1 inch tall. 
 
When cutting hay, do not cut any lower than 6-8 
inches.  Three cuttings may be done: The first one 
about June 10-15 prior to heading; the second cutting 
about July 30; and the third cutting should be done no 
later than September 5. A two cut system may be 
appropriate in more northe rn states and on lower 
production sites.  The first cutting should be at boot 
stage; the second cutting 4-8 weeks later depending 
on production, but no later than September 5 to allow 
adequate growth before frost.  If the gamagrass is to 
be grazed, a good forage management system must 
be used that provides recovery periods for the grass 
and does not allow  grazing below an 8-inch stubble 
height.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Pete’:  This cultivar was developed at the Kansas 
Plant Materials Center from  an assembly of over 60 
Kansas and Oklahoma collections.  It is non-uniform 
and widely adapted. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 
05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and  Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.