Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ALSIKE CLOVER 
Trifolium hybridum L. 
Plant Symbol = TRHY  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Trifolium elegans Savi 
 
Uses 
Alsike clover is used for hay, pasture, and soil 
improvement, and is pref erred where wetter or acid 
soils are encountered.  It is generally out produced by 
other clover species for par ticular uses.  Note: alsike 
clover can be toxic to horses under some conditions. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Alsike clover has smooth stems and leaves, reaching 
a height of 2-4 feet.  This introduced plant tends to 
recline or lodge unless companion plants hold the 
stem upright.  The flowers are pink to white, and are 
borne along the length of th e stem.  The flower heads 
are much smaller than red clover, and the stems do 
not terminate in a flower as they do in red clover. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Alsike is best adapted to the cool climate of the 
Northeast.  It will tolerate wetter soils better than 
other clovers, and also acid conditions.  It prefers 
silty clay loams, and does not tolerate droughty sites. 
 
Alsike clover is distributed throughout the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Establishment 
Alsike clover is always seeded with grass, or can be 
overseeded into grass in the spring.  For conventional 
plantings, spring and fall seedings will work.  Alsike 
seed should always be inoculated due to the 
infrequent use of the species.  Plant alsike at 2-4 
pounds per acre, at a depth of 1/4 to 1/2 inch.  Pre-
plant fertilize according to soil test. 
 
Management 
Pasture management varies depending upon the 
forages in use, but should be based upon the grasses 
involved since they are the “meat and potatoes” of 
the mix.  High rates of nitrogen fertilizer will damage 
the alsike component.  In hayfields, cutting below 2 
inches will damage the stand. 
 
Animal management note: on pasture high in alsike 
clover content, take steps to introduce animals 
gradually to the forage or risk of bloat can be high.  
Horses have done poorly on pastures that have 
significant alsike components. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Unknown. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Common seed is available from commercial seed 
sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.