Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PURPLETOP 
Tridens flavus (L.) Hitchc. 
Plant Symbol = TRFL2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
greasegrass 
 
Uses 
Purpletop is a perennial, warm season grass that is 
consumed by all grazing livestock.  It is well adapted 
to shallow, droughty, infertile soil and provides 
forage in the summer and on sites where cool season 
forages do not produce well.  It can be planted alone 
or in mixes with other warm season grasses. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Tridens flavus  (L.) Hitchc., purpletop, is a bunchgrass 
with erect tufted culms.  It is 35 to 75 inches tall.  
Leaf blades are flat, often less than 1/2 inch wide and 
10 to 27 inches long, lax, smooth, and glossy green.  
The leaf sheath is flattened near the base, keeled (has 
a central rib), and overlappi ng.  The ligule (projection 
up from inside leaf sheat h where sheath meets blade) 
is a ring of short hairs.  The seedhead is an open 
cluster, 8 to 14 inches long, spreading, pyramid 
shaped, usually purple, sometimes nearly black.  The  seedheads droop and are co
vered with an oily or 
grease-like substance.  Th ere are 465,000 seeds per 
pound. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Purpletop is adapted to areas of the eastern United 
States with more than 30 inches of rainfall, from 
Maine to eastern Nebraska to eastern Texas to 
Florida.  It is not common in northern New England 
or New York, especially on inland sites, where poor 
winter hardiness is a problem. 
 
Purpletop is adapted to soils that are well-drained to 
droughty, shallow and rocky, fertile to sterile.  It is 
tolerant of road salt and often colonizes roadside 
sites, especially in Pennsylvania and south. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD Establishment 
Purpletop should be seeded in spring, when soil 
moisture and temperatures are conducive to 
germination.  Seeding depth should be 1/4 inch.  Ten 
to fifteen pounds PLS (pure live seed) per acre is 
sufficient for drill seedings.  For broadcast seedings, 
the seeding rate should be 20 to 25 pounds PLS per 
acre. 
 
Purpletop seedlings are slow to develop and 
competition from weeds and/or cool season grass 
may overwhelm the stand on the better soils.  Stands 
should be established using a no till drill to minimize 
the number of weed seeds exposed.  The cool season 
grasses must be thoroughly killed with contact 
herbicide before seeding.  Purpletop is tolerant of 
most broadleaf herbicides.  (Read labels for 
application amounts and grazing restrictions.) 
 
The most common cause of  purpletop establishment 
failures is a loose seedbed.  Conventionally tilled 
plantings should be packed before and especially 
after the seeding.  The seedbed should be firm, 
showing only a slight imprint when stepped on.  
When using a no till drill, be sure the furrows are 
closed to avoid seed exposure and drying.  This is 
effectively done by cultipacking after drilling. 
 
Management  
Fertilization to maintain moderate levels of 
phosphorus and potassium are recommended for

establishment.  Nitrogen fertilization is not 
recommended until the purpletop is established and 
above the competition.  It may be applied late in the 
first summer at 20 to 40 pounds per acre or early in 
the second summer at 40 to 80 pounds per acre.  
Fertilizer should be applied in subsequent years to 
maintain vigor and enhance production.  Mature 
stands resist weed and brush encroachment, but are 
tolerant of mowing or burning for control.  Cool 
season grasses and legumes  can be controlled with a 
contact herbicide or overgr azing before the purpletop 
emerges.  Rotational grazing of purpletop that 
removes half the above ground growth (6 to 12 
inches down to 3 to 6 inches) will provide the best 
forage and maintain the stand.  With care, a stand 
will last indefinitely. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This section is under development. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
No improved cultivars have been released.  
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.