Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
RED CLOVER 
Trifolium pratense L. 
Plant Symbol = TRPR2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Red clover is primarily used for hay, pasture, silage, 
and soil improvement.  It is a quick growing crop, 
easily established, and produces high quality forage.  
Tolerance of shade allows red clover to be used 
effectively as a cover crop under silage corn. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Trifolium pratense  L., red clover, is an introduced 
biennial or short-lived perennial that grows as one of 
two types: medium (double-cut) or mammoth  (single-
cut).  Red clover plants grow from crowns.  Plants 
have hollow, hairy stems and branches.  Stem lengths 
of medium and mammoth types average 18 inches 
and 24 to 30 inches, respectively.  Medium types 
have about 4 branches per stem; mammoth have 6.  
Each leaf consists of a slender stalk bearing 3 
leaflets.  The taproot of red clover is extensively 
branched.  Flowers are born e in compact clusters or 
heads and are usually rose-pink in color.  Seed pods 
are small, short, and contain kidney-shaped seeds that 
vary in color from yellow to deep violet.  Mammoth  red clover matures later than medium types; only one 
crop of mammoth red clover is harvested each season 
since recovery is slow. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Red clover grows best on well-drained loamy soils, 
but it will also grow on soil that is not as well-
drained.  Medium and fine textured soils are 
preferred by the plant over sandy or gravelly soils.  It 
is best adapted to a pH of 6.0 or higher. 
 
Red clover is distributed throughout the United 
States.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Red clover may be seeded in pure stands, but it is 
often mixed with grain or grass.  Spring or late 
summer seedings are satisfactory.  It may be 
overseeded in the spring on fall seeded grasses.  Red 
clover seed should be inoculated.  Phosphorus and 
potash are the fertilizer elements needed mostly by 
red clover.  Apply as recommended by soil tests.  
Seeding may be done with a drill or broadcast.  A 
firm, weed-free seedbed is essential.  Plant seeds ¼ to 
½ inch deep.  
USDA NRCS PLANTS 
 
Management
 
Graze or cut for hay when the red clover is ¼ to ½ in 
bloom.  A second cuttin g or successive grazings 
should occur when red clover is ¼ in bloom.  Leave 
at least 2 inches of growth after each harvest.  Care 
should be taken to elimin ate or appreciably reduce 
bloating of livestock.  Keep lime and fertilizers 
(phosphorus and potash) at the proper level.  Control 
insects and diseases. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Anthracnose and powdery mildew may be problems 
in areas with high humidity and rainfall.  Choose 
resistant cultivars to reduce the occurrence of these 
diseases. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Some of the major cultivars for the western US are 
‘Pennscott’, ‘Chesapeake’, ‘Kenland’, ‘Cumberland’, 
‘Dollard’, ‘Midland’ and ‘Lakeland’.  ‘Altaswede’, 
‘Norlac’, and ‘Craig’ are ma mmoth red clovers.  In 
the eastern US, varieties selected should be resistant

to anthracnose and powdery mildew.  Some cultivars 
commercially available that are moderate to highly 
resistant to anthracnose are  ‘Acclaim’, ‘Rally’, 
‘Redland II’, and ‘Renegade’.  Those moderate to 
highly resistant to powdery mildew are ‘Arlington’, 
‘Rally’, ‘Rebel’, ‘Red Star’, and ‘Reddy’.  Most 
cultivars and varieties adapted to your area can be 
found through local seed suppliers. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.