Plant Fact Sheet 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
CRIMSON CLOVER 
Trifolium incarnatum L. 
Plant Symbol = TRIN3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 USDA NRCS Jimmy Carter l Plant Materials Center
 
Animal Management Note 
On pasture or hay high in clover content, take steps to 
in

troduce animals gradually to the forage or the risk 
of bloat can be high. 
Uses 
Crimson clover, as a winter annual, is usually planted 
in the late summer to early fall.  It can be utilized in 
pasture, hay, organic farming, pollinator 
enhancement, silage mixes, or used as a winter cover 
for soil protection or green manure crop for soil 
improvement. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  Description 
Crimson clover is an introduced winter annual and 
herbaceous legume.  The leaves and stems of crimson 
clover resemble those of red clover, but the leaves are 
round-tipped with more hair on the stems and leaves.  
Seedlings grow rapidly from the crown forming a 
rosette.  This rosette enlarges as weather becomes 
favorable.  In the spring, the flower stems develop 
rapidly and end their growth with long, pointed 
conical flower heads comprised of 75 to 125 florets.  
Florets are a bright crimson color and open in 
succession from the bottom to the top.   
Adaptation and Distribution 
Crimson clover will grow on soils of poorer quality 
than most other clovers, thriving on both well-
drained sandy and clayey soils.  It does not do well in 
extreme cold or heat.  The 
preferable pH range is 6.0 
to 7.0.  After seedling establishment, growth at lower 
temperatures is superior to other clovers.  Crimson 
clover has been used for a cover crop as far north as 
northern Maine.  The primary growing areas are the 
Southeast and southern Atlantic coastal states. 
Amer
icus, GA
For  a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
Establishment 
Crimson clover seed should be inoculated for 
planting on critical areas where bacteria may have 
been lost.  On sites that have been in pasture or hay, 
this is probably not necessary. 
Soils should contain moderate to high levels of 
phosphorus and potash prior to planting, but nitrogen 
should not be applied unless planting sites are 
degraded.  Plant in the spring or late summer.  
Clovers may be frost seeded in late winter.  This 
seeding method broadcasts seed on existing grass 
pastures when the gro und is frozen, freezing, 
thawing, and early spring  rain cover the seed. 
The best planting method is to drill the seed into a 
firm, weed free seedbed.  No-till methods can be used 
successfully if effective weed  control is employed.   
Seeding rates range from 10 to 15 lb/acre when 
seeded alone and 5 to 10  lb/acre when seeded in a 
mixture.  Seed should be planted at about a ¼ inch 
depth. 
Management  
Pasture and hayland management varies depending 
upon the forage and/or forage mix.  In grass legume

mixtures management is based upon the grasses 
rather than the legumes.  Graze or cut crimson clover 
for hay when in the early bloom stage (¼ to ½ in 
bloom).  When used as a winter pasture, grazing too 
closely will affect the stand and the seed and forage 
yields the following spring.  Grazing or hay cutting at 
or near maturity may be harmful.  Hairs of stems and 
heads become hard and tough.  If used as a green 
manure, manage the crop so it is plowed under about 
2 to 3 weeks before the next crop is planted. 
Clover needs a high level of phosphorous.  High 
inputs of nitrogen fertilizer will damage clover and 
other legumes by reducing their vigor and give a 
boost to the grass. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Most crimson clover types used in the past were 
common types.  However, more recent introductions 
featured reseeding types such as ‘Dixie’, ‘Tibbee’, 
and ‘AU Robin’.  ‘AU Sunrise’ and ‘AU Sunup’ are 
reseeding cultivars from the Jimmy Carter Plant 
Materials Center in Americus, Georgia and Auburn 
University in Auburn, Alabama. The ‘AU Sunrise’ 
and ‘AU Sunup’ releases  are well-adapted to 
Alabama and Georgia, and can grow into Florida and 
Mississippi. 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp; 20feb09 mo&erg; 090225 
jsp 
For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status , parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information,  political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an indivi dual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disab ilities who require alternative 
means for communication of progra m information (Braille, large  print, audiotape, etc.) should cont
act USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimi nation write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). 
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.