Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
INTERMEDIATE WHEATGRASS 
Thinopyrum intermedium 
(Host) Barkworth & D.R.  Dewey 
Plant Symbol = THIN6  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
pubescent wheatgrass, Elytrigia intermedia (Host) 
Nevski, Agropyon intermedium (Host) Beauv. 
 
Uses 
Grazing/pastureland/hayland : Intermediate 
wheatgrass is used for hay and pasture from the 
northern Great Plains to  eastern Washington, and 
south into Colorado and Kansas.  It produces good 
hay yields both individually and with alfalfa where 
stiff stems tend to keep alfalfa from lodging.  
Intermediate wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of 
livestock and wildlife.  It  is a preferred feed for 
cattle, sheep, horses, deer, antelope and elk in spring, 
early summer and fall.  It is considered a desirable 
feed for cattle, sheep, horses and elk in summer and 
winter.  
 
Erosion control/reclamation : Intermediate 
wheatgrass is well adapted to stabilization of  disturbed soils.  It can be used in critical and urban 
areas where irrigation water is limited and to stabilize 
ditchbanks, dikes and roadsides.  This grass can also 
be use to build soils because of its heavy root 
production.  Levels as high as 7,000 pounds (dry 
weight) per acre of root production in the upper 8 
inches of soil have been measured in 5 year old 
stands. 
 
Wildlife
: Strips of this grass ungrazed provide good 
nesting cover for game birds and migratory 
waterfowl. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 Big Flats Plant Materials Center 
Big Flats, NY Description 
Intermediate wheatgrass is an introduced perennial 
grass native to Europe and Asia.  Included with this 
species is pubescent wheatgrass (formerly  Agropyron 
trichophorum ), an introduced perennial grass native 
to Europe and Asia considered slightly more drought 
tolerant and winter hardy than intermediate 
wheatgrass.  As the common name implies, the 
flower spikes and leaves  of the pubescent form are 
densely covered with hairs whereas intermediate 
wheatgrass’ vegetative structures are for the most 
part smooth, but may have a fringe of hairs on the 
leaf margins. 
Intermediate wheatgrass grows to 3 to 4 feet tall.  It is 
a long-lived cool season gr asses with short rhizomes 
and a deep feeding root system.  The seed spikes may 
be up to 4 to 8 inches long.  Leaves are 4-8 mm wide 
and green to blue-green in color and sometimes 
drooping.  The florets are usually fewer than seven.  
Intermediate and pubescent wheatgrass readily cross 
and commercial seed often  contains both types.

Adaptation and Distribution 
Intermediate wheatgrass is adapted to areas with 12 
to 13 inches of annual rainfall or greater.  The 
pubescent type can tolerate slightly more droughty 
conditions of about 11 to 12 inches of rainfall or 
greater.  The species performs best above 3,500 and 
up to 9,000 feet elevation.  It can be seeded at lower 
elevations, but its moisture requirement is greater.  It 
is not as drought tolerant as some cultivars of crested 
wheatgrass, Siberian wheatgrass, and Russian 
wildrye.  
 
Intermediate wheatgrass prefers well drained loamy 
to clayey textured soils; the pubescent form performs 
best on loamy to sandy to shallow soils.  It will 
tolerate slightly acidic to mildly saline conditions, are 
cold tolerant, can withstand moderate periodic 
flooding in the spring, and are very tolerant of fire.  
The pubescent form can tole rate lower fertility, more 
alkaline soils, higher elevations and drier conditions 
than intermediate wheatgrass.  The species performs 
poorly on wet, poorly drained, moderately saline to 
alkaline soils. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website.
 
 
Establishment 
Intermediate wheatgrass should be seeded with a drill 
at a depth of ½ inch or less on medium to fine 
textured soils and no more than 1 inch deep on coarse 
textured soils.  When seeded alone, a rate of 10 to 12 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 21 to 25 
PLS seeds per square foot is recommended.  It is 
compatible with other species,  particularly alfalfa.  If 
used as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of 
mix desired.  The best dryland results are obtained 
from seeding in very early spring on heavy to 
medium textured soils and in late fall (dormant) on 
medium to light textured soils.  Irrigated lands should 
be seeded in spring through summer.  Late summer 
(August - mid September) seedings are not 
recommended unless irrigation is available. 
 
For mined lands, roadsides and other harsh critical 
areas, the seeding rate should be increased to 15 to 18 
pounds PLS per acre or 31 to 38 PLS seeds per 
square foot.  Light frequent irrigations are beneficial 
for stand establishment.  
 
Protect new seedings until they are fully established 
and are able to withstand pulling by grazing animals 
without being uprooted.  It is desirable to cut at least 
one hay crop prior to grazing.  Stands may require 
weed control measures du ring establishment.   Application of 2,4-D should not be made until plants 
have reached the 4 to 6 leaf stage.  Mow weeds at or 
prior to their bloom stage. 
 
Management
 
Ten to twelve inches of new growth should be 
attained in spring before grazing is allowed on 
established stands.  A six-inch stubble height should 
be maintained following each mowing and going into 
winter.  Care should be taken to allow proper rest of 
21 to 28 days between grazing periods in irrigated 
and high moisture situations.  When planted with a 
legume, harvest hay at optimum stage for the legume.  
This will allow the grass to be harvested prior to 
flowering and result in very high quality hay.  
Harvest pure stands for hay when plants start to 
flower.  Apply nitrogen as needed to maintain 
vigorous growth.  A balance of nitrogen and 
phosphate fertilizer needs to be considered in order to 
maintain a legume component.  A soil test is 
recommended. 
 
Intermediate wheatgrass is distributed primarily 
throughout the West.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
New stands may also be damaged by grasshoppers 
and other insects and pesticides may be needed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Russian seed origin: ‘Chief’, ‘Clarke’, ‘Luna’ 
(Russia, Turkey), ‘Mandan 759’, ‘Manska’, ‘Oahe.’  
Turkish seed origin: ‘Tegmar’.  Other seed sources: 
‘Amur’ (China), ‘Greenl eaf’, ‘Reliant’, ‘Rush’, 
‘Slate.’ 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Dan Ogle 
USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho 
 Edited: 08Nov2001 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.