Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARROWLEAF CLOVER  
Trifolium vesiculosum Savi  
Plant Symbol = TRVE 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
Uses 
Arrowleaf clover is suitable for hay, grazing, seed 
production, soil improvement,  and wildlife.  Deer and 
turkey readily feed on this clover, which often 
persists well into early summer.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Arrowleaf clover is an  upright, cool-season, 
reseeding annual legume that grows to a height of 40 
to 50 inches under good conditions.  Seeds germinate 
in the fall, but grow slowly during the winter.  
Leaflets are large, rounded  at the base and pointed at 
the tip.  Some leaflets have white, V-shaped 
markings.  Blossoms are arranged in a cluster or head 
up to 2 inches long.  Initially, the blossoms are white 
to pinkish, turning brown when mature. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
The plant is suited to a wide range of soil conditions 
from well- to moderately well-drained and from  slightly acid to slightly alkaline.  It is not suited to 
light textured, droughty soil of low fertility or to 
poorly drained, wet soils.  
 
Arrowleaf clover  is distributed throughout the 
midsouth and southeastern  United States.  For a 
current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Prepare a smooth, clean seedbed.  Firm with a 
cultipacker before and after planting.  Cover seed ¼ 
to ½ inch deep.  Arrowl
eaf clover may also be 
planted in an established summer perennial grass sod 
by light disking or with a no-till drill.  Interseeding 
into a grass sod should be delayed until about the first 
frost date.  Plant at a rate of 10 lbs of inoculated seed 
per/acre.  Follow soil test recommendations, if 
available.  If not, apply 300 lbs/acre of 0-20-20 or 
similar analysis at plan ting time, and annually 
(August or September) as a maintenance fertilizer.  
 
Management  Jimmy Carter Plant Materials Center 
Americus, GA 
Start grazing when plants are 5 to 6 inches tall.  
Maintain a minimum top growth of 3 to 4 inches 
during the growing-season.  For commercial seed 
production, exclude livestock or do not cut for hay 
after May 1.  For reseeding, allow plants to attain a 
minimum height of 12 to 15 inches in early July to 
mature seed.  For hay, cu t in early bloom stage.  
When ‘Meechee’ arrowleaf clover is grown with 
summer perennial grasse s, graze or cut surplus 
growth of grass to 2 inches by October 1.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Unknown. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Amclo’ (Italy), ‘Yuchi’, ‘M eechee’ (Italy).  Order of 
maturity for these cultivars: ‘Yuchi’--early, ‘Amclo’-
-intermediate,  ‘Meechee’--late. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the

PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.