Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SLIM TRIDENS 
Tridens muticus (Torr.) Nash 
Plant Symbol = TRMU  
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Uses 
Cattle and horses graze slim tridens.  Rodents and 
birds eat the seeds. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  S lim tridens is a native, 
warm-season, perennial bunch grass.  The height 
ranges from 8 to 12 inches.  The leaf blade is narrow, 
and rolled giving a needlelike appearance and 
sometimes sparsely covered with fine hairs.  The leaf 
sheath is shorter than the internodes and usually 
covered with short hairs.  The ligule is a ring of hairs.  
The stems are erect, slender, and somewhat swollen 
at the base.  The seedheads are dense panicles, 
spikelets with 6- to 8-flowered, and pale purplish.  
The back of the palea is densely covered with hair. 
 
Distribution : For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Management 
Although this grass makes up 10 to 15 percent of the 
total production on some sites, it is seldom 
considered a key management species because 
associated grasses are more palatable.  It is an 
increaser on cattle ranges.  Its abundance indicates 
fair to poor range condition. 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
 
Establishment 
It makes most of its growth in the late spring and the 
seedheads generally appear 4 to 5 weeks later.  The 
bunches are seldom more than 3 to 4 inches in 
diameter.  It is adapted to well-drained, rocky 
calcareous soils. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.