Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
BALD CYPRESS 
Taxodium distichum  (L.) L.C. 
Rich.  
Plant Symbol = TADI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 J.S. Peterson USDA NRCS NPDC @PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
southern-cypress, swamp-cypress, red-cypress, 
yellow-cypress, white-cypress,  tidewater red-cypress, 
gulf-cypress 
 
Uses 
Erosion Control : Riverine swamps of bald cypress 
reduce damage from floods and act as sediment and 
pollutant traps as they cause floodwaters to spread 
out, slow down, and infiltrate the soil. 
 
Timber : Its wood is valuable for building 
construction, fence posts, planking in boats, river 
pilings, doors, blinds, flooring, shingles, garden 
boxes, caskets, interior trim and cabinetry.  
 
Wildlife : Its seeds are eaten  by wild turkey, wood 
ducks, evening grosbeak, squirrels, waterfowl, and 
wading birds.  Cypress domes provide unique 
watering places for a variety of birds and mammals 
and breeding sites for frogs, toads, salamanders, and 
other reptiles.  Yellow-throated warblers forage in the 
Spanish moss often found hanging on the branches.   Its tops provide nesting sites for bald eagles, ospreys, 
herons, and egrets.   
 
Site Rehabilitation
: It has potential for rehabilitating 
margins of surface-mined lakes.  Cypress domes can 
serve as tertiary sewage treatment facilities for 
improving water quality and recharging groundwater.   
 
Beautification : This species has been planted as a 
water tolerant tree species used for shading and 
canopy closure in mosquito control programs.  It has 
been successfully planted throughout its range as an 
ornamental and along roadsides. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bald cypress is a large, slow-growing but long-lived, 
deciduous conifer, which frequently reaches 100 to 
120 feet in height and 3 to 6 feet in diameter. Its 
trunk is massive, tapered and buttressed.  The leaves 
are alternate, linear and fl at with blades generally 
spreading around the twig.  The bark is thin and 
fibrous with an interwoven pattern of narrow flat 
ridges and narrow furrows.  Its male and female 
flowers form slender tassle-like structures near the 
edge of the branchlets.   Bald cypress trees produces 
cone fruit, and there are  approximately 5,200 seeds 
per pound.  It develops a taproot as well as horizontal 
roots that lie just below the surface and extend 20 to 
50 feet before bending down.  It develops knees that 
grow above water providing additional support. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bald cypress is generally restricted to very wet soils 
consisting of muck, clay or fine sand where moisture 
is abundant and fairly permanent.  It is usually found 
on flat or nearly flat topography at elevations less 
than 100 feet above sea level.  Its thin bark offers 
little protection against fire and during years of 
drought when swamps are dry, fire kills great 
numbers of cypress. 
 
Bald cypress is widely distributed along the Atlantic 
Coastal Plain from southern Delaware to southern 
Florida, westward along the lower Gulf Coast Plain 
to southeastern Texas.  Inland, it grows along streams

of the southeastern states and north in the Mississippi 
valley to southeastern Oklahoma, southeastern 
Missouri, southern Illinois, and southwestern Indiana.  
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Establishment of bald cypress stands can be 
accomplished by either seeds or sprouts.  Seeds are 
produced annually and good seed production occurs 
about every 3 years.  Seeds are dispersed more 
frequently by flood waters.  Under swamp conditions, 
the best seed germination generally takes place on a 
sphagnum moss or a wet-muck seedbed.  On better 
drained soils, seed usually fails to germinate due to 
lack of surface water.  Soil saturated for 1 to 3 
months after seedfall is required for germination.  
Seedlings require light for good growth, thus control 
of competing vegetation is necessary. 
 
Bald cypress will produce vigorous sprouts from the 
stumps of both young and old trees, following 
disturbance. 
 
Management  
The best management practice for regenerating this 
species is canopy thinning.  Through thinning, 
competition is controlled and overhead light is 
provided for newly germinated seedlings.  Nutria, a 
swamp rodent, often clips or uproots newly planted 
seedlings before the root systems are fully 
established, thus killing them.  Control of nutria 
population is necessary. 
 
Severe fire after logging or drainage destroys seeds 
and roots in the soil, favoring willows and hardwoods 
to take over. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Brown pocket rot known as “pecky cypress” which is 
caused by the fungus  Stereum taxodi attacks the 
heartwood.  The forest tent caterpillar ( Malacosma 
disstria ) and fruit-tree leafroller ( Archips 
argyrospila) larvae build webs and feed on needles 
causing dieback and eventually death. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Emerson’ and  ‘Pendens’ are 2 cultivars of bald 
cypress that are commercially available. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.