Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
PALE FALSE 
MANNAGRASS  
Torreyochloa pallida  (Torr.) 
Church var.  pauciflora (J. 
Presl) J.I. Davis  
Plant Symbol = TOPAP3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon  
Alternate Names 
Other common names include weak alkaligrass, weak 
mannagrass, and weak false manna.  Synonyms 
include Glyceria pauciflora , Glyceria otisii , 
Pucinellia pauciflora , and Torreyochloa pauciflora . 
 
Uses 
Pale false mannagrass has potential for restoration 
and enhancement of forested, prairie, and riparian 
wetlands, as well as other non tidal wetland plant  communities.  Its underground creeping stems 
(rhizomes) improve the plants ability to stabilize soils 
along faster moving streams and watercourses.  The 
seeds are probably eaten by waterfowl and other 
birds, while the foliage provides cover for wildlife.  
The value of false mannagrass as forage for livestock, 
large game, and small mammals is not widely known.  
It may have potential for use in ditches or swales 
designed to filter agricultural or stormwater runoff.  
Strong rhizome production coupled with low lying, 
curved stems that root from the joints, makes this 
species a good candidate for streambank, channel, 
and shoreline stabilization. 
 
Dale Darris USDANRCSCorvallisPMC
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat
ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Pale false mannagrass is a native, perennial cool 
season grass that grows 30 to 150 cm tall. The stems 
are erect to decumbent (low lying and bent upward) 
and may root where the nodes (joints) touch the 
ground.  It actively spreads by rhizomes 
(underground shoots).  Leaf blades are rolled when 
young, flat when mature, 3-15 mm wide, and slightly 
rough to the touch on one or both sides.   The flower 
head (panicle) is loose and open, 7 to 20 cm long, 
with ascending or drooping branches.  Pale false 
mannagrass occurs from Alaska to California and 
east to South Dakota and New Mexico.  It can found 
from near sea-level to timberline in the Mountains. 
 
Key to identification:  Pale false mannagrass is easily 
confused with true mannagrasses ( Glyceria spp.), 
which it was once classified as.
  However, its leaf 
sheaths (lower part of the leaf surrounding the stem) 
are open rather than closed and have cross- markings.  
The species is also similar to true alkaligrasses 
( Pucinellia  spp.).  Consult with a botanical key for 
distinguishing traits. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  Scattered in Oregon 
and Washington in marshy areas and roadside ditches 
where reed canarygrass ( Phalaris arundinacea) does 
not dominate.  Its abundance elsewhere is unknown.  
Seed retention is fair to good, production is high and 
seed fill is excellent.  False mannagrass also ripens 
over several weeks in late summer wherever soil 
moisture is non-uniform.  These features make wild 
collection easy.

Adaptation: Pale false mannagrass is found in 
freshwater marshes, swamps, wet forest openings,  
wet meadows, ditches and other depressions.   It 
grows in acid soils comprised of loamy, organic, or  
sandy substrates.  The species tolerance to salinity, 
alkalinity, and high acidity is not well reported.  It  
typically occurs on continuously moist, saturated, and  
shallow flooded areas.  At moderate elevations in 
Oregon, false mannagrass can form its own plant 
association where it comprises  30 to 80 percent of the 
total cover.  Most of the surface area between plants 
is mud or open water.  This species is found in full 
sun to intermediate shade but may prefer the latter. 
 
Establishment 
The seed has no dormancy and germinates when fall 
or spring sown.  It has a  weak hull and requires no 
special conditioning.  Establishment rate is moderate 
as is rhizome spread. There are approximately 
1,955,000 seeds per pound (+/- 30%).  A seeding rate 
of 1 lb/ac of pure lives seeds will result in about 45 
live seeds per square foot.  Suggested rates are 1 to 4 
lbs/ac when sown as a single species.  Rhizomes and 
plugs may also be used.  Recommended spacing is 8 
to 16 inches (20 to 40 cm) for uniform aerial 
coverage within one and two years respectively.   
  Management
 
There is a lack of information about the management 
of this species for livestock or other uses.   When 
cultivated for seed, poorly drained soils or summer 
irrigation is required along with moderate soil 
fertility levels. Tolerance to wildfire or prescribed 
burning is not well documented. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
In some situations false mannagrass can form dense 
stands that may limit diversity, but it is not known to 
be weedy. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
 Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 
This species is rarely sold as seed or plants.  
Availability depends on wild harvests, hand 
collections, or contract growing with producers who 
specialize in native herbaceous seed.   
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Dale Darris , USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Edited: 23mar2006 jsp, 17sept2008 dcd; 080919 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation
 
Service.