Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
SIBERIAN ELM 
Ulmus pumila L. 
Plant Symbol = ULPU  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 Herman, D.E. et al. 1996 
North Dakota Tree Handbook  
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Alternate names 
Chinese elm, dwarf elm, Asiatic elm 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The inner bark of Siberian elm was 
dried and ground into a powder for thickening soups 
or adding to cereal flours  in bread making.  Immature 
fruit was used to produce sauce and wine (Facciola, 
1990) and the wood was used for agricultural 
implements and boat making (Vines, 1987). 
 
Agroforestry:  Siberian elm is planted and managed in 
tree strips as windbreaks to protect livestock, enhance 
crop production, and control soil erosion.  
Windbreaks also function to shelter home buildings 
against harsh weather conditions and help reduce 
home heating and cooling costs. 
 
Landscape : Siberian elm has limited ornamental 
value (Dirr, 1990), although it has been used in the 
Midwest for shade along boulevards and in parks. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status such as state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
General : Elm Family (Ulmaceae).  Siberian elm is an 
introduced, fast-growing tree , from 50 to 70 feet in 
height.  Its leaves are alternate, oblong in shape, 1 to 
3 inches long, and usually have serrate (saw-toothed) 
margins.  The flowers are greenish and clustered with 
short pedicels, and appear with or before the leaves 
from March through April (Vines, 1960).  The bark is 
a light gray-brown with irregular furrows and is often 
streaked with stains cause d by bacterial wetwood.  
The fruit, a samara, ripens from April to May, and 
consists of a dry, compressed nutlet surrounded by a 
thin, membranous wing (Ibid.). 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Siberian elm, an extremely hardy tree, is native to 
northern China, eastern Siberia, Manchuria, and 
Korea.  It was introduced to the United States in the 
1860s and can be found on dry sites as well as along 
moist stream banks, in pastures and on grasslands.  
This species prefers well-drained, fertile soil and full 
sun, however, it is highly adaptable and easily 
tolerates, even thrives in, a variety of conditions such 
as poor, dry soils, cold winters and long periods of 
summer drought.  Siberian elm has invaded mesic, 
dry, and sand prairies. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site.

Establishment 
Propagation by seed: Siberian elm seeds do not need 
pretreatment and should be sown as soon as ripe in 
the spring.  Excessive drying and dewinging will 
reduce viability, though the seeds may be stored at 
36-40 ° F for up to 8 years if moisture content is kept 
at 3-8% (Dirr and Heuser, 19 87).  Seeds are sown in 
a cold frame, 12 to 20 per linear foot, in rows ten 
inches apart, and covered with  ¼ inch of firmed soil.  
The seedbeds should be kept moist and not overly 
shaded.  When the seedlings are large enough to 
handle, they are transplanted to individual pots and 
grown in a greenhouse for the first winter.  Siberian 
elm seedlings are outplanted into their permanent 
positions in late spring or early summer the following 
year.  Seedlings should not be held in a nursery bed 
for more than two years because they will develop a 
taproot that makes lifting difficult and reduces 
outplanting survival rates. 
 
Management 
Rosendahl, 1955, noted that some Siberian elm 
plantings in the Upper Midwest were unsuccessful 
because seed was collected  in climatically different 
geographical areas of the species range and had 
varying levels of winter hardiness. Siberian elm may 
become weedy and require removal.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Siberian elm is resistant  to Dutch elm disease and 
phloem necrosis and has been used to breed 
resistance into elm hy brids (Dirr, 1990). 
Leaf damage from elm leaf beetle has been noted in 
the south.  (Ibid.) 
 
Environmental Concerns 
This species has been declared invasive in New 
Mexico. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Siberian elm plant materials are readily available 
through commercial sources. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read the label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
Kathy Davis 
formerly USDA, NRCS National Plant Materials 
Center Beltsville, MD 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited 20nov2003 jlk; 30may06jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.