Plant Fact Sheet
SEA OATS 
Uniola paniculata
Plant Symbol = UNPA 
 L.  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 R. Alan Shadow  
USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Material Center  
Uses 
Landscaping:  
Sea Oats  is an attractive and important plant of the 
coastal community.  Seed heads from this plant are 
sometimes used in floral arrangements.  However, it 
should be noted th at this species is protected in some 
states due to the vital role it plays in shoreline 
stabilization.  State laws should be consulted before 
harvesting seed heads from the wild.  Sea Oats is 
very valuable as a dune builder and stabilizer.  
 
Forage : 
Sea Oat s is reported to have high palatability to 
browsing animals and moderate palatability to 
grazing animals.  However, due to the location of its 
habitat, protected status, and low protein content, it 
has no value as a forage plant.   
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Description and Adaptation 
Sea 
oats is a long lived , slow growin g, warm season, 
perennial grass  commonly associated with the upper 
dunes along beach fronts.  It grows erect to 
approximately 6 feet in height at maturity, and has 
leaves that can grow to 24 inches in length.  The 
leaves are narrow, less than 1 inch in wid th, and taper 
towards their ends.  The ends of the leaves are often 
brown and curled in appearance.  It produces a large 
seed head, or panicle, during the summer.  The 
panicles are made up of many flat spikelets 
containing seed.  The panicle turns from green to 
straw colored in late summer as the plant matures.  
The stem of the plant has bulges, or nodes, near the 
soil surface.  These will often root down and anchor 
to the soil surface as wind born sediment accumulates 
around the plant.  Sea oats is also rh izomatous.  
These rhizomes have a scale- like appearance when 
young, and can be seen as pale yellow, sharp, stiff, 
protrusions near the base of the plant.   
 
Sea oats is very drought tolerant.  This species 
produces a massive root system, and will tolerate salt 
spray and brief inundation with salt water.  It prefers 
full sun, and thrives in areas with blowing sand, such 
as dunes along the upper beach front.  B urial of the 
plant’s base by blowing sand actually stimulates plant 
growth and helps the plant sprea d via rhizomes and 
tacking down at the stem nodes.  It prefers coarse 
sediments, but will tolerate medium grained 
sediments.  It will not tolerate fine grained sediments, 
and has a difficult time surviving in lower, wetter 
portions of the beach area.   Tho ugh it is capable of 
surviving brief inundations of salt water, it will not 
tolerate water logging.       
 
Distribution :  Sea oats can be found on beach fronts 
and barrier islands along the eastern seaboard of the 
United States from Virginia to Florida.    Their range 
extends along the coast line of the Gulf States, south 
into portions of Mexico.  It can also be found in the 
Bahamas and portions of Cuba.               
 
Establishment  
Sea oats is not a prolific seed producer.  It produces 
large panicles with numerous spikelets.  However, 
very few seed are actually produced.  Seed is viable 
and will grow readily in greenhouse conditions.   
However, there are no sources of commercial seed 
available.    
 
Sea oats is predominantly established from 
containerized material and vegetative propagules.