Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
WILD COWPEA 
Vigna luteola (Jacq.) Benth. 
Plant Symbol = VILU3  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center 
 
 Clarence Rechenthin Courtesy of NRCS Texas State Office @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
hairypod cowpea, deer pea,  Vigna repens 
 
Uses 
Wildlife:  Wild cowpea (Vigna luteola ) is a good 
source of browse for white-tailed deer.  It can get 
quite bushy, and produce a lot of vegetation, making 
it a good plant for deer food plots.  Ground feeding 
birds also enjoy the seeds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.   
 
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 
 
Description 
Wild cowpea is a native, perennial, herbaceous vine 
that has trailing or twining branches that can grow to 
three feet in length or longer.  Previously known by 
the scientific name  Vigna repens,  it has several 
common names including wild cowpea, hairypod 
cowpea, and deer pea.   It is a member of the 
papilionoideae subfamily of the Fabaceae (legume) 
family.  Wild cowpea has been known to nodulate.   
 
Wild cowpea is trifoliate with yellow zygomorphic 
(bilaterally symmetrical) flowers at the end of a long 
peduncle.  It flowers from April to November in 
South Texas.  It produces several fairly large seeds in 
pods 1-2 ½ inches long.  Its vines often form dense 
tangles. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Wild cowpea grows along coastal regions from 
tropical areas of Central  and South America, north 
along the Gulf Coast states, and up the Atlantic 
seaboard as far north as North Carolina.  It has also 
been found in Zimbabwe, Af rica.  In Texas, it is 
found in the coastal counties, inland to Hidalgo 
County, and along the barrier islands.  
 
Wild cowpea grows in wet pastures, along levees, 
elevated ridges, and on we ll-drained sites near along 
the edge of fresh-water to brackish swamps.  It 
prefers moist to wet clay soils, although at the Kika 
de la Garza Plant Materials Center in Kingsville, 
Texas, we have been able to grow it dryland on 
Victoria Clay soil with go od success.  Wild cowpea 
will tolerate a wide range of salinities, ranging from 0 
to 10 ppt.  
 
Establishment 
Wild cowpea can be easily propagated from seed or 
cuttings.  Propagation from seed has ranged from 8-
96 percent.  Greenhouse germination tests conducted 
at the Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 
1998 and 1999 found that the variability may be due 
in part to accession differences.  One wild cowpea 
accession consistently had better than 93% 
germination, while a second accession had less than 
10%.   
 
Wild cowpea can be seeded directly or grown in 
cone-tainers in a greenhouse to produce transplants.  
Stutzenbaker (1999) recommends planting in a clean, 
weed-free seedbed, or broadcasting over lightly

disturbed soils in the early spring.  There are 
approximately 10,880 wild cowpea seeds per pound.  
 
Success with cuttings has been good.  A cutting test 
conducted at the Kika de la Garza PMC in 1998 had 
an 80% survival rate when the cuttings were treated 
with a rooting hormone.  
 
Management 
Cowpea is extremely hardy and requires little 
management.  At the Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center, wild cowpea plantings have 
survived a winter freeze, extended periods of 
droughty conditions, defoliation by fall army worms 
and grasshoppers, and several trimmings by PMC 
staff.  Further, the plants still had good vegetative and 
seed production, and new seedlings were present in 
the plot. 
 
 Larry Allain USDI GS NWRC @ PLANTS 
 
Stutzenbaker (1999) notes that wild cow pea can 
endure livestock grazing, periodic burning, and 
occasional floods. 
 
For additional assistance regarding the production 
and establishment of wild cow pea, please contact the 
Plant Material Center at (361) 595-1313. 
 
Control 
To control wild cowpea, us e a broadleaf herbicide.  
Remember to make sure that the product chosen is 
licensed for aquatic use if the planting is near a 
waterway or wetland area. 
 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin , Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher , Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 
1Oct2003 SDM; Edited 13Nov2003 jlk; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.