Plant Fact Sheet
BLUE VERVAIN 
Verbena hastata (L.)  
Plant Symbol = VEHA2  
   
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
 Thomas Barnes@USDA, NRCS -PLANTS Database  
Alternate Names 
Swamp vervain  Blue verbena 
Swamp verbena  Simpler’s joy 
Uses 
   
Ethnobotanical : Blue vervain  is used internally to treat 
depression, fevers, coughs, cramps, jaundice, and 
headaches.  Externally, it is used for acne, ulcers, and 
cuts.    
Warning : Blue  vervain can interfere with blood pressure 
medication and hormone therapy.  Large doses will 
induce  vomiting and diarrhea.    
Landscaping: Blue vervain produces very attractive 
purplish -blue flowers in late summer.  It can grow in 
degraded wetland habitats and is an excellent landscaping 
substitute for several invasive species, including 
European wand lo osestrife, purple loosestrife, and purple 
foxglove.
 
Wildlife : The cardinal, swamp sparrow, field sparrow, 
song sparrow, and slate -colored junco eat the seeds of 
blue vervain.  The cottontail rabbit will sometimes eat the 
foliage; most other mammalian herbivores avoid it due its  bitter taste.  The caterpillars of the verbena moth feed on 
the leaves and it is the larval host for the common 
buckeye butterfly.  Long and short tongued bees collect 
the nectar and sometimes the pollen.  Other bee 
pollinators include: epoline cuckoo bees, eucerine miner 
bees , halictid bees, and the verbena bee, 
a specialist 
pollinator.  In addition the thread -waisted wasp, bee 
flies,  thick -headed fli es and golden soldier beetle are also 
known to all visit blue vervain.  
 
 
Description and Adaptation
  
Blue vervain is a native, perennial wildflower that grows 
from 2 to 5 feet tall.  Its hairy, square stems can be green 
or red.  The toothed, lance shaped leaves progress in pairs 
up the stem and are about 6 inches long by 1 inch wide. 
  Purplish -blue flowers bloom in multiple, showy, 
elongated panicles (flowers arranged on a stem) and are 
up to 5 inches long.  Each bloom is about 1/4 inch across 
and conspicu ously lobed.  Blue vervain blooms in mid to 
late summer; approximately 1 1/2 months after blooming 
each bloom gives way to four oblong, reddish -brown, 
triangular -convex “nutlets.”   Blue vervain spreads 
through rhizomes, horizontal roots that produce new 
pl ants.  
 
  
Blue vervain prefers moist conditions and full to partial 
sun.  It can grow in disturbed sites and is commonly 
found in moist meadows, thickets, and pastures, as well as 
riversides, marshes, ditches, and river -bottom prairies.    
 
 Blue Vervain distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.   
   
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
 
Establishment  
General : Collect nutlets in late summer or early fall  and 
spread them over  a clean, dry, indoor surface  for several 
days.  Once the nutlets are dry, crush them lightly to