Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HAIRY VETCH 
Vicia villosa Roth 
Plant Symbol = VIVI  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Alternate Names 
winter vetch 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Hairy vetch’s capacity to provide a 
heavy mulch aids in soil and water conservation. 
 
Crop : Hairy vetch is grown as a cover preceding such 
crops as safflower, corn, tobacco, cotton, rice, 
tomatoes, and other vegetables.  Hairy vetch is 
valuable for use in no-till corn rotations, especially in 
regions that are less favorable for clover and pea 
cultivation.  It may also be used in orchards and 
vineyards.  Hairy vetch is noted for its ability to fix 
large quantities of nitrogen. 
 
Livestock : It is grown for hay, pasture, silage, seed, or 
as interim cover on disturbed soil.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable  vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or 
state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
Description 
Vicia villosa Roth, hairy vetch, is a vining, winter-
active legume.  It may be annual or biennial.  It has a 
shallow root system.  Stems may grow 2 to 5 feet 
long.  Leaves bearing several leaflets grow 
perpendicular to the stem, and may terminate in 
tendrils.  Stems and leaves of hairy vetch are 
pubescent (covered with a soft woolly fuzz) and tufts 
are present at the tips of stems.  Flowers are purple.  
Seeds are round and black, and develop inside 
elongated and flattened pods. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Hairy vetch is a hardy type of vetch suited to wetter 
soil and colder winters than other winter-active 
legumes.  Hairy vetch develops best under cool 
temperature conditions, on fertile loam soils; it is also 
productive on sandy or clay soils.  It has been 
reported to grow well on light soils that are too sandy 
for crimson clover.  It is only moderately sensitive to 
soil acidity. USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Hairy vetch is distributed throughout the entire 
United States.  For a current distribution map, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Hairy vetch is planted in the fall wherever it is 
grown.  It is normally seeded at 20 to 40 pounds per 
acre.  Due to the vining, climbing habit of the plant, it 
is often sown in combination with rye so the rye may 
provide some support.  In a mixture, 50 pounds of rye 
and 15 to 20 pounds of vetch per acre should be used. 
 
Management 
Hairy vetch performs well in rotations with 
conventional and no-till planted row crops.  In these 
systems, the fall planted legume is either 
mechanically or chemically killed 2 to 3 weeks prior 
to planting or it is sprayed at planting.  A heavy 
disking may be advantageous prior to turning or it 
may be sufficient as a primary operation depending 
on the top growth of the vetch.  The row-crop is then

planted conventionally or no-tilled into the cover 
crop.  The legume decomposes, providing nitrogen 
for the following crop.  When grown for hay, vetch is 
generally cut when the first pods are set.  It may be 
cut using a mower with a swather attachment.  If 
grown as a seed crop, hairy vetch is harvested when 
the lower pods are ripe to avoid shattering.  If 
carefully managed, hairy vetch may be grown with 
Bermudagrass.  Vetch volunteers profusely when 
allowed to disseminate seed.  Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious insect or disease pests of mature 
hairy vetch; however, the seed is highly susceptible 
to vetch bruchid ( Bruchus brachialis ) injury.  This 
insect pest is largely responsible for poor natural 
reseeding of hairy vetch in pastures.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Americus’ (Turkey), ‘AU Early Cover’ (Alabama 
naturalized stand), and  ‘Madison’.  Seeds are 
available from most commercial seed sources. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.