Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ARROWWOOD VIBURNUM  
Viburnum dentatum  L. var. 
venosum  (Britt.) Gleason 
Plant Symbol = VIDEV  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data  
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
V. dentatum var. venosum  is a variation occurring 
within the  Viburnum dentatum  species.  Arrow-wood 
viburnum, southern arrow-wood, roughish arrow-
wood.  (Arrowwood is frequently hyphenated: arrow-
wood.) The common name refers to the Native 
American use of the straight young stems as arrow 
shafts.  
 
Uses 
Landscape: V. dentatum  is an adaptable native, multi-
stemmed shrub.  Creamy white flowers, dark blue 
berries and colorful fall foliage make southern 
arrowwood an a ttractive landscape plant.  It  suckers 
freely from the base.  It can be used for borders or 
screens or as mass plantings and groupings to attract 
birds, which eat the fruit. 
Medicinal:   Viburnum species have been used for 
numerous medicinal purposes (Alternative Medicine 
Foundation: HerbMed, 2000--for notes and internet 
links on medicinal use and other health related topics 
for  Viburnum species). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Southern arrowwood is a native shrub growing 3-9 
feet tall and spreading some times up to 8 feet.  The 
plant’s arching branches form an overall rounded 
crown; twigs are slender,  ridged and angled.  Its 
leaves are deciduous, opposite, simple, oval to 
oblong, obovate (inversely egg-shaped), or elliptic in 
shape and 1½ - 4 inches in length, with coarsely, but 
regularly, toothed margins.  Leaves are shiny dark 
green above and paler beneath, sparsely stellate (with 
hairs in small star-like tufts) on undersides and 
petioles.  Foliage turns yellow to red or reddish-
purple in late fall.  Small white flowers are borne in 2 
to 4-inch flat-topped clusters in May to early June.  
The ¼ inch berry-like drup es are bluish-black and 
attractive to wildlife.  Fru iting occurs from August - 
November. 
 ©  Hugh Wilson Vascuclar Plant Image  Gallery Texas A&M University, Bioinformatics Working Group  
Localized variations of southern arrowwood occur 
over the geographic range of the species.  Most 
common differences between  the variants are in the 
shape and size of leaves, the type and placement of 
pubescence (hairs) on the leaf underside and petioles, 
and the region of occurrence.  Some variations of 
southern arrowwood include  V. dentatum var. 
dentatum ; V. dentatum var.  scabrellum Torr. & Gray 
(=  V. scabrellum  (Torr. & Gray) Chapm.) and  V. 
dentatum  var. venosum  (Britt.) Gleason. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Southern arrowwood is found natively in open woods 
and margins, and along streambanks. It prefers 
loamy, neutral to acid soil with ample moisture, but is 
adaptable to a range of conditions from dry to fairly 
wet soil.  Plants are salt-tolerant in New England 
coastal areas.  They can grow in generally drier 
conditions than  V. acerifolium.  They most 
commonly occur in partial shade but can be grown in 
full sun.  
 
Southern arrowwood is distributed throughout the 
East.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website.

Establishment 
Southern arrowwood plants are propagated by seed or 
vegetatively.  Seed bearing age begins at 
approximately 3-4 years.  Depending on region of 
collection, the seeds of V. dentatum may have a cold 
requirement for breaking  embryo dormancy.  
Vegetative reproduction is through short rhizomes 
and sprouts from the root crown or softwood cuttings.  
Southern arrowwood has a fibrous root system and is 
easily transplanted. 
 
Management 
V. dentatum  is free from serious problems of disease 
or most insect pests (see, however, discussion on 
viburnum leaf beetle belo w).  Occasional pruning is 
helpful to rejuvenate and shape the plant.  Prune off 
basal suckers to restrict spreading if necessary.    
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The viburnum leaf beetle  (Pyrrhalta viburni) was 
introduced from Europe and Asia to North America 
around 1947.  It became a pr oblem in Canada in 1978 
and has now moved to the northeastern United States 
where it is a concern in urban landscapes and 
nurseries.   Viburnum dentatum  leaves can be 
damaged or skeletonized by  the beetle adults and 
larvae, though  Viburnum opulus  (European 
cranberrybush viburnum) appears to be the insect’s 
preferred host and is most seriously affected.  The 
beetle larvae hatch in early May, feed for about 4-5 
weeks then pupate in the soil.  Adults emerge by mid-
July, feed, mate, and females lay over-wintering eggs 
in a straight line on viburnum twigs.  If found, the 
eggs should be pruned out and destroyed before 
hatching.  Chemical control is best applied to young 
larvae, which feed on both upper and lower leaf 
surfaces.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Several cultivars of  V. dentatum are available. 
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Kathy Davis 
USDA-NRCS National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, Maryland   
 
Species Coordinator:  
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 26Jul2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.