Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MAPLELEAF VIBURNUM  
Viburnum acerifolium  L. 
Plant Symbol = VIAC  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Maple-leaf viburnum, ma ple-leaved arrow-wood, 
dockmackie, guelder-rose, possum-haw, squash-berry 
 
Uses 
Landscape: Mapleleaf vibur num is a native, thicket-
forming shrub long cultivated for its good seasonal 
displays of creamy flower s, attractive summer leaves, 
dark mature fruits and reddish-purple fall color.  It is 
adaptable to a wide range of light and soil conditions, 
is an excellent choice for dry soils in deep shade, and 
is useful for naturalizing along forest edges, 
streamsides and lakeshores.  
Wildlife:  Mature fruits are eaten by a variety of 
wildlife including mammals, game birds and many 
species of songbirds.  Its low-growing habit provides 
good nesting and escape cover for birds and small 
mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 
Description 
V. acerfolium  is a native, thicket-forming shrub, 4 to 
6 feet high and 3 to 4 feet wide.  Twigs are pubescent 
(hairy).  Leaves are deciduous and 2-5 inches wide, 
and most are deeply 3-lobed  with coarse teeth on the 
margins.  Lower leaf surfaces have minute black 
dots, and are nearly smooth to thinly stellate (having 
star-like tufted hairs).  Small creamy-white, bisexual 
flowers in upright, flat-topped clusters 1-3 inches 
wide appear May through August.  The 1/3-inch to 
1/2-inch berry-like drupes  are nearly black and 
appear July through October, often persisting into 
winter.   
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Mapleleaf viburnum occurs natively on hillsides and 
ravine slopes, as an understory shrub in upland 
beech-maple forests of th e Northeast and Midwest, 
and in rich deciduous woods along the Gulf coastal 
plain.  Optimum growth occurs in well-drained, moist 
soils, with partial shading; however,  V. acerfolium  is 
tolerant of acid soils, dry sites and deep shade.  
 
Mapleleaf viburnum is distributed throughout the 
East.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Mapleleaf viburnum produces abundant fruit and 
seed yearly beginning at  about 2-3 years of age.  
Most seeds have an impermeable seedcoat and 
embryo dormancy that requires a warm-cold 
stratification sequence for germination.  The plant 
may prove difficult to propagate from seed.  
Vegetative reproduction is through rhizomes, or 
softwood cuttings (Dirr and Heuser, 1987). 
 
Management  
The plant’s suckering habit forms open colonies and 
it is best in a naturalized setting.  In the native 
landscape, V. acerfolium  may be damaged and 
decreased by repeated exposure to fires. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The viburnum leaf beetle  (Pyrrhalta viburni) was 
introduced from Europe and Asia to North America 
around 1947 and first became  a problem in Canada in 
1978.  It has now moved to the northeastern United 
States where it is a concern in urban landscapes and 
nurseries.   Viburnum acerfolium  leaves can be 
damaged or skeletonized by  the beetle adults and

larvae, though Viburnum opulus  appears to be the 
insect’s preferred host and is  most seriously affected.  
The beetle larvae hatch in early May, feed for about 
4-5 weeks then pupate in the soil.  Adults emerge by 
mid-July, feed, mate, and lay over-wintering eggs in 
a straight line on viburnum twigs.  The over-
wintering eggs should be pruned out and destroyed 
before hatching.  Chemical control is best applied to 
young larvae, which feed on both upper and lower 
leaf surfaces.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
V. acerfolium  cultivars are not readily available. 
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Kathy Davis 
USDA, NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited 25Jul2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.