Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
HIGHBUSH 
BLUEBERRY  
Vaccinium corymbosum L.  
Plant Symbol = VACO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Northern highbush blueberry,  southeastern highbush 
blueberry, Maryland highbush blueberry, black 
highbush blueberry, American blueberry, New Jersey 
blueberry, rabbiteye blueberry, swamp blueberry, tall 
huckleberry, mayberry, whortleberry  
 
Uses 
Fruit production: V. corymbosum , highbush 
blueberry, a native North American shrub cultivated 
throughout the country, is the major blueberry-
producing species in commerce.  More than 50 
cultivars have been developed, primarily for 
commercially valuable fr uit characteristics and 
seasonality.  
 
Landscaping:  A few selections are used in 
landscaping, especially as plantings in wet areas or to 
attract wildlife.   
 
Food:   Highbush blueberries are eaten raw, 
smoke-dried, sun-dried, boiled, and baked in a wide 
variety of culinary settings.  They have one of the 
highest concentrations of iron of the temperate fruits.   
 
Wildlife:   Blueberries provide important summer and 
early fall food for numerous  species of game birds, 
songbirds, and mammals.    
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status  (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
 Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Highbush blueberry is a native, upright, 6-12 feet tall, 
crown-forming shrub.  The common name refers to 
the relatively tall stature of these plants. Twigs are 
yellow-green (reddish in winter) and covered with 
small wart-like dots.  Leaves  are deciduous, alternate, 
simple, elliptic or ovate, 1 to 3½ inches long and 
slightly waxy above with  pubescence (hairs) at least 
on the veins beneath.  The white or pink-tinged 
flowers are small and urn-shaped with 5 petals, and 
occur 8 to 10 per cluster.  Flowering occurs February 
to June, sporadically in the southern portion of its 
range; fruiting occurs April to October, about 62 days 
after flowering.  Fruits are ¼ - ½” blue-black berries 
with many seeds. 
 
In the PLANTS database, plants known as 
“highbush” blueberries are actually a group of 
interrelated species.  Hybrids are often used in 
commercial fruit production.  
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Widespread in eastern North America, the highbush 
blueberry has been introduced outside of its natural 
range for commercial berry production.  The most 
common native habitat is in moist or wet peat of 
moderate to high acidity – in and around marshes, 
swamps, lakes and flood-prone areas.  V. 
corymbosum  also occurs in drier areas such as dunes 
and barrier beaches, rocky hillsides, oak woods, and 
pinewoods.  
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
Highbush blueberry produces abundant fruit every 
year. Highbush blueberry ( V. corymbosum) is self-
fertile, but cross-pollination increases fruit set and 
results in larger, earlier berries with more seeds 
(Agriculture Western Australia 2000).  Other species

of the complex are partially or completely self-
incompatible.   Bees are the primary pollinators.  The 
seeds may be widely dispersed by birds and 
mammals, but germination can be reduced up to 15% 
after passing through an animal gut.   In the southern 
portion of its range, highbush blueberry seeds have 
thick seed coats and require cold stratification before 
germination.  Those from northern regions produce 
thinner seed coats and germinate in the autumn after 
dispersal.   
 
Plants of highbush blueberry can be propagated by 
seeds or cuttings. 
 
Occasionally sprouting has occurred from root-
crowns after top kill by fire or disturbance.  Plants 
have also been noted to produce root sprouts that 
emerge 1-2 meters away from the parent plant.    
 
Management  
Ideal soil for cultivation is moist, high in organic 
matter, highly acidic (4.5-5.5), and well-drained.  The 
plants grow in full sun to partial shade, but those in 
open sites produce more flowers and have brighter 
fall foliage color.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects, diseases and wildlife pests need to be 
controlled in commercial production. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Improved varieties for commercial berry production 
are readily available.  Non-selected materials for 
conservation use are also available from nurseries. 
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
 
Kathy Davis 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Species Coordinator 
Gerald Guala 
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center , Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 26Jul2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the  PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.