Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
COMMON 
PERIWINKLE 
Vinca minor  L. 
Plant Symbol = VIMI2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Its use should normally be restricted 
to partially shaded areas and north or east exposures 
on ramps and inclines.  It should be considered on 
roadsides in specially adapted locations and sites. 
 
Ornamental and beautification : Common periwinkle 
is particularly desirable as an attractive evergreen 
ground cover in mild climates.  It is valuable on 
yards, banks, or odd areas as a low maintenance 
ground cover.  It tolerates light traffic but should not 
be used where frequent trampling occurs. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Vinca minor  L., common periwinkle, is a perennial 
evergreen ground cover that is winter hardy.  It is 
closely related to the big leaf periwinkle ( V. major 
L.), except in size and hardiness.  Common  periwinkle seldom exceeds a height of 6 inches 
although runners may trail long distances on the 
ground.  The runners root at the node under moist 
conditions.  The thick glossy leaves form a good 
ground cover.  Small blue flowers occur 
indeterminately from April to September. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Common periwinkle is adapted to mild climates.  It 
usually requires part shade and ample moisture, but 
will tolerate full sun if it is adequately watered.  It is 
more hardy than big leaf periwinkle.  Moisture and 
exposure are often more restrictive than soil type on 
determining adaptation.  Common periwinkle is 
adapted to a wide range of soils.  It is found on well 
drained to poorly drained soils that can be calcareous, 
alkaline to slightly acidic, and medium textured to 
fine textured.  The plant should be used where there 
is adequate moisture. 
 
Common periwinkle is distributed throughout the 
East.  For a current distribution map, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
©
William S. Justice 
Smithsonian Institution 
@ USD NRCS PLANTS 
 
Establishment 
Plants may be established from rooted cuttings 
produced in flats or from plant division.  Plant on a 
spacing of 18 inches x 18 inches.  Fertilizer should be 
applied for vigorous establishment.  Mulch critical 
areas immediately after planting.  Planting can be 
done any time of the year when moisture is adequate 
for establishment.  This should ordinarily be planted 
on areas that can be sprinkled or otherwise irrigated 
or on sites where average a nnual precipitation is over 
20 inches. 
 
Management  
Little or no maintenance is required after 
establishment.  Well-established plantings may be 
clipped to promote new growth.  Chemical or 
mechanical weeding may  be need to control 
unwanted vegetation. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common periwinkle can be affected by blight, 
canker, leaf spot, and root rot. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local  agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what

works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Alba’, ‘Atropurpurea’, ‘Bowles’, ‘Variegata’, 
‘Multiplex.’  Seedlings are available at most 
commercial nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.