Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
NANNYBERRY 
Viburnum lentago  L. 
Plant Symbol = VILE  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & the Biota of North America Program 
 
Alternate Names 
Sheepberry, wild raisin, sweet viburnum, nanny-
berry 
 
Uses 
Nannyberry is a shade-tolerant, understory species 
useful in landscape plantings as shrub borders, taller 
barriers, hedges, and windbreaks.  It produces good 
seasonal displays of flowers, fruits, and fall leaf 
color. The fruits are sweet and edible and are eaten 
by many species of birds and wildlife.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General :  Nannyberry is a native, deciduous, multi-
stemmed shrub or small tree that may reach 36 ft. in 
height.  The plant is also known as “sheepberry” 
because its fruit smells like wet sheep wool when 
over ripe.  Nannyberry is leggy and somewhat open 
at maturity with an irre gular to rounded crown.  
Suckers often form at the base.  The bark is dark gray 
to black in a pattern of small blocks.  Leaves are 
simple, opposite, and ellipse to egg-shaped with 
finely toothed margins.  They are 2-4” long and  hairless, or nearly so, on
 both sides.  The ½-1” 
petiole has a wavy, mostly winged margin. Mature 
foliage is dark glossy green, becoming deep maroon 
to red in the fall.  Small, creamy-white, bisexual 
flowers in flat-topped cluste rs appear May-June.  The 
½” berry-like fruits (drupes) are blue-black and form 
hanging clusters from July - September.   
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
 ©  R.A. Seelig Botany Dept., NMNH, Smithsonian Institution @ PLANTS 
Nannyberry is adaptable to  a wide range of sites, but 
is commonly found natively in moist areas with rich 
loam to clay-loam soil, such as low woods, swamp 
borders, or near stream banks.  It also occurs on 
moist, wooded slopes, but tolerates drier sites. 
Although quite shade-tolerant, it achieves relatively 
larger size in more open areas. 
 
Nannyberry is distributed throughout the north and 
northeastern United States.   For a current distribution 
map, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
 
Establishment 
Nannyberry seed requires  alternating temperatures 
and a cool moist period to germinate (Dirr, 1990).  
The plant can be readily propagated by softwood 
cuttings.  Hanging branches may also root, or layer, 
where they touch the ground.  Nannyberry has 
fibrous roots and is easily transplanted and 
established.  
 
Management 
Although nannyberry grows naturally as a multi-
stemmed shrub, it can be maintained as a small tree 
by pruning stems and removing suckers at the base. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Powdery mildew, which may affect leaves in late 
summer, decreases aesthetic value but will not kill 
the plant.  The viburnum leaf beetle (Pyrrhalta 
viburni) , first a problem in Quebec and Ontario in 
1978,  has moved to New York and Maine and is now 
a concern in urban landscapes and nurseries.   V. 
lentago  leaves can be damaged or skeletonized by the 
adults and larvae, although  V. opulus is the beetle’s 
preferred host. The beetle  larvae hatch in early May, 
feed for about 4-5 weeks then pupate in the soil.  
Adults emerge by mid-July, feed, mate, and lay over-
wintering eggs on viburnum twigs.  Chemical control

is best applied to young larvae.  Over-wintering eggs 
should be pruned out and destroyed before hatching. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Nannyberry  cultivars are not readily available. 
 
Prepared By:  
Guy Nesom 
Formerly BONAP, North Carolina Botanical Garden, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina   
 
Kathy Davis 
USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, Maryland 
 
Species Coordinator: 
Gerald Guala 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 24Jul2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.