Plant Fact Sheet
CULVER’S ROOT  
Veronicastrum virginicum (L.) 
Farw. 
Plant Symbol = VEVI4  
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
Photo by Catherine Ca llaghan USDA, NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center . Purplehead sneezeweed and bee balm also 
shown  
Alternate Names  
Bowman’s Root  
Uses  
Conservation:  Culver’s root is a native, clumping,  
perennial wildflower  grow ing well in moist  to wet 
meadows and prairies . It  is a good component of a 
pollinator  seed mixture  seeding native grasses and 
wildflowers  together . It grows easily in sunny locations 
and combines well with wildflowers such as asters, bee 
balm,  cardinal flower, swamp milkweed, gol denrods and 
ironweeds.     
Wildlife:  The most common visitors to the flowers are 
long 
and short tongued bees, which collect pollen and  
nectar . Other pollinators include honeybees, bumblebees, 
m ason bees, g reen metallic bees and  masked bees . Other 
insect vi sitors include s phecid wasps, butterflies, moths 
and  syrphid flies.  The seeds are too small to be of interest 
to birds.    
Ethnobotanical:   The Cherokee, Iroquois, Chippewa and 
Menominee Indians used this plant for a multitude of 
medicin es. It is used  as an analgesic, cathartic 
(accelerated defecation), emetic (induces vomiting), 
treatment for coughs , fevers  and rheumatism  and to assist 
with  childbirth .   
Landscape :  Culver’s root is a tall, durable, adaptable  and 
easily grown . It ’s  beautiful  (usually  white, purple  to pink) 
flower s occur  at a time of year (July -  September ) when 
m ost  other plants are not  flowering .  It sometimes  needs 
staking  and is a good wildflower for meadows, borders , 
wetlands  and  rain garden s.  It makes a nice cut flower 
lasting as  much as a week in fresh arrangements.  
Status  
Culvers root is threatened in Massachusetts and New 
York and endangered in Vermont.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status ( e.g., thre atened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  
Description  and Adaptation 
 Culver’s root  distribution from USDA -NRCS PLANTS Database.