Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
AMERICAN 
CRANBERRYBUSH  
Viburnum opulus L. var. 
americanum  Ait. 
Plant Symbol = VIOPA2  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 
 
 Herman, D.E. et al. 1996 North Dakota Tree Handbook @ PLANTS 
 
Alternate Names 
Viburnum opulus L.ssp. trilobum  (Marsh.) Clausen, 
Viburnum trilobum  Marsh.,highbush cranberry 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: American cranberrybush is a good wildlife 
food and cover plant for small mammals and birds.  
Twigs are eaten by deer, moose and beaver.  Fruits 
are a staple winter food for ruffed grouse and are 
eaten sparingly by pheasants and at least five species 
of songbirds.  Humans find the fruit tart but edible 
and excellent as a preserve or sauce. 
 
Erosion Control : The shrub is useful as a medium tall 
hedge or border for screening or a windbreak. 
 
Landscaping : It is an attractive flowering landscape 
plant for use in odd areas or in group plantings 
around homes and farm ponds.  The fruit is a bright 
red which increases its orna mental value.  Combined, 
its characteristics make it useful as a dual purpose 
food plant and ornamental. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Viburnum trilobum  Marsh., American cranberrybush 
is an erect native shrub, averaging in height from 6 to 
10 feet, occasionally taller on good sites.  The plants 
are multi-stemmed but do not form thickets by 
spreading.  They are dense shrubs because of close 
branching.  The leaves are opposite, 3-lobed maple-
like leaves and from 2 to 5 inches long.  In the fall 
the leaves become scarlet.  The creamy-white 
flowers, which appear in  late May and early June, 
measure 3 to 4 inches  across. Each bloom is 
composed of an outer ring of large sterile flowers and 
an inner ring of tiny fertile ones.  The fruit, which 
ripens in September and October, resembles the true 
cranberry in size and color but is more translucent 
when ripe.  Fruit hangs on the branches all winter. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
American cranberrybush is adapted throughout the 
Northeast, although distribution is widely scattered 
throughout much of its range.  It is found growing in 
well-drained, imperfectly drained, and poorly 
drained, but not droughty soils.  Soil pH is not 
critical, but for best results soil should be reasonably 
fertile.   
 
American cranberrybush is distributed throughout the 
northern states.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
Establish hedges or block plantings by using bare 
root or container grown stock.  Plant 2 year old 
nursery seedlings.  If planting your own seed, it takes 
2 years for them to germinate.

When establishing a planting, prepare a good bed by 
plowing a few furrows, or by removing at least 4 
square feet of sod for each plant.  For the first 2 
years, either cultivate, weed, or mulch with straw, 
hay, or sawdust to control competition.  During the 
early years of establishment remove all competing 
vegetation. 
 
As a wildlife bord er along the edge of woods, plant 
the American cranberrybush one or two rows 
between the open fields and the trees.  Space each 
plant 5 or 6 feet apart.  As a hedge where a medium-
tall screen is desired, plan t 2 rows 2 feet apart with 
staggered spacing or 1 row with 1 foot spacing .  In an 
odd area or group planting around a pond, plant in the 
center or behind low growing shrubs.  Full growth of 
the shrub requires 5 to 10 years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This plant has no serious pests. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Compactum’, ‘Andrews’, ‘Hahs’, and ‘Wentworth.’  
Plants are available at commercial hardwood 
nurseries. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 
 Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.