Plant Fact Sheet
AMERICAN VETCH 
Vicia americana Muhl. Ex Willd.  
Plant Symbol = VIAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA NRCS. 1992 . 
Alternate Names  
Purple vetch  
American deer vetch  
Stiff -leaf vetch  
 
Uses  
Crop : American vetch fixes nitrogen and can be grown as 
a cover preceding late spring -planted crops.    
Conservation:  American vetch is a drought -tolerant 
climbing vine excellent  for sunny and partially shady 
locations.  It is a native plant and can be part of a wildlife  
seed mixture where native grasses and wildflowers are 
seeded together.   It will support itself using tall grasses 
such as rye .  
Ethnobotanical :  Native Americans used the pods, seeds, 
and leaves of American vetch as food.  A poultice of the 
leaves has been used to treat spider bites, an infusion of 
the plant has been used as eyewash and an infusion of the 
tops has been used as a wash in sweat houses. American 
vetch has also been used as a panacea, an aphrodisiac, and 
a good luck charm.  Native Americans would get horses 
to smoke the plant to increase the horses’ endurance.  
Landscaping and wildlife:  American  vetch is an excellent 
grazing and fodder plant for game birds, small mammals, 
black bear, grizzly bear, and mule deer.  Horses, sheep, 
and cattle will browse on the aerial portions of American 
vetch.   Growing in disturbed sites it can be planted to 
help  restore roadsides, former coal mine sites and  disturbed rangelands.  Use this plant as a native 
alternative for crown vetch in landscaping.  
 
 
Status  
American vetch is listed as endangered/extirpated in 
Maryland.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your  
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicatorvalues).  
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displ ace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
 
Description and Adaptation 
American ve tch is a native, perennial, climbing vine that 
grows approximately 1 to 2 feet tall.  Each plant has a 
single stem.  Tendrils emerge from the end of the multiple 
leaflets to help secure the plant to the climbing structure.  
The purple flowers, which are gathered together in 
racemes (flower stalks) of 3 to 10 flowers, appear in late 
spring (May through August) and give way to 1 to 1.5 
inch pods about one month after flowering.  Each pod 
contains two or more pea like brown seeds.  American 
vetch spreads throu gh rhizomes (roots that spread out 
from the parent plant and produce new plants).   
 
Distribution:  American vetch grows in medium - to finely -
textured moist to dry soils in full sun.  It is widely 
distributed west of the Mississippi River and in the 
northeastern United States (USDA cold hardiness zones 4 
through 7).  
 
Habitat : American vetch grows in ope n patches in 
swampy woods, road banks, fencerows, borders, mixed 
forests, meadows, foothill canyons, and clearings.