Plant Fact Sheet     
United States Department  of Agriculture-Natural Reso urces Conservation Service 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
ORANGE ZEXMENIA
Wedelia  texana  
(A. Gray) B.L. Turner  
Plant Symbol = WETE 
 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 
 Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Hairy wedelia.  Previous scientific names include 
Wedelia acapulcensis Kunth var.  hispida auct. non 
(Kunth) Strother, Wedelia hispida  auct. non Kunth, 
and  Zexmenia hispida  auct. non (Kunth) A. Gray ex 
Small. 
 
Uses 
Wildlife : Orange zexmenia is a good plant for 
inclusion in native seed mixes for range use.  It is 
browsed by white-tailed deer, cattle, sheep, and 
goats.  Wildlife species such bobwhite quail and 
white tail deer have been observed browsing seed and 
vegetative material in observation plots.  Orange 
zexmenia may also provide unknown benefits by 
maintaining and contributing habitat that harbors 
beneficial insects and butterflies. 
 
It also can be used in many types of conservation 
plantings, such as stream-side buffers and filter strips. 
Beautification : Orange zexmenia is an attractive plant 
for landscaping use because of its all around 
hardiness, drought tolerance, small shrub growth 
form, and brightly colored yellow-orange flowers.  It 
is recommended for landscaping on roadside, native 
gardens, and other low rainfall locations.  It is a  larval host for bordered patch butterfly larvae and a 
nectar source for various spec
ies of adult butterflies.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Orange zexmenia is a native Texas sub-shrub 5-10 
dm tall.  The stems are usually solitary and woody at 
the base.  The many branch es and leaves are covered 
with rough stiff hairs.  The leaves are simple, ovate-
lanceolate, sessile or nearly so, and mostly opposite.  
Leaves are generally scabrous or strigose on both 
sides and turn black after drying.   
 
The flower stems are terminal and solitary or 
occasionally in a cyme of three.  The flower heads 
are about 3 cm across.  The ray flowers are broad, 
conspicuous, 7-15 in number, with the corollas being 
yellow or orange.  Both the disk and ray flowers 
produce achenes.  The plants bloom and produce seed 
from March to December.  
 
 
Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
 
Orange zexmenia is frequent on various soils in 
openings and partially shaded brushy sites in the 
Edwards Plateau and Rio Grande Plains ecoregions 
of Texas.  It is less frequent in the Trans Pecos and 
southeast and north central Texas.  It can also be 
found in northeastern Mexico, southeast to Veracruz 
and Hidalgo.  For current distribution maps, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Orange zexmenia can best be established from seed.  
Seeds can be sown directly, or can be grown in a

greenhouse to establish transplants for later planting.  
Germination tests conducted at the Kika de la Garza 
Plant Material Center (1999) found germination rates 
ranging from a low of 1% to a high of 73%.    
 
For direct seeding, broadcast seed in the late winter 
or early spring into a cl ean, weed free seedbed.  
Seeds should be covered from ¼ to ½” depth to 
ensure good soil to seed contact.  Transplants should 
be planted in early to mid-spring, to ensure good root 
establishment before the summer heat arrives.   
 
 Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
 
For greenhouse seeding, it is important not to over 
water, because the small seedlings are prone to 
damping off.  New plants can be transplanted into 
their permanent locations after three months. 
 
Management  
Orange zexmenia requires little management other 
than occasional weeding.  It can survive in both 
droughty and moist conditions.  For seed production 
purposes, occasional irrigation during extremely 
droughty periods may help seed fertility.   
 
 Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza PMC 
 
Orange zexmenia can be harvested with a combine.  
When harvesting orange zex menia, run the combine’s 
cylinder speed at 900 RPM, the concave is at 6 mm, 
the sieve is open ¼”, and the fan is off.  Orange  zexmenia can also be harvested using a weed eater 
with a stripper attachment.  To clean the seed, it 
should first be run through a brush machine and can 
then be cleaned further using a clipper style seed 
cleaner.  It is recommended 
that after cleaning, the 
seed should be stored at 45
oF and less than 50% 
humidity.  Dryland (non-irrigated) field production 
can yield 60 pounds of seed per acre per year
. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
White flies have been observed to completely 
defoliate orange zexmenia plants.  However, the 
defoliated plants survived.    Bordered patch butterfly 
larvae have also defoliated the plants.  Aphids and 
leaf-footed bugs have been documented on orange 
zexmenia.  All of the above pests are fairly easy to 
control with Organophosphate (Ex.-Malathion) and 
carbamate (Ex.-Sevin) insecticides.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
Goliad Germplasm is a selected class release 
developed from seed originating from seven South 
Texas counties.  It was released cooperatively with 
the South Texas Natives project in 2008.  It was 
selected for superior adaptation to South Texas over 
other commercially available forbs, high active 
germination, and drought and disease resistance.  It is 
intended to provide food and cover for wildlife.  
Certified seed is available and the E. “Kika” de la 
Garza PMC maintains breeder seed.  
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
John Lloyd-Reilley & Shelly D. Maher, USDA 
NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center, 
Kingsville, Texas 
 
Edited: August 2008; 081030 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural 
Resources Conservation Service.