Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
MEXICAN TEOSINTE
Zea mexicana (Schrad.) 
Kuntze 
Plant Symbol = ZEME  
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Florida Plant 
Materials Center and the National Plant Data Center 
  
Alternate Names 
Teosinte, annual teosinte,  Euchlaena mexicana 
 
Uses 
This species is used for wildlife, such as quail, dove, 
and turkey, food and habitat.  It is also suitable for 
silage or green chop feed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or  state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is al so available from the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
 
 From Hitchcock (1950) @ plants.usda.gov 
Description and Adaptation 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Mexican teosinte is an 
annual, warm-season grass introduced from Mexico.  
It is similar to corn in general vegetative appearance 
and stands 10 to 15 feet in height.  It is coarse, 
branches at the base, and the leaf blades are sword-
shaped to 3 ¼ inches wide and 13 to 48 inches long.  
Clusters of slender “ears” (seed pods) are produced in 
each of the 5 to 7 uppermost leaf axils.  Each ear 
normally contains 3 to 8 very firm glossy seeds with 
a marking resembling an insect pupa on the face. 
 
It is adapted to fertile soils ranging from somewhat 
poorly to well drained.  It can grow wherever corn is 
grown.  Approximately 165 to 170 frost free days are 
required from seeding to maturity. 
 
Establishment 
The area to be planted should be plowed and 
thoroughly disked.  The time for planting in Florida 
is early June.  If irrigation is available and greater 
forage yield is desired, planting can be done in early 
April, weather permitting.  Fertilizer requirements are 
similar to that for most grain crops.  An application 
of N, P, and K should be based upon a soil test.  For 
row planting, the width of the rows should be 
approximately the same as used for corn, placing the 
seed 1 to 2 inches deep.  Use 8 to 10 pounds of seed 
per acre.  For broadcast seeding, use 10 to 12 pounds 
per acre followed by shallow disking for seed 
coverage.  Shattered seed will voluntarily germinate 
the following year.  To encourage this production, till 
the soil by moderate to thorough disking in early 
march prior to germination. 
 
Management  
Increased stems may be obtained by cutting when the 
plant attains a height of 3 to 4 feet.  Additional or late 
cuttings will decrease seed production.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your NRCS Service Center office for sources 
of this material. 
 
Prepared By:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Brooksville, 
Florida 
 
Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Brooksville, 
Florida 
 Edited: 29sep05 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's 
TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.