Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GOLDEN 
ALEXANDERS  
Zizia aurea (L.) W.D.J. Koch   
Plant Symbol = ZIAU  
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
 
© 2001 Eleanor Saulys, by permission 
Alternate Name 
Golden zizia 
 
Uses 
Golden Alexanders has its greatest potential as a 
component of conservation mixes and wildflower 
gardens.  In wet, sunny meadows and open 
woodlands it will naturalize.  The flowers are 
attractive to many kinds of butterflies and many other 
insects.  It is an excellent source of accessible pollen 
and nectar to many beneficial insects with short 
mouthparts.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threat ened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Golden Alexanders is a memb er of the carrot family, 
Apiaceae.  It is an upright, native, perennial forb 
growing to .4 – .75 meters (1 – 2 feet) in height.  The  leaves are up to 8 centimeters long and 5 centimeters 
across, have finely serrated margins, generally 
lanceolate or ovate in sh
ape and the larger leaves 
usually have 1 or 2 sharp lobes.  Lower (basal) leaves 
are twice or three times compound with long petioles, 
while the upper leaves are  once compound with short 
petioles.  Golden Alexanders is most noteworthy for 
its attractive bright yellow flower which occurs from 
May – June.  The flower is less than .3 centimeters 
long. Each flower has 5 sepals, 5 petals and 5 
stamens. A cluster of flowers gathers into an 8 
centimeter long flat-topped flower head,  the middle 
flower of each compound umbel being stalk less.  
Flowers give way to 3 – 4 millimeter long, oblong, 
green fruit capsules.  The leaves as well as the fruit 
slowly turn light purple in the autumn. 
 
Golden Alexanders is a carefree plant which occurs 
naturally in small colonies on wet soils.  It prefers 
wet sites, but is very tolerant of dry conditions in the 
summer.  The preference is for full to partial sun, 
although light shade under trees is tolerated.       
     
Distribution: This species is widely distributed from 
Quebec to Saskatoon, south to Florida and Texas in 
USDA hardiness zones 4 – 9.   Habitats include: moist 
black soil prairies, openings in moist to mesic 
woodlands, savannas, thickets, limestone glades and 
bluffs, power line clearings in woodland areas, and 
abandoned fields.     
 
Production 
Propagation by Seed
 
Large round seed capsules ripen slowly in flattened 
heads or umbels.  They are green for much of the 
summer then gradually darken to burgundy and then 
brown, at which time they can be removed and 
crushed to release the dark brown seeds.  Seed will 
germinate after 90 days moist, cold stratification at 4º 
C.  The seed of golden Alexanders germinate at high 
percentages.  The resulting seedlings can be 
transplanted into containers by midsummer; and 
plants will be at flowering size by the following 
spring.  
 
Establishment 
This species is probably best planted in the spring or 
early fall from containerize st ock to ensure success.  
Unstratified seed may also be fall planted, although 
germination the following spring may not be as 
predictable.

Management 
Golden Alexanders is a hardy plant with relatively 
few problems.  This species is easy to grow and 
maintain with moderate levels of N, P and K.  It will 
naturalize under optimal conditions. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Golden Alexanders is a plant with relatively few pest 
and disease problems.  Plants tend to bolt and the 
foliage depreciates as the summer progresses. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected 
materials at this time.  Golden Alexanders is 
somewhat available from commercial nurseries 
specializing in native plants
. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt  
NRCS, National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, Maryland  
 
References 
Brown, M., Brown, R., 1984.   Herbaceous Plants of 
Maryland,  Port City Press, Inc., Baltimore, 
Maryland.  
 
Cullina, W. 2000.   The New England Wild Flower 
Society guide to growing and propagating 
wildflowers of the United States and Canada.   
Houghton Mifflin Co., New York, New York. 
 
Edited: 080228 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site< http://plants.usda.gov
> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site < http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's  TARGET Center
 at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimina tion write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about  Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.