Plant Fact Sheet
EELGRASS  
Zostera marina  Linnaeus  
Plant Symbol =  ZOMA 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  
 
Photo courtesy of P. Bergstrom, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Chesapeake Bay Office, Annapolis, Maryland.  
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names : seawrack, tapegrass 
Uses  
Native American cultures consumed the leaf bases and 
rhizomes of eelgrass and used the bulk plant material for 
smoking meats.  Eelgrass was once harvested for use as 
stuffing in mattress manufacture prior to industrial 
production of synthetic fibers.  Due to its low 
flammability, dried eelgrass shoots were also used as 
h ousing insulation. In addition, watermen frequently ship 
live blue crabs ( Callinectes sapidus ) in eelgrass-packed 
boxes.   
 
Eelgrass is desirable for nearshore restoration, due to its 
ability to stabilize sediments and reduce erosion. Seagrass 
restoration is also a tool for improving water quality and 
providing habitat for various aquatic and coastal species.  Status
 
Eelgrass populations, along with other submerged plants, 
have declined over the past 40 years due to poor water 
quality in coastal regions. Poor water quality is a result of 
increased turbidity due to sediment from runoff and algal 
blooms associated with e utrophication. Populations have 
declined most significantly in Delaware Bay (almost 
completely absent) and Chesapeake Bay (reduced).  
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
Description and Adaptation 
Eelgrass has a thick, creeping underground stem 
(rhizome), 2 to 5 cm long, with many roots and nodes 
spaced 1 to 3.5 cm apart.  Alternate ribb on-like leaves 
with rounded tips arise from these nodes and grow up to 
1.2 m long and 2 to 12 mm wide, hence the alternate 
name tapegrass. Depending upon region and water clarity, 
eelgrass may grow in depths of less than 3 m (east coast 
United States) or in depths of more than 5 m (Pacific 
Northwest coast United States).  Eelgrass growing in 
shallow, sandy substrates (eelgrass prefers sandy 
sediments) tends to have shorter  leaves, whereas plants in 
deeper, muddy, quiet conditions have longer leaf growth.  
 
Reproduction is both sexual and asexual.  Plants flower in 
late spring and each plant contains male and female 
flowers (monoecious). Flowers are fertilized by drifting 
pollen.  Seeds develop on specialized reproductive shoots 
(spathes) that eventually brea k off and float to the surface 
where they drift and release seeds.  For asexual 
reproduction, the rhizome grows and elongates, sending 
up new shoots.  Entire beds may consist of clones from 
one original plant.   
 
Eelgrass is a true seagrass, requiring minim um salinities 
of 10 PSU (Practical Salinity Unit, a unit of measure 
based on the properties of seawater conductivity) or 
greater. It grows along both coasts of North America, 
ranging from North Carolina to Labrador on the east 
coast, and from Baja, Califor nia north to southeastern 
Alaska.  It  has a worldwide distribution in coastal waters 
of similar conditions.