Plant Fact Sheet  
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 
 
GIANT CUTGRASS 
Zizaniopsis miliacea (Michx.) 
Doell & Aschers.  
Plant Symbol = ZIMI 
 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 
 
 Alternate Names 
southern wild grass, water millet  
 
Uses  
Cattle readily graze giant cutgrass from late winter 
through summer.  If grazed  in the dormant season, a 
mineral supplement should be provided.  This grass is 
also used for erosion control around lakes and on 
stream banks.  Geese and ducks forage on its green 
basal leaves. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Giant cutgrass is a 
warm-season, rhizomatous perennial grass.  The 
height is between 3 to 9 feet.  The leaf blade is long 
and flat, rough on edges, almost sawlike.  The leaf 
sheath is rounded and opens with shorter than 
internodes.  The seedhead is narrow and nodding 
panicles, spikelets unisexual, 1-flowered, male and 
female on same branch of panicle. 
 
Management 
For maximum production, no more than 50 percent of 
current growth by weight should be removed at any 
season.  Controlled burning is recommended if 
enough dead leaves and stems accumulate on the 
ground to smother new growth.  Burn only when 
there is at least 1 inch of water above soil surface.  
Defer grazing after burning to permit 8 inches of re-
growth.  Cattle walkways are essential to distribute 
grazing and provide access  to forage on fresh 
marshes where this grass is important. 
 
Establishment 
Although a warm-season grass, giant cutgrass grows 
some in late fall along the gulf coast.  It produces 
seed mostly in spring and early summer.  It grows in 
dense bunches from large, creeping rhizomes.  
Mature plants turn yellowish after first frost, but 
usually have green basal leaves all year.  It grows 
primarily on firm mineral clays or silt soils.  Also, it 
grows in fresh-water marshes and swamps, on creek 
and riverbanks, and in drainage ditches and canals.  It 
tolerates a small amount of salt in free soil water.  It 
does best if the water level fluctuates from soil 
surface to 12 inches above. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office.  
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS  Agriculture Handbook No. 389 , 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee , USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp; 070116 jsp 
 For more information about this  and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or C onservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<
http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its program s and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national or igin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means  for communication of program 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ plants.usda.gov

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation Service.